* 0346526
* Compacterization of the IMNH Vertebrate Paleontology Collection to Enhance Access and Research Use
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* William Akersten, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 335,356.00

A grant has been awarded to the Idaho Museum of Natural History (IMNH) under the
direction of M. Thompson to improve accessibility and storage of the museum's
Vertebrate Paleontology (VP) collection. In scientific terminology, the
collection is particularly strong in animals from the Neogene Period (23.8 to
1.81 million years ago), and is especially rich in mammals of the Hemphillian,
Blancan, and late Rancholabrean Stages (i.e., ~11,000 to 9,000,000 years ago).
The collection was gathered from across Idaho and neighboring states. The growth
of the collection in the last ten years has resulted in overcrowded storage
conditions, which in turn will lead to eventual deterioration and loss of
specimens. It is the goal and scope of this project to cost-effectively correct
these deficiencies by improving storage to accommodate up to 100,000 specimens
and lots, facilitate cataloging of items and enhance scholarly
access.&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this, the IMNH had two basic options: to expand
its available space, or to use existing space more efficiently. IMNH plans to
purchase/install a system of compact, space-efficient storage racks with
accompanying all-metal cabinets and drawers for storing the specimens. As items
are transferred into the new storage facilities, all will be updated to current
collection standards as identified by the Society for the Preservation of
Natural History Collections using archival quality materials. The catalogue will
be updated, and a full entry made in IMNH databases for ease of locating items
and to promote the collection for research/scholarly activities. Further, IMNH
will create a public exhibit for the project's duration, designed to educate
museum visitors about the curation process as well as the VP collection itself.
Together, these project features will dramatically increase access to the
collection for both formal scientific research and informal education at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;The project is significant for both the public and the
scientific community. For the public, it will preserve their own heritage and
the history of the natural world. The curation exhibit will illustrate the care
needed to display, maintain and preserve museum specimens. The VP collection
itself is of high interest, as it encompasses the time of man's arrival in the
Americas, and may shed light on current public debate of human impact on the
environment. Scientifically, all items are individually irreplaceable, and may
hold many keys to understanding the past. The project will not only conserve the
items, but increase their access to scholars through enhanced storage and
cataloguing. Scholarly research into the animals and ecologies represented by
the sizable VP collection may shed important insights on dramatic environmental
changes (e.g., glaciation and retreat), and may hold vital lessons concerning
global warming.&lt;br/&gt;