* 0346945
* CAREER:     Capacity and Ubiquity in Multitier Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2009
* Shalinee Kishore, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* William H Tranter
* 11/30/2009
* USD 406,000.00

CAREER: Capacity and Ubiquity in Multitier Wireless Networks Abstract To meet
diverse communication requirements of users, wireless systems must
simultaneously support wide-area access (ubiquity) and local area performance
(capacity). Multitiered wireless networks represent a natural design option that
fulfills these joint goals. These networks contain radios designed with coverage
areas that vary in their order of magnitude. Higher-tier radios, which have
larger coverage, extend the network's reach while lower-tier radios target
location-specific performance. This research studies the capacity and ubiquity
supported by various multitier networks. As a demonstration of the benefits
offered by such systems, topographic and demographic data for Susquehanna
County, a rural and technology-poor county in Northern Pennsylvania, will be
used to implement derived results and to devise a multitier network for that
region. This design will take into consideration the extremely hilly propagation
characteristics of the area; location of population centers; and communication
requirements at these locations in order to better serve the needs of the county
(e.g., provide satisfactory cellular coverage, deliver broadband access, promote
distance learning initiatives, etc.). Overall, this research aims to develop a
general and unified framework for spectrally efficient multitier systems.
Specifically, it examines the case of full spectral reuse across tiers for
various centralized and decentralized multitier configurations. In centralized
networks, users communicate exclusively to access points, which control
admission and route information. In non-centralized systems, such
responsibilities are distributed over access points and users, and ad-hoc
connections are possible. The key challenge lies in overcoming cross-tier
interference produced by high spectral reuse. This research develops analytical
methods that 1) model this interference; and 2) use signal processing, radio
resource allocation, and access control techniques to jointly suppress it and
deliver desired ubiquity and capacity. COVER SHEET FOR PROPOSAL TO THE NATIONAL
SCIENCE FOUNDATION FOR NSF USE ONLY NSF PROPOSAL NUMBER DATE RECEIVED NUMBER OF
COPIES DIVISION ASSIGNED FUND CODE DUNS# (Data Universal Numbering System) FILE
LOCATION FOR CONSIDERATION BY NSF ORGANIZATION UNIT(S) (Indicate the most
specific unit known, i.e. program, division, etc.) PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT/SOLICITATION NO./CLOSING DATE/if not in response to a program
announcement/solicitation enter NSF 03-041 EMPLOYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (EIN)
OR TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (TIN) SHOW PREVIOUS AWARD NO. IF THIS IS A
RENEWAL AN ACCOMPLISHMENT-BASED RENEWAL IS THIS PROPOSAL BEING SUBMITTED TO
ANOTHER FEDERAL AGENCY? YES NO IF YES, LIST ACRONYM(S) NAME OF ORGANIZATION TO
WHICH AWARD SHOULD BE MADE ADDRESS OF AWARDEE ORGANIZATION, INCLUDING 9 DIGIT
ZIP CODE AWARDEE ORGANIZATION CODE (IF KNOWN) IS AWARDEE ORGANIZATION (Check All
That Apply) SMALL BUSINESS MINORITY BUSINESS IF THIS IS A PRELIMINARY PROPOSAL
(See GPG II.C For Definitions) FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATION WOMAN-OWNED BUSINESS THEN
CHECK HERE NAME OF PERFORMING ORGANIZATION, IF DIFFERENT FROM ABOVE ADDRESS OF
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION, IF DIFFERENT, INCLUDING 9 DIGIT ZIP CODE PERFORMING
ORGANIZATION CODE (IF KNOWN) TITLE OF PROPOSED PROJECT REQUESTED AMOUNT $
PROPOSED DURATION (1-60 MONTHS) months REQUESTED STARTING DATE SHOW RELATED
PRELIMINARY PROPOSAL NO. IF APPLICABLE CHECK APPROPRIATE BOX(ES) IF THIS
PROPOSAL INCLUDES ANY OF THE ITEMS LISTED BELOW BEGINNING INVESTIGATOR (GPG I.A)
DISCLOSURE OF LOBBYING ACTIVITIES (GPG II.C) PROPRIETARY & PRIVILEGED
INFORMATION (GPG I.B, II.C.1.d) HISTORIC PLACES (GPG II.C.2.j) SMALL GRANT FOR
EXPLOR. RESEARCH (SGER) (GPG II.D.1) VERTEBRATE ANIMALS (GPG II.D.5) IACUC App.
Date HUMAN SUBJECTS (GPG II.D.6) Exemption Subsection or IRB App. Date
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATIVE ACTIVITIES: COUNTRY/COUNTRIES INVOLVED (GPG II.C.2.j)
HIGH RESOLUTION GRAPHICS/OTHER GRAPHICS WHERE EXACT COLOR REPRESENTATION IS
REQUIRED FOR PROPER INTERPRETATION (GPG I.E.1) PI/PD DEPARTMENT PI/PD POSTAL
ADDRESS PI/PD FAX NUMBER NAMES (TYPED) High Degree Yr of Degree Telephone Number
Electronic Mail Address PI/PD NAME CO-PI/PD CO-PI/PD CO-PI/PD CO-PI/PD Page 1 of
2 0346945 CCR - COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH NSF 02-111 07/22/03 240795445 Lehigh
University 0032896000 Lehigh University Alumni Building 27 Bethlehem, PA.
180153005 CAREER:Capacity and Ubiquity in Multitier Wireless Networks 578,373 60
01/04/01 Electrical Engineering 610-758-6279 Bethlehem, PA 180153005 United
States Shalinee Kishore PhD 2003 610-758-4517 skishore@lehigh.edu 808264444
Electronic Signature 400,000 CERTIFICATION PAGE Certification for Authorized
Organizational Representative or Individual Applicant: By signing and submitting
this proposal, the individual applicant or the authorized official of the
applicant institution is: (1) certifying that statements made herein are true
and complete to the best of his/her knowledge; and (2) agreeing to accept the
obligation to comply with NSF award terms and conditions if an award is made as
a result of this application. Further, the applicant is hereby providing
certifications regarding debarment and suspension, drug-free workplace, and
lobbying activities (see below), as set forth in Grant Proposal Guide (GPG), NSF
03-041. Willful provision of false information in this application and its
supporting documents or in reports required under an ensuing award is a criminal
offense (U. S. Code, Title 18, Section 1001). In addition, if the applicant
institution employs more than fifty persons, the authorized official of the
applicant institution is certifying that the institution has implemented a
written and enforced conflict of interest policy that is consistent with the
provisions of Grant Policy Manual Section 510; that to the best of his/her
knowledge, all financial disclosures required by that conflict of interest
policy have been made; and that all identified conflicts of interest will have
been satisfactorily managed, reduced or eliminated prior to the institution's
expenditure of any funds under the award, in accordance with the institution's
conflict of interest policy. Conflicts which cannot be satisfactorily managed,
reduced or eliminated must be disclosed to NSF. Drug Free Work Place
Certification By electronically signing the NSF Proposal Cover Sheet, the
Authorized Organizational Representative or Individual Applicant is providing
the Drug Free Work Place Certification contained in Appendix C of the Grant
Proposal Guide. Debarment and Suspension Certification (If answer "yes", please
provide explanation.) Is the organization or its principals presently debarred,
suspended, proposed for debarment, declared ineligible, or voluntarily excluded
from covered transactions by any Federal department or agency? Yes No By
electronically signing the NSF Proposal Cover Sheet, the Authorized
Organizational Representative or Individual Applicant is providing the Debarment
and Suspension Certification contained in Appendix D of the Grant Proposal
Guide. Certification Regarding Lobbying This certification is required for an
award of a Federal contract, grant, or cooperative agreement exceeding $100,000
and for an award of a Federal loan or a commitment providing for the United
States to insure or guarantee a loan exceeding $150,000. Certification for
Contracts, Grants, Loans and Cooperative Agreements The undersigned certifies,
to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that: (1) No federal
appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the
undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer
or employ