* 0346975
* CAREER: Signal Transduction of Eukaryotic Quorum Sensing
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Derrick Brazill, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2009
* USD 625,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The ability of mammalian cells to sense the density of the cells
around them plays an important role in cellular growth control and
differentiation. Without such ability a developing embryo would be unable to
properly proportion its cells into different tissue types. Unfortunately,
studying this phenomenon in mammals is difficult due to their complexity.
Therefore, this project is designed to uncover and study the genetic regulation
of cell density sensing by using the social ameoba Dictyostelium discoideum as a
model. Dictyostelium cells display many of the characteristics of mammalian
cells, including but not limited to motility, differentiation, development and
cell to cell signaling. Thus, they present themselves as excellent models for
mammalian cell behavior, especially cell density sensing. When starved,
Dictyostelium cells will undergo a period of differentiation and development
leading to the formation of a multicellular organism. However, this process will
not begin unless there are sufficient numbers of starving cells to form a full
sized organism. Therefore, these cells are able to sense the density of the
starving cells around them and respond appropriately. This sensing is
accomplished by secreting and responding to a protein called Conditioned Medium
Factor (CMF). As more cells starve, the levels of CMF rise until they reach a
threshold level, at which point the cells are able to initiate development. This
project will delineate how CMF levels are sensed by cells and impact their
decision to develop. By uncovering the function of CMF in Dictyostelium
discoideum, a better understanding of cell density sensing in mammalian cells
can be gained, and with it, a better understanding of its role in development.
These experiments will be incorporated into teaching laboratories where
undergraduate students will participate in hands-on experiments with
Dictyostelium mutants and their characterization and manipulation. Hunter
College has a large population of minority students who will participate in
these laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;