* 0346476
* Nebraska EPSCoR Infrastructure Improvement Grant
* O/D,EPS
* 02/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Royce Ballinger, University of Nebraska
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 06/30/2007
* USD 9,000,000.00

The Nebraska Research Infrastructure Improvement grant will continue development
of the research and education infrastructure in genomics, cell biology, nano-
materials science and mobile computing. Infrastructure building will help to
create the Metabolite Signaling Center (MSC) that will be used to study
molecular response to metabolites using primarily genomic technologies and the
Nebraska Center for Cell Biology at Creighton University that will be devoted to
studying the dynamic behavior of cells using sophisticated optical imaging
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning and development activities will be
undertaken in nano-materials science and mobile computing - two state emerging
research areas. In nano-materials, the state seeks to coalesce its experience to
create a nationally, competitive, multidisciplinary research team in an entirely
new class of electronics and sensors. The research area will also complement the
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) in Nebraska that
focuses on Nanoscale magnetic material research, with a limited device
component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In mobile computing, Nebraska proposes to
stimulate economic development by forming partnerships with several local
industries and establishing strong educational and research programs in this
area. The goal is to develop basic mobile computing infrastructure (hardware,
software, and personnel) to increase the competitiveness for federal
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrative educational and outreach activities
for K-12 students and teachers, undergraduates, graduates, faculty, and industry
will be supported with funds from this project. Activities will include Young
Women in Science conferences, Young Nebraska Scientist (YNS) K-12 Summer
Research Experience, Young Nebraska K-12 Classroom Modules, Community and State
College outreach, faculty seed funding and fellowships, and university industry
R&amp;D support.&lt;br/&gt;Institutions participating in the project include
Nebraska's four research universities - University of Nebraska (Lincoln),
University of Nebraska (Omaha), Nebraska Medical Sciences Center (NMSC),
Creighton University (CU), Little Priest Tribal College (LPTC) two private, two
public, and two community colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;