* 0346815
* CAREER: Biologically-Mediated Molecular-Level Transformations of Marine Organic Matter
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Elizabeth Kujawinski, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2005
* USD 210,100.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0346815&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The route from fixation of
carbon by photosynthesis in the euphotic zone to its ultimate burial in bottom
sediments or remineralization at depth is extremely complex and circuitous,
involving biotic and abiotic processes acting differently on various compound
classes and particle size fractions. A critical step in the pathway from
fixation to burial / sequestration is the remineralization of small particulate
organic matter (POM) and colloidal / dissolved organic matter (C/DOM) by the
microbial loop, a group of microorganisms including bacteria and protozoan
grazers. This group of microbes plays an integral role in the remineralization
and modification of organic carbon compounds in all areas of the ocean, from
coastal eutrophic areas to open-ocean oligotrophic regimes. Though this role of
the microbial web in OM cycling in the coastal and open ocean has been well-
established, molecular-level understanding of the transformations within
different pools of organic matter (OM) has not been possible due to analytical
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, a researcher at Barnard College
will examine these transformations using isotope-ratio gas chromatography/ mass
spectrometry (irGC/MS) and electrospray ionization Fourier transform ion
cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (ESI FT-ICR MS). Laboratory cultures of
protozoa, bacteria and/or phytoplankton will be monitored for changes in OM
composition as a function of time. The prey cultures will be isotopically-
labeled with either C13-acetate (bacterial prey) or C13-bicarbonate
(phytoplankton prey). Incorporation of the C13-label from prey material will be
tracked through the protozoan digestive process and the lability of different OM
fractions within grazing cultures can be estimated. Laboratory results will be
extended to the field with incubations of size-fractionated seawater from
coastal (NY) and oligotrophic (Bermuda) environments. By monitoring OM
components on a molecular level, this study has an unprecedented opportunity to
elucidate mechanisms for carbon preservation in the marine
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will strengthen
interdisciplinary training for undergraduate students at Barnard College and
increase the number of young female scientists who enter the environmental
science pipeline and continue on to graduate school in environmental chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;