* 0346716
* CAREER:     Real-Time Transport Phenomena of Non-Viral DNA Nanocarriers in Live Cells:    A Research and Education Program
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Justin Hanes, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Theresa Good
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Justin S. Hanes&lt;br/&gt;BES-0346716&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
research seeks to quantify the rates and efficiencies of particle transport
through potential intracellular rate-limiting barriers by using a imaging
technique and particle tracking software. The specific aims are: (1) to
investigate the effects of gene carrier physicochemical properties on the
spatially- and temporally-dependent intracellular transport and accumulation of
a variety of important non-viral gene carriers in human primary muscle and
endothelial cells, (2) to determine the biological and/or biophysical mechanisms
responsible for the intracellular gene carrier transport phenomena, and (3) to
identify the effects of attaching combinations of important bioactive ligands to
the gene carrier surface on the intracellular transport of the carriers, and
correlate this with gene expression. The potential scientific insights to be
gained from the proposed research may provide a rational basis for the improved
design of new gene carriers capable of more efficient delivery to the cell
nucleus. The ability to determine the transport behavior of a heterogeneous
population of carriers on an individual carrier basis is critical since only a
minute fraction of gene carriers applied to a cell ultimately reaches the
nucleus. In addition, two innovative educational initiatives designed to recruit
and retain young people, especially underprivileged and underrepresented
students, into engineering careers are proposed. The first is a combined
coursework and research program for undergraduates with an emphasis on technical
communication skills and independent research. The second is a high school
outreach research program targeted toward students that come from
underprivileged families, or that are part of underrepresented groups in science
and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;