* 0346880
* CAREER: ASSISTED NAVIGATION IN DYNAMIC AND COMPLEX ENVIRONMENTS
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2004,02/28/2011
* Vladimir Kulyukin, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2011
* USD 549,204.00

In this project, the PI will develop a System for Assisted Navigation of Dynamic
and Complex Environments (SANDEE) that will significantly increase navigation
effectiveness for the visually impaired in dynamic and complex indoor and
outdoor environments. Specific goals are: To develop new localization,
orientation, and wayfinding algorithms; To develop new sensor fusion algorithms;
To design lightweight wearable wayfinding toolkits for the visually impaired; To
design multi-modal communication interfaces; To test the technology on the
target population of visually impaired users; And to mentor and train young
scientists in assistive technology research.. Critical aspects of navigation
effectiveness will be systematically evaluated through longitudinal user
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly advance our
understanding of: localization, orientation, and wayfinding; audio
representation of environments; sensor fusion; multi-modal user interfaces; and
pervasive computing. Current navigation technologies can be quite error-prone
and inflexible due to their tendency to rely on one type of sensor. The PI's
premise is that in many environments exploiting a broad range of sensor types
will lead to superior navigation effectiveness. Current navigation technologies
require that the user commit to a specific communication model. The PI expects
to show that multi-modal communication interfaces reduce the user's navigation-
related cognitive load, and allow him/her to add intelligence to the system
dynamically. Existing navigation technologies for the visually impaired rely on
body sensors, or sensors embedded in the environment. This project will
demonstrate that, in unfamiliar indoor environments, better navigation
effectiveness and user satisfaction are achieved through the use of mobile
robotic guides. To achieve these objectives, a particularly challenging tasks
the PI will address include the design and implementation of robust
localization, orientation, and wayfinding algorithms that integrate information
from multiple sensors, the design and development of multi-modal communication
interfaces, and the evaluation of the human ability to learn and adjust critical
aspects of the system and to use the system on a continuous
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project will develop new
assistive technology for the visually impaired. Individuals with vision loss
will be included in this project at all stages, both as researchers and as
participants in longitudinal evaluation studies. Both undergraduate and graduate
students will be involved in the PI's research activities, and the findings will
be integrated into the university coursework. Software and hardware innovations
resulting from this research will be documented and, in the case of software,
distributed over the Internet to the target population, the scientific
community, and the general public.