* 0346073
* CAREER: Brain Mechanisms of Conditioned Stimulus Processing
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,08/31/2004
* David Bucci, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 172,427.00

The educational component of this Early Career project is designed to enrich
undergraduate neuroscience education at the University of Vermont. The
educational activities will increase the exposure of undergraduates to
neuroscience and foster the development of professional skills. First, a
Behavioral Neuroscience Research Series will be incorporated into introductory
psychology classes to provide early exposure to research opportunities. An
upper-level Neuroscience Seminar will be developed, focusing on current "hot"
topics in neuroscience selected from the list of Symposia scheduled for the
Society for Neuroscience Annual Meeting. Students will also accompany Dr. Bucci
to the Annual Meeting. A third activity involves increasing undergraduate
participation in research by supporting student research projects in Dr. Bucci's
laboratory. Lastly, an Undergraduate Neuroscience Club will be established to
enhance interaction among neuroscience students and to foster the development of
scientific and professional skills.&lt;br/&gt; The research component of the
project will test hypotheses concerning the involvement of multiple brain
systems in processing environmental stimuli. Animals are routinely bombarded by
numerous stimuli, and it is believed that the extent to which a stimulus is
processed, or attended to, influences how much learning will occur. The ability
to alter levels of stimulus processing has adaptive value in that it permits an
individual to actively devote resources to learning about cues that are
behaviorally important while ignoring unimportant cues. The first phase of the
project will test the hypothesis that two competing brain systems are involved
in increasing the processing of important stimuli versus decreasing the
processing of irrelevant stimuli. Subsequent studies will determine if and how
these processing pathways interact, using both lesion approaches and monitoring
neural activity in specific brain regions. The planned studies will inform
theories of learning as well as provide valuable insight into the brain
mechanisms of stimulus processing and memory.