* 0347291
* CAREER: Beaks, Song, and Speciation in Darwin's Finches
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Jeffrey Podos, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 02/28/2010
* USD 528,273.00

CAREER: Beaks, Song, and Speciation in Darwin's Finches Jeffrey Podos

Darwin's finches of the Galapagos Islands, Ecuador, are a classic example of
adaptive radiation, in which a single ancestral species has diversified into
multiple descendant species. These birds have evolved an impressive array of
specializations in beak form and function, in accordance with the diverse
feeding niches they have come to occupy. The study builds on the recent
discovery that the evolutionary diversification of beaks has led to incidental
changes in the acoustic structure of finch vocal mating signals. The larger goal
of the research is to understand how adaptive evolution and mating signal
divergence contributes to species diversity. The research is conducted during
annual field expeditions. Intensive sampling of birds at multiple field sites
allows documentation of relationships between feeding ecology, beak form and
function, vocal behavior, and patterns of mate selection. Finch bite performance
is measured using portable force transducers and high-speed video will document
beak movements during song production and possible tradeoffs. Song playback
experiments will characterize the influence of acoustic variation on song
function and reproductive isolation. The project also includes instruction,
professional training, and outreach activities. A "real-time" web site will be
developed for an undergraduate non-majors course to document field research and
foster interactions between students and researchers; the study will be part of
the National Center for Case Study Teaching in Science for K-12 students and
teachers; new laboratory exercises for undergraduate majors and a graduate
seminar course will also be an integral part of this project.