* 0347065
* CAREER:     Tracing the Provenance and Flow of Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Wang-Chiew Tan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2011
* USD 449,994.00

The goal of this research project is to investigate techniques and develop
effective tools for tracing the provenance and flow of data in a network of
inter-related databases where each database may be constantly evolving. The
following three key areas are investigated: (1) Reasoning about provenance for
relational/XML data through constraints. The relationships between databases or
versions of databases can often be described by high-level abstractions such as
constraints. Hence, tracing the provenance or flow of a piece of data involves
reasoning about the movement of a piece of data through constraints. (2) An
annotation management system based on provenance. This system provides an
alternative method for computing provenance. It does so "eagerly" by carrying
provenance along as annotations when data is transformed. (3) An archiving
toolkit based on key constraints. A set of utilities for efficiently archiving
and managing evolving databases in a semantically meaningful way is provided.
The archive is such that the provenance of a piece of data can be easily traced.
The results of this project have potential applications in many domains, in
particular in scientific databases such as bioinformatics. Whenever applicable,
results of this project will be prototyped and experimental evaluations will be
conducted on both synthetic and real datasets in order to evaluate the
effectiveness of the results. The results will also be integrated into an
advanced database topics course on data provenance that will be developed and
taught at UC Santa Cruz. Project website
http://www.cs.ucsc.edu/~wctan/provenance/ will be used for wide dissemination of
all course materials, publications, and software that result from this project.