* 0347649
* CAREER: Designing with Light: Comparative Analysis and Design of Optical Interconnects for Chip-to-Chip Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2010
* Alyssa Apsel, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2010
* USD 399,998.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0347649&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Cornell University-
Endowed&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Apsel, Alyssa&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Designing with Light: Comparative Analysis and Design of Optical Interconnects
for Chip-to-Chip
Communication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;CMOS
electronics have become ubiquitous in modern society, continuing to create both
technological and economic opportunities in such areas as portable computing and
handheld devices. In the past, the capabilities of CMOS processors have been
limited internally by transistor density, power consumption, and speed. All of
these characteristics have improved consistently with transistor scaling,
governed empirically by Moore's Law. However, as CMOS feature sizes decrease
into the sub-micron regime, electrical signaling and interconnect problems
promise to become the ultimate limit of high performance systems at both the
board and chip levels. Integration of optical interconnects into high-
performance computing offers a promising and necessary approach to solving the
inter-chip communication bottleneck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to provide a framework for design of short distance chip-to-chip
optical interconnects that addresses the unique problems and requirements of
these microelectronic systems. Through research in the field of chip-to-chip
optical interconnect design, I have found that existing models for optical
interconnects in large scale networks fail when applied to small chip-scale
networks. By performing analysis tailored to smaller chip scales and integrating
these new approaches with usable modeling tools, we will enable optical
interconnects to be added into the design catalog of mainstream CMOS designers.
In order to achieve this we propose a two-pronged research plan composed of both
investigation and development of feasible high speed interconnects. A goal of
the first part of the proposed research is to develop a methodology for
interconnect optimization by performing a comparative analysis and testing of
various interconnect architectures, as they would be applied in a multi-chip
module (MCM). In the second segment of this project, we will develop the
framework for CAD supportable models of short distance optical interconnects,
standard CMOS cell libraries for optical interconnect, and a set of simple
design rules applicable to optimized short distance interconnect design. The
results of this work with be both a better understanding of use of hybrid
technologies to solve scaling problems in CMOS systems as well as a demonstrated
physical means of carrying out this type of design within a computational CMOS
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational aspect of this project
focuses on integrating research into teaching and other educational activities
at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. A crucial step in
removing barriers to innovation by students and future designers is to educate
them in hands-on interdisciplinary research and allow them to develop and test
novel design methodologies. In following with this idea, a third goal of this
work is to engage students at all levels by providing them with "hands on"
design experiences and exposure to research that develops both critical thinking
and laboratory skills. This project provides many opportunities for students of
VLSI design to practice hands on learning and develop critical thinking skills
both in the laboratory and in the classroom environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;