* 0347103
* CAREER: Understanding Nitrogen Limitation of Decomposition
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2010
* Sarah Hobbie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2010
* USD 500,000.00

Nitrogen (N) produced by modern agriculture and fossil fuel combustion can be
transported downwind from agricultural or industrial areas and deposited on
ecosystems that historically may have experienced low levels of N inputs.
Although N is an important nutrient required by both plants and soil organisms,
it is presently unknown how these elevated inputs of N will affect decomposition
of organic matter. Because decomposition is the primary way that carbon taken up
by plants during photosynthesis is ultimately returned to the atmosphere as
carbon dioxide (CO2), understanding effects of N on decomposition is necessary
for predicting future human impacts on atmospheric concentrations of CO2. Recent
work showed that in low-N sites, plant detritus (litter) with a greater N
content decomposed more quickly, suggesting that decomposing microorganisms
require N to break down plant litter. However, addition of inorganic N
fertilizer increased decomposition in only two of eight sites. These paradoxical
results call into question the assumption that the often-observed positive
relationship between litter N concentration and decomposition arises because N
limits decomposition. The proposed research will use both mathematical models
and field experiments to clarify how N affects decomposition, focusing on N
effects on the soil microorganisms responsible for the process of decomposition.
This specific research goal fits into the investigator's broader objective for
the proposed research and education plan to develop new skills and approaches
for more effective pursuit of research and education of students and the public
in fundamental questions in ecosystem ecology that have applications to global
environmental change. The research will involve a 4-y study at the Cedar Creek
Natural History Area, Minnesota, in which the amount and form of N supplied to
decomposers will be experimentally controlled. The response of the microbial
community will be monitored. In addition, mathematical models will be developed
to explore the consequences of variation in decomposition rate. Proposed
educational activities include involving undergraduates in research, developing
two new courses, enhancing an existing course, and developing effective public
outreach skills with the aim of improving literacy regarding global
environmental change. The proposed research and education plan will achieve
broader impacts by increasing understanding of how atmospheric N deposition
alters carbon cycling in ecosystems; through development of mathematical models
of N effects on decomposition; through the development of a faculty member's
skills in theoretical and microbial techniques; through the development of two
courses (one undergraduate, one graduate) to educate students in environmental
science and the science and policy of global change; through enhancement of an
existing course via incorporation of active-learning techniques; through support
and mentorship of a minority graduate student; and through support and
mentorship of three undergraduates in research via an existing program that has
successfully recruited participants from underrepresented groups.