* 0347992
* CAREER:     Comparison and Annotation of Multiple Whole Genomes
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2010
* Lior Pachter, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2010
* USD 400,000.00

As an increasing number of genomes are being sequenced to completion, the
exciting promise of comparative genomics is beginning to bear fruit. Remarkable
discoveries are being made about the evolution of genomes and the complex
relationships between sequence, function and conservation. As we will highlight
in this proposal, interesting biological results have emerged from comparisons
of closely related primate sequences, as well as from comparisons of more
distant organisms such as human, mouse and the Fugu fish. In the last year, it
has become possible for the first time to study multiple whole genomes: four
eukaryotic genomes (human, mouse, rat and Fugu fish) have now been sequenced
almost to completion. Preliminary results of multiple genome comparisons have
revealed the power of phylogenetic inference, and at the same time have shed
light on fundamental questions about the nature of sequence evolution.

The biological results which have been discovered using comparative genomics
have been underpinned by algorithmic advances in alignment methods and the
development of novel models for the functional annotation of genomes. Despite
much progress during the past years, the promise of comparative genomics remains
to be fulfilled. In this proposal we review the status of the following critical
problems and propose a plan for tackling both the algorithmic problems, and the
practical aspects of relating the informatics to biology. The key issues are: 1.
Development of accurate multiple alignment methods for whole genomes. 2.
Incorporation of phylogenetic models into whole genome alignment and annotation
strategies. 3. Discovery of novel genes, in particular primate (or human)
specific genes which may be related to disease. 4. Unraveling of the regulatory
code and the annotation of transcription factor binding sites and other
regulatory elements.

We begin with a review of the available sequence data, current sequencing
prospects for other eukaryotic genomes, and the existing state-of-the-art
computational tools for alignment and annotation. We then outline the major
components of our research plan, starting with the theoretical aspects and
concluding with our plans for experimental validation and how this integrates
with the career objectives of the PI. We also specifically address the practical
aspects of the proposed work, for example the issue that genome sequences are
constantly being updated, and the implication this has for their alignment and
for the end-user biologist.

Intellectual Merit

Biological discovery based on the comparison of genome sequences is limited by
computation: in particular the algorithms for annotating and comparing genomes
sequences are inherently "quadratic" (i.e. all the sequences have to be compared
against each other) and this means that accurate processing of existing genomes
is intractable unless supported by heuristics. This difficulty is coupled with
the practical burden of processing and displaying large quantities of data for
identifying interesting experiments or for further analysis by biologists. These
are the two issues we address in the proposal. Our research agenda is motivated
by, and will build on, success we have already had in developing comparative
genomics algorithms using hidden Markov models (pairwise, generalized and
phylogenetic) and integrating those with heuristics to process whole genomes for
biological discovery. We also plan a series of experiments for novel gene
discovery (using RT-PCR) and for regulatory element detection using gel shift
assays and transfection analysis. This plan both unifies and extends the
research agenda of the principal investigator.

Broader Impacts

The core development resulting from the proposed research is a system for
alignment and browsing of multiple whole genomes. This resource will be
maintained and constantly updated (we estimate less than one week turnaround on
a multiple genome alignment) so that biologists can work with the latest
versions of genomes and their alignments. The annotation component of the
research will lead to the discovery of novel genes and regulatory elements in
the human genome, and the techniques we will develop should also be useful for
other organisms including drosophila and even plant genomes (for example
cereals).