* 0347918
* Quantifying Flows of Resources and Wastes During Construction of Milwaukee School of Engineering's Kern Center
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Carol Diggelman, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/2005
* USD 61,774.00

Abstract - SGER: Quantifying Flows of Resources and Wastes During Construction
of Milwaukee School of Engineering's Kern Center

The overall goal of research is to collect, quantify and model environmental
impacts of the construction process. The construction industry collects
information but not information related to environmental impact, i.e., energy
use, material use, and emissions during construction. The data is perishable in
the sense that the PI has secured access and cooperation to collect data that
does not appear in the literature or in any known database. This represents a
unique opportunity to collect baseline information necessary to quantify and
evaluate environmental aspects and impacts of a construction project. Knowledge
of the environmental data can be used to develop the framework for data
collection and ultimately a model that can be applied to other construction
projects and disseminated throughout the industry. The goal is to provide a
rational basis for reducing future environmental impacts of the construction
process in a way that is also beneficial to the industry. Research results will
be incorporated into a new, required course on Environmental Science in Building
Construction. The data will also be disseminated to industry audiences and
conferences. The materials, energy, emissions, and waste data will be normalized
and enable comparison with other construction projects. The institution is a
Primarily Undergraduate Institution so this research may attract students to
graduate engineering school.