* 0347368
* CAREER:      Development of a New Class Of Static and Dynamic Stereoselective Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Christian Wolf, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2009
* USD 500,900.00

Professor Christian Wolf of the Department of Chemistry at Georgetown University
is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his
research on developing molecular sensors exhibiting a C2-symmetric
1,8-dihetarylnaphthalene framework for stereoselective recognition of organic
compounds. He will prepare and employ stereodynamic 1,8-diquinolylnaphthalenes
and conformationally stable 1,8-diacridylnaphthalenes in stereoselective sensing
studies and investigate the chiral recognition mechanism. In pursuing new
directions toward static and dynamic sensors that utilize fluorescence or
induced circular dichroism, this study is expected to significantly advance the
current scope of stereoselective sensing of fine
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, Dr Wolf is
increasing participation and involvement of undergraduate and graduate students
in chemical sciences through the integration of discovery and learning. Selected
research projects mentored by Ph.D. students provide undergraduate students with
hands-on research experience while graduate students gain important teamwork and
training skills. The introduction of computer-based learning exercises and
research activities into an undergraduate laboratory course is exposing students
to the excitement of discovery at an early stage in their careers. A new
initiative at the graduate level is aimed at helping Ph.D. students in
identifying career opportunities in chemical sciences prior to
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;