* 0347318
* CAREER: Meta Clustering: Improving User Efficiency on Real-World Clustering Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Rich Caruana, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2008
* USD 407,000.00

The goal of this research is to reduce the knowledge engineering required to
apply clustering to real-world problems by changing how users interact with
clustering systems. Instead of having users manually engineer distance metrics
and modify clustering algorithms, meta clustering helps users find good
clusterings by generating many different clusterings of the data, and presenting
these to users organized as a meta clustering. A meta clustering is a clustering
of clusterings that makes it easier for users to navigate the clustering space
to find clusterings useful to them. An important goal of the project is to work
with existing clustering methods instead of replacing them with new methods. By
shifting some of the burden from users to the computer, the project will have
significant impact on the practice, research, and education in clustering. This
will make clustering easier, particularly for users not adept at defining
distance metrics, help experienced users arrive at good clusterings faster, and
will advance clustering research and education by providing a framework for
comparing and evaluating clustering methods. In addition to producing
fundamental research results, the research project will be used to train Ph.D.
students, will involve both undergraduate and exceptional high school students
in research, will help in creating a new course on unsupervised learning, will
yield meta clustering software available through the web that is compatible with
many existing clustering algorithms, and will form the basis of a novel workshop
and web-based comparison of clustering methods run by different clustering
researchers. The project Web site http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~caruana will be
used for timely results dissemination.