* 0347475
* Microbial Observatory: Linking Microbial Diversity With Biogeochemical Studies Throughout  the Deep Greenland Ice Sheet
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Vanya Miteva, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2010
* USD 845,254.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Jean Brenchley, Vanya Miteva, and Todd Sowers
of Pennsylvania State University to establish microbial observatory studies of
microbial diversity in relation to geochemical analyses throughout a Greenland
glacier ice core. These investigators have shown that ice from over 3,000 meters
deep contained an abundant and diverse prokaryotic population that had survived
subzero temperatures, high pressures, and limited liquid, oxygen, and nutrients
for over 120,000 years. This new work will develop a low temperature microbial
observatory to examine the prokaryotic populations in ice core samples selected
to represent different depths/times/deposition temperatures and test whether
microbial metabolism could be occurring within the ice core itself. Goals
include examining the viability and number of prokaryotes in different ice
samples to determine whether specific types correlate with deposition climates,
comparing the microbial diversity using both culture dependent and culture
independent methods, and monitoring trace gas composition using stable isotopes
in ice to link the microbial diversity studies with biogeochemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glacier ice is a harsh habitat and results from
this microbial observatory will help understand the limits for survival on earth
and serve as a model for possible extraterrestrial life. In addition to broad
educational impacts, this work will provide a comprehensive view of the vertical
distribution of microbial populations in the ice core and is likely to lead to
the cultivation of numerous not-yet cultivated organisms representing novel
taxa. Some isolates could produce biotechnologically important new antibiotics,
chemicals, cold-active enzymes, etc. In addition, the interdisciplinary test of
whether metabolism can be detected within ice is important because trace gases
in ice cores record past atmospheres that are then compared with current
compositions. If microbial metabolism could have altered this trace gas record,
then previous results and climate predictions would have to be
reevaluated.&lt;br/&gt;