* 0347403
* CAREER:     Tools for Design for Manufacturability in Nanometer CMOS
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Michael Orshansky, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0347403&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of Texas
Austin&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Orshansky, Michael&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Tools for Design for Manufacturability in Nanometer
CMOS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
develop models, algorithms, and conceptual frameworks that will enable robust
circuit design in nanometer scale CMOS technology. The manufacturing and
fundamental limitations of scaled solid-state technology lead to increasing
unpredictability in the physical properties of semiconductor devices. This
research proposes a new design paradigm in which uncertainty is explicitly
embraced by computer-aided design tools. This will be achieved via the unified
treatment of statistical modeling, analysis, and optimization. This proposal
specifically aims at: (1) Developing an analysis environment for early
assessment of the impact of process and device variation on circuit design. The
tool will assist in making high-level decisions on the properties of new designs
and technologies. (2) Developing an accurate and efficient statistical static
timing analysis algorithm which will allow circuit designers to reliably verify
the timing behavior of their designs and find the distribution of circuit timing
yield. (3) Developing statistical circuit optimization approaches that will
enable identifying superior design alternatives with respect to frequency,
power, and yield. The goal of the educational part of this program is to ensure
that a new generation of engineering students has a comprehensive understanding
of both the semiconductor physics and technology and the algorithmic circuit
design techniques. To achieve that goal, this proposal will: (1) develop two new
courses emphasizing joint treatment of concepts in solid-state technology,
circuit design, and computer-aided design algorithms; (2) actively recruit
underrepresented students through direct outreach and targeted research
opportunities for undergraduates; and (3) promote active involvement of
industrial experts in teaching.&lt;br/&gt;