* 0347419
* CAREER: The Genetics of Species Differences: Drosophila Courtship Signals and their Preferences
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Jennifer Gleason, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* stephen vessey
* 06/30/2010
* USD 538,500.00

CAREER: The genetics of species differences: &lt;br/&gt;Drosophila courtship
signals and their preferences&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jennifer M.
Gleason&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speciation is responsible for the diversity of life
on earth. The process of speciation requires the evolution of reproductive
isolation. One type of reproductive isolation is sexual isolation derived from
differences in mating behaviors. The fruit fly species to be studied, Drosophila
simulans and D. sechellia, differ in two elements of courtship. The first
element, courtship song, is produced by the male to stimulate the female.
Females prefer the song of their own species and only reluctantly mate in the
presence of a different species' song. The second element is a contact
pheromone. D. sechellia females have a different major pheromone than D.
simulans females. D. simulans males discriminate against D. sechellia females
because of this pheromone difference.&lt;br/&gt;The project uses two genetic
analyses of these traits. First, quantitative genetics will be used to estimate
the number of genes involved, their location in the genome and their individual
effects. These will be studied for both courtship elements (song and pheromones)
and for the preferences exhibited by the opposite sex for these traits. Second,
regions of the genome genetically implicated in the courtship traits will be
introduced from one species to the other, in isolation of all other gene
regions. These genetic analyses will be performed to identify the genes that
have had a regulatory change between the species.&lt;br/&gt;Teaching activities
will focus on improving existing courses on evolution and genetics and
developing new courses on speciation and behavioral genetics. The intellectual
merit of this project is to elucidate the genetics of species differences that
can contribute to speciation, a topic that is not well understood. The broader
impacts of this project include educational opportunities for students who will
receive interdisciplinary training in behavioral and genetic methods. In
addition, understanding behavior in Drosophila, a model system, provides
insights into the behavioral analysis of both more complex species and pest
species. &lt;br/&gt;