* 0347662
* CAREER:     A Scalable Framework for Mining Scientific and Biomedical Data
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2009
* USD 497,775.00

This project involves the development of a scalable framework for mining large,
dynamic, biomedical and scientific datasets. This project has two research
goals. The first research goal involves the development of novel methods to
accurately model the relevant spatial or structural relationships embedded in
such data, in particular the use of graph-based methods to model structure and
geometric orthogonal polynomials to model shape. The second research goal
involves the development of parallel and incremental algorithms, in conjunction
with novel cluster file system support, to effectively and efficiently mine such
data. A key feature of this work is the use of real-life large scale datasets as
testbeds, specifically, data produced by molecular dynamics simulations to study
the evolution of defects in materials, bio-molecular structure data to study
structure-activity relationships, and clinical eye disease data to study the
onset and progression of Keratoconus and Glaucoma disease patterns.

The educational component of this project seeks to foster, and promote a new
inter-disciplinary graduate and undergraduate curriculum in data mining at the
Ohio State University. Co-learning, a novel method by which students across
disciplines can learn from one another and leverage each other's strengths, will
be employed through the design of suitable inter-disciplinary large-scale
exploratory data mining class projects.

This project will have a significant impact on how large biomedical and
scientific datasets are efficiently explored and analyzed, and will enable
scientists and clinicians to gain an effective understanding of the underlying
scientific process involved, thereby extending the state-of-the-art in these
domains.