* 0347295
* CAREER: Biophysics of Flatworm Regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Michael Levin, The Forsyth Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2009
* USD 674,368.00

The most interesting aspect of living beings is the ability of biological
tissues to generate and maintain their shape. Understanding how cells are able
to create organs of a tightly-specified 3-dimensional geometry will have great
benefits for biomedicine (helping to address cancer, regeneration, and aging).
Even more interestingly, decoding the signals that control cell behavior will
profoundly increase our understanding of the most basic properties of cell
function and of the evolution of pattern-formation mechanisms. Making progress
in this area requires a model system--a biological context amenable to the most
powerful cell-biological and physiological techniques of the molecular age. The
proposed work centers around a fascinating organism, the planarian. These free-
living flatworms possess a truly remarkable property: they are able to
regenerate any missing piece of the worm. Genomic approaches are beginning to
address this phenomenon from a biochemical perspective. Interestingly,
preliminary data indicated that a novel, biophysical, aspect of biological
control was responsible for the ability of the worm's stem cells to correctly
restore lost tissue: a natural electric field produced by the activity of ion
channels and pumps in key cells. The project will use cell- and molecular-
biological approaches to understand how natural ion flows direct stem cells to
restore missing tissues; a variety of students and post-doctoral fellows will be
involved. Additionally, the flatworm represents a very rich yet inexpensive
system for introducing students at all levels to fundamental methods in
biological discovery. The project includes an important educational component
which will create a web-based center for the dissemination of materials,
protocols, and results to high-school, college, and graduate student labs. The
proposed center will ignite the interest of young scientists in profound
problems of biological patterning and provide an opportunity for many to
participate and gain hands-on experience in state-of-the-art techniques.

