* 0347681
* CAREER: Proteomic Tools for the Study of Nonribosomal Peptide Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Michael Burkart, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2009
* USD 679,000.00

Non-ribosomal peptides are a large class of secondary metabolites produced in
both eukaryotes and prokaryotes as molecular vectors for the regulation of
natural environments. These metabolites have been studied for over 100 years and
are commonly used in a variety of practical applications. The future discovery
of non-ribosomal peptides lies within two avenues: 1) continued sampling of
native producer organisms and 2) metabolic engineering. This project opens
access to a novel collection of domain activity assays for non-ribosomal peptide
(NRP) synthases. The project forwards a bold new means to selectively
functionalize NRP domains and, thereby, provides a collection of tools that
further the techniques used to decode biosynthetic machinery. These tools are
developed through the synthesis of a series small molecule probes that are tuned
to recognize and interact with specific functional aspects of NRP synthases. In
particular, novel approaches are forwarded to identify peptidyl carrier protein,
adenylation, and condensation domains. The tyrocidine A synthase from Bacillus
brevis, the organism producing the cyclic peptide antibiotic tyrocidine A, will
be used as the primary model for this study. It is anticipated that the methods
described herein represent the beginnings of a functional system to identify,
isolate, and manipulate modular synthase enzymes from both native and engineered
NRP pathways. The lessons learned serve to further the understanding of enzyme
mechanisms, natural product isolation, and metabolic engineering. These
approaches also make understanding chemistry and biology of the natural world
more accessible and exciting to students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
In addition to the research component, this award supports educational and
training activities. The project offers new groundwork to teach secondary
metabolism as the integration of chemistry and biology. This discipline has
changed enormously in the last fifteen years, and its instruction must include
new advances in genomics, proteomics, and computational methods thereon.
Proteomic methods developed in this project can be adapted to identify and
optimize natural product biosynthesis from a functional perspective. For
teaching purposes, these tools provide an ideal opportunity for students to come
in contact with complex enzymatic systems. These tools necessitate an
interdisciplinary approach for studying familiar natural products from the
interface of chemistry and biology.