* 0347427
* CAREER: Practical 3D Model Acquisition
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Szymon Rusinkiewicz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 01/31/2010
* USD 454,348.00

Despite dramatic increases in the performance of graphics hardware, the use of
3D graphics by most users remains limited because of the difficulty of creating
or obtaining 3D content. The widespread availability of inexpensive, easy to use
3D scanning systems will help bridge this "content gap", with impacts in fields
ranging from art education and cultural heritage preservation to construction
and law enforcement. The aim of this research is to develop a theoretical
understanding of triangulation-based 3D scanning systems and to design new 3D
scanners that are flexible, robust, inexpensive, and easy to use. As a specific
example, the project involves bringing 3D scanning into elementary school
classrooms by developing a scanning system that can be built out of Lego cameras
and building blocks, set up by teachers, and operated by fourth graders. The
goal is to encourage early interest in science, technology, and arts by letting
students create their own computer-animated movies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research builds upon a framework of "space-time stereo" to generalize many
currently used scanner designs, such as stereo and laser stripe scanning. An
analysis of existing and novel scanners relates the processing performed by the
systems, consisting of correspondence across spatial, temporal, or space-time
windows, to properties of the object being scanned (such as depth variation,
presence or absence of color texture, and speed of motion). Based on this
analysis, new 3D scanner designs are developed that eliminate the need for
expensive optics and motors while being more adaptable to a wide range of
scanning scenarios. Several specific applications are implemented, including an
inexpensive, high-resolution desktop scanner for small objects, scanners for
building interiors that flexibly incorporate multiple cameras and projectors,
and an omni directional scanner that captures an entire room at once. Efficient
and stable alignment algorithms combine the multiple scans obtained by each
scanner into complete 3D models.&lt;br/&gt;