* 0347545
* CAREER: Autonomous Reorganization of Cooperative Robotic Teams for Robustness
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Scott DeLoach, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 03/31/2010
* USD 450,000.00

The objective of this project is to provide teams of cooperative robots with the
appropriate knowledge of their organizational structure and capabilities, along
with efficient reasoning mechanisms, to allow them to reorganize "on-the-fly" to
achieve their overall team goals more efficiently and effectively in the face of
a changing environment and team capabilities. The goal is to establish
organizational reasoning as a key component in a new approach to building highly
robust cooperative robotic teams. To realize this goal, the new organizational
knowledge and reasoning techniques must be incorporated into practical methods
and tools for designing and developing real world cooperative robotic systems.
The technological objectives of this research will be to (1) develop a team
organizational model that describes how organizational concepts such as goals,
roles, and individual team members are related, (2) develop strategies,
techniques, and algorithms for discovering when reorganization is required as
well as efficient techniques for reorganizing to allow teams to reach their
goals, and (3) codify these methods and techniques in an automated toolset to
ensure that the organizational knowledge is captured and transformed into a form
compatible with efficient reasoning techniques. The theories, techniques,
methods, and tools developed in research will be used to enhance both
undergraduate as well as graduate curriculum in multiagent and cooperative
robotic systems. Also, a series of activities designed to impact persons not
specifically part of the project are planned with a strong emphasis on pre-
college students from elementary to high school. We plan to participate in
several summer workshops to motivate pre-college students to select science and
technology majors and to reach specific underrepresented groups.