* 0347652
* Diachronic Generative Syntax Conference - DIGS VIII
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Stephen Anderson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2005
* USD 16,848.00

The National Science Foundation will support the eighth Diachronic Syntax
Conference, to be hosted by the Department of Linguistics at Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut, from June 24th to June 27th, 2004. The conference will
provide a forum for discussion of issues related to syntactic variation and
change. The conference will bring together two groups of researchers: those who
work on syntactic variation, including dialect variation, and those whose
research focuses on syntactic variation from the perspective of generative
syntactic theory. The conference will focus on these issues from a comparative
perspective and promote discussion of research on a variety of languages
including non-Indo-European languages and non-standard varieties. The main goal
of the conference is to provide a forum to address the nature of the
relationship between syntactic variation as exhibited in the speech community
and syntactic change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of variation and the use of
non-standard varieties of language can provide important information for
educators regarding the classroom usage of non-standard varieties of language by
their students. In &lt;br/&gt;addition, the findings of the conference will be
relevant to research in fields related to linguistics such as anthropology and
sociology. The issues of language variation, language contact and language
change that will be discussed at this meeting are also important for furthering
our understanding of the means by which languages or non-standard varieties of
languages may become endangered. &lt;br/&gt;