* 0347792
* CAREER: Ultra-Low Power Programmable Analog Signal Processing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2010
* David Anderson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 04/30/2010
* USD 783,200.00

Demand for low-power, sophisticated information processing and control systems
grows daily. Consumers seek hand-held devices delivering more computationally
intensive capabilities in a smaller space with a longer battery life. Industry
requires reduced operating costs by reducing the power consumed by installed
systems. Military applications demand deployable smart sensors with greater
mission longevity, and that sustain themselves on minimal resources. Such
demands have driven recent research activity to reconsider analog embedded
processing. Advances in analog floating-gate circuits enable complex algorithms
to be realized in the analog domain in a manner that is both programmable and
adaptive. With scalability similar to CMOS circuits, massively parallel analog
processing becomes feasible.

The focus of this CAREER research in cooperative analog-digital signal
processing (CADSP) is on freedom of movement of the partition between the analog
and digital systems. By allowing more of the computation to be performed in low-
power analog circuits, cooperative analog-digital signal processing enables
advanced functionality in very low-power embedded systems and smart sensors.

This project pioneers the design and implementation of embedded signal
processing and control systems that perform significant processing in analog as
well as digital circuits. The analog circuits are extremely small and low power,
making it possible to investigate entirely new methods of computing, exploiting
large-scale parallelism and redundancy in a very small space. This entails a
very high-density field-programmable analog array (FPAA) based on floating-gate
analog circuits. The FPAA device operates in tandem with a traditional digital
field-programmable gate array (FPGA). Significant impact is expected for signal
processing and control applications, enabling low-power analog FPAA processing
for computations previously viewed as feasible only in the digital domain. The
integration of research and education provides new theoretical analyses,
software tools, silicon chips, and education materials to aid both academics and
industrial designers. Broader impact is sought through tools that are made
freely available and on-line education materials, disseminated via university
courses and short courses.