* 0347392
* CAREER:    Transparent Bandwidth Conservation Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Aaron Striegel, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2010
* USD 499,289.00

Over the past decade, the Internet has emerged as one of the primary tools for
information dissemination. The traditional point-to-point nature of the Internet
has created a natural trend of increasingly redundant data across the network as
applications and information sources increase in both scope and scale. While a
wide variety of techniques have emerged to increase the efficiency of the
network, the techniques have met with varying degrees of success. This career
work aims to develop novel techniques for network efficiency through transparent
bandwidth conservation while avoiding many of the pitfalls associated with
previous approaches. Individual facets of the research include a paradigm-
shifting approach to multicast (stealth multicast) whereby redundant packets are
dynamically converted to/from multicast, inter-domain peering protocols for
expanding the benefits of bandwidth conservation, and extensive
analsis/exploitation of existing applications to increase redundancy but yet
improve overall system efficiency. In addition, this project will serve as a
catalyst for the development of large-scale group oriented applications.
Furthermore, the work will have a direct impact on the efficiency of the
Internet, Quality-of-Service pricing and resource management, and how
applications are designed to cooperate with the underlying network. Beyond its
research impact, this work will directly impact education through innovative
studies on classroom methodologies and student development contests. The results
will also be conveyed to industry and academia through the development of
prototypes freely available via open-source.