* 0347400
* CAREER: Spatial Models and Algorithms for Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Sanjay Shakkottai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 06/30/2010
* USD 407,956.00

PROPOSAL: 0347400&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of Texas Austin&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Shakkottai, Sanjay &lt;br/&gt;TITLE: CAREER: Spatial Models and
Algorithms for Sensor Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From everyday tasks like
buying groceries, to tracking chemical&lt;br/&gt;pollutants through a riverbed,
sensor network technology will&lt;br/&gt;transform the way we understand and
interact with the physical&lt;br/&gt;world. Such networks will support
communications over thousands of&lt;br/&gt;sensor nodes -- communications of a
scale not seen in today's&lt;br/&gt;networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by
the physics of gases, where the behavior of individual&lt;br/&gt;atoms are
inconsequential in order to understand macroscopic behavior&lt;br/&gt;such as
pressure or temperature, this CAREER project develops a
research&lt;br/&gt;program based on a continuum viewpoint of a network of sensor
nodes --&lt;br/&gt;where individual node properties aggregate, and manifest only
as&lt;br/&gt;random fluctuations in an underlying continuous medium. By
introducing&lt;br/&gt;techniques from statistical physics, this proposal
develops a&lt;br/&gt;framework for sensor network algorithm design and
architecture. This&lt;br/&gt;is applied to obtain basic insights, and develop
algorithms for sensor&lt;br/&gt;network communications -- from network protocol
primitives such as&lt;br/&gt;querying, flooding and route setup, to data flow
path optimization, to&lt;br/&gt;the interactions of multiple data flows over
wireless media, and their&lt;br/&gt;impact on topological
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results impact design methodology for
a wide range of sensor&lt;br/&gt;network applications, and are incorporated into
the undergraduate and&lt;br/&gt;graduate curricula at UT Austin. The results are
easily accessible to&lt;br/&gt;industry through the Wireless Networking and
Communications Group&lt;br/&gt;industrial affiliates program at UT Austin. A
network testbed that&lt;br/&gt;integrates actual network hardware with
analytical network models has&lt;br/&gt;been prototyped to measure and validate
sensor network algorithms, and&lt;br/&gt;furthers outreach efforts to high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;