* 0347374
* CAREER:     Putting Network Measurements to Work - Design & Evaluation of Measurement-Driven Network Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Constantinos Dovrolis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 08/31/2009
* USD 500,003.00

The central thesis of this project is that the area of Internet measurements has
matured to the point that it can advance from a descriptive to an operational
role. Measurements, collected passively or actively at end-hosts, routers, or
edge devices and proxies, can be fed back and used in applications, transport
protocols, packet forwarding engines, and routing mechanisms. The project aims
at the design and evaluation of important network mechanisms driven by
measurements. Three such mechanisms are the following.

Techniques for the auto-configuration of major router processes, such as buffer
management, based on passive measurements in router interfaces

Dynamic route selection, driven by active edge-to-edge performance measurements
and congestion prediction

Transport optimizations for high-bandwidth long-distance networks, using
recently developed bandwidth estimation techniques.

The focus on measurements is integrated in the project's research and education
aspects. A major educational objective is to bring network measurements into the
classroom as a learning and visualization tool. The PI is going to create an
Internet measurements graduate course, lso covering "network statistics", i.e.,
a collection of statistical tools for the analysis of network measurements.

The project can have a significant technological, economic, and social impact. A
wide-scale deployment of network measurements as an operational tool can improve
the Internet's performance, resilience, and robustness, and enable new services
and applications. The tools, prototypes, and learning material being developed
are made publicly available. Finally, the integration of measurements in the
curriculum changes radically the way in which computer networking is being
taught.