* 0347469
* CAREER: Waveguide-Based Power Combining Architectures Scalable to Submillimeter-Wave Frequencies
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* James Becker, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2010
* USD 412,000.00

0347469&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Portions of the electromagnetic spectrum that were
once the domain to only astronomy and remote sensing efforts are of growing
interest to the scientific, military, and commercial communities. For example,
various wideband communication platforms and compact biological and chemical
detection devices are being considered for operation at frequencies into the
submillimeter-wave range. Perhaps the most formidable obstacle to deploying such
high- frequency systems is the lack of compact, low-cost power sources. As the
power from a single solid-state device is modest at frequencies approaching the
submillimeter-wave range, combining the power from many individual devices often
becomes necessary when building sources. The proposed research addresses the
issue of establishing such power sources through investigation of novel
waveguide-based power combining architectures that can be readily scaled to
submillimeter-wave frequencies using low-cost micromachining techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities associated with this CAREER
project address the need to: recruit and retain a diverse student population in
electrical and computer engineering at Montana State, provide a curriculum that
fosters a strong background in high-frequency electronics, inspire
undergraduates to pursue further study in graduate school, and provide an
opportunity for students to be involved in meaningful research. These goals will
be addressed in part through activities that include re-working the introductory
electrical engineering course at Montana State, developing an advanced course in
radio frequency electronics and sponsoring senior design projects that emphasize
high-frequency electronics. As a means to familiarize potential university
students with the electrical and computer engineering department at Montana
State, the introductory electrical engineering course will be structured to
allow for its offering as a distance learning course to high school seniors and
community college students. The course will also be used as a vehicle to
collaborate with Salish Kootenai College, a tribal college within the state of
Montana, in an effort to provide a bridge between two-year tribal colleges and
the four-year electrical and computer engineering program at Montana
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;