* 0347005
* CAREER: Accounting for Information and Recourse in the Robust Design and Optimization of Stochastic Transportation Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* S. Travis Waller, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 05/31/2010
* USD 427,687.00

Networks form the core of countless problems in diverse fields of knowledge
including transportation, communications, finance/economics, social interaction
and many others. With the increasing capabilities of information technology and
online control opportunities, each field has come to address the issue of
network behavior under information in some manner, sometimes with vastly
differing techniques. Further, the advances in sensor and information technology
for many fields have occurred rapidly and have exceeded our methodological
ability to fully model and plan for them. As a result of the relatively recent
nature of these developments, it remains a pressing challenge to integrate and
significantly enhance the knowledge from each field impacted by such advances.
This CAREER development program addresses the problem of modeling information
and online behavior in complex network systems in addition to developing
approaches for designing such networks by leveraging the diverse existing
methods to find commonalities and augmenting the methods with new problems and
solution approaches. Newly introduced models in this CAREER program include the
user equilibrium with recourse problem which describes the online behavior of
all network travelers given information, interaction, and recourse
opportunities. The new solution methods will consist of a combination of
fundamental routing algorithm development, mathematical programming, and
simulation techniques to address the key concepts of network behavior,
information, recourse, dynamics, and uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
developments from this CAREER plan have the potential of advancing numerous
fields that employ network modeling where online user behavior is important.
Further, this program provides an opportunity to develop web-based learning
tools, integrate vital aspects of behavior with information into the
undergraduate and graduate curriculum, and continue outreach efforts to involve
younger students in engineering. Often, network behavior is very counter-
intuitive and it is even more so when online behavior and dynamics are
considered. A continued effort will be made in this CAREER development program
to improve the exposure students receive regarding the central methodologies and
applications required to understand and appreciate the complexities of
stochastic dynamic network behavior with
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;