* 0347252
* CAREER:  A Multiresolution Approach to Network Anomaly and Intrusion Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Paul Barford, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* carl landwehr
* 09/30/2010
* USD 501,901.00

CNS-0347252 CAREER: A Multiresolution Approach to Network Anomaly and Intrusion
Detection

Paul Barford

This project aims to measure traffic and detect anomalies and intrusions in wide
area networks. The measurements will support precise, real-time identification
of anomalies/intrusions, enabling future networks to function securely and
efficiently--something that is seriously threatened in today's hostile and
dynamic environment. New, in-situ measurement systems will be built and deployed
to collect traffic data from many locations across the Internet and store it in
a centralized repository in an anonymized, privacy preserving format. Research
access to the data will be provided through a private, secure web interface. In
conjunction with the measurement and data collection activity, the research will
develop multiresolution analysis methods based on wavelets, which isolate
distinct traffic characteristics in both frequency and time, thus enabling
accurate and timely detection of anomalies/intrusions. A library of
measurement/analysis tools and the data repository will be made available to the
research community. This project will also develop a series of laboratory
experiments to provide secondary and university students a hand-on means of
learning about the Internet. This effort involves collaboration on both the
measurement and analysis activities with network operators, researchers in
industry and researchers in disciplines outside of networking including applied
math, statistics and signal processing.