* 0348180
* Microbial Interactions and Processes: Diversity, Function, and Biogeochemical Consequences of Chemolithoautotrophic Archaea in Nevada Hot Springs
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Chuanlun Zhang, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2008
* USD 429,880.00

"Alkalithermophilic, chemolithoautotrophic Crenarchaeota"is a mouthful to say,
but it precisely describes the new types of microbes being sought by Drs.
Chuanlun Zhang, Christopher Romanek, and Juergen Wiegel of the University of
Georgia. They have received a grant to study novel thermophilic (heat-loving)
microorganisms in Nevada hot springs. Crenarchaeota are members of a poorly
surveyed grouped of microorganisms in the domain Archaea. These investigators
will focus on alkalithermophilic Crenarchaeota - those that both grow at or
above pH 8 and at or above 60oC. Most of the known thermophilic Crenarchaeota
have been found in low pH environments, while more alkaline habitats such as
these have received less attention. Numerous hot springs located in the Sierra
Nevada are alkaline and may be unique niches for Crenarchaeota. Based on their
preliminary observations, the specific objectives of this project will further
focus on the alkalithermophilic Crenarchaeota that are chemolithoautotrophic
-which means that they obtain their carbon from CO2, and their energy by
transforming inorganic substances such as nitrogen, iron or sulfur. The team
aims to determine the ecological functions and biogeochemical consequences of
CO2 fixation performed by these organisms. Research approaches will include
novel culturing techniques, gene-sequencing, and integrated lipid biomarker and
stable isotope analyses. Short-term kinetic analysis will also be performed
using 14C-labeled CO2 or HCO3 for activity measurements under conditions
consistent with the in situ environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will integrate studies of diversity, physiology, molecular genetics and
biogeochemistry of chemolithoautotrophs, and build a strong link between their
diversity and function in carbon metabolism in hot spring environments. Results
from this study will enable these researchers to develop ideas and strategies
for establishing a future long-term microbial observatory to study total
microbial diversity and processes in Nevada hot springs, so that they can be
compared to hot springs in other habitats with a different geochemistry, such as
those in Yellowstone National Park or the Uzon Caldera in the Kamchatka
peninsula. Finally, this project will enhance infrastructure for developing
genome-enabled geomicrobiology programs at the University of Georgia's Savannah
River Ecology Laboratory, with strong ties to academic departments on main
campus. Their collaborative efforts will be directed to train graduate and
undergraduate students with interdisciplinary skills for solving complex
geomicrobiogical problems in the 21 Century.&lt;br/&gt;