* 0348323
* CAREER:  Responsive Self-Assembled Materials from Designed Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Joel Schneider, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 547,322.00

Professor Joel P. Schneider of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at
the University of Delaware is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program for a research project that entails the design of peptides
that fold and self-assemble into materials whose morphology and consequent
function can be predictably changed by specific environmental cues. Responsive
materials are prepared by linking intramolecular peptide folding to self-
assembly. Peptides are designed to fold in response to a distinct external
stimulus adopting a conformation that is amenable to self-assembly. The
resultant self-assembled material has properties that are dictated by the
individual peptides comprising the assembly; this allows novel materials with
tailored morphologies and functions to be prepared through single molecule
engineering. Peptides offer important features that can be exploited in the
self-assembly process; their ability to form defined secondary structure and
specific intermolecular interactions such as H-bonds, salt bridges and
hydrophobic contacts can be manipulated to control material morphology as well
as bulk material properties. Herein, will be developed a thorough understanding
of the triggered, reversible folding and self-assembly events for a class of
beta-hairpin peptides that form hydrogel material on cue. These responsive
hydrogels are porous on the nano- and microscale yet incredibly rigid making
them ideal candidates as tissue engineering scaffolds. The possibility of
controlling the bulk properties of these hydrogels via peptide design will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Schneider will help to establish the
rules by which peptides fold and self-assemble, which will allow novel materials
to be tailored for applications such as tissue engineering, therapeutic delivery
and microfluidics. This research is an ideal platform for developing an
educational outreach program involving high school teachers. The educational
portion of this proposal seeks to provide high school teachers with a multi-
faceted research experience to make them better teachers and mentors of the
chemical profession. Teacher-scholars will accomplish this in a 10 week summer
program by: performing cutting edge research within a laboratory at the
University of Delaware; visiting and interviewing industrial research chemists
at Dupont and AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals; developing new curricula based on
their experiences that will be incorporated into their high school chemistry
class room. The exact nature of the curricula is dependent on the Teacher-
scholar's high school and state educational guidelines, but could include a new
laboratory experiment, lectures or team problem sets. If a new lab is developed,
high school students may have the opportunity to interact directly with
Professor Schneider's lab via sample submission for routine analysis. In
contrast to a program that entails bringing only one or two high school students
into a lab to gain experience, this program provides an avenue for classrooms of
high school students to gain industrial and collegiate experience through their
teacher and the newly developed curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;