* 0348682
* CAREER:Continuous Hierarchical Nanowire/mesh Thin Films through Self-Assembled Templates
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Yunfeng Lu, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2008
* USD 399,998.00

Lu, Yunfeng Tulane University

"CAREER: Synthesis and Device Applications of Continuous Hierarchical
Nanowire/mesh Thin Films"

Nanotechnology is able to manipulate individual atoms and molecules to create
large structures with improved properties and functions. In addition to the
research, the continuous growth of nanotechnology requires nanotechnology
education, workforce training, and public information on related issues. The
research of this project includes the following goals and objectives: 1) to
develop a general synthesis approach for the fabrication of nanowire and
nanomesh thin films with controlled hierarchic structure and composition; 2) to
examine their unique properties; and 3) to explore their applications, such as
sensor and photovoltaics.

Broader Impacts: Nanoscale materials like nanowires often show novel and
significantly improved physical, chemical, and tribological properties and
functions. Current synthesis methods are often inefficient and synthesized
nanowires often lack the macroscopic morphology control required for device
applications. The most significant scientific impact of this project is the
capability to fabricate metallic or semiconductor nanowires/meshes into the
continuous, macroscopic, hierarchical thin films necessary for direct device
applications. The findings gained from this project will contribute to the basic
understanding of the nanoscale physical and chemical phenomena, providing
insights into the design and fabrication of high-sensitivity sensors and high-
efficiency photovoltaics. The fundamental studies of the confined
electrodeposition within the mesoscale geometries will significantly contribute
to current electrodeposition knowledge. The research could develop a general
synthesis method of fabricating continuous hierarchical metallic and
semiconductor nanowire/mesh thin films, examine their unique properties, and
explore their sensor, fuel cell, photovoltaic, and other applications. The
proposed nanostructured sensors may possess the high-sensitivity needed for
homeland security missions. The proposed photovoltaic devices could directly
contribute to our national energy security by providing low-cost, high-
efficiency energy devices.

The success of this career-development plan could have broad impacts on
nanotechnology education in the southern region by providing workforce training,
disseminating nanotechnology information, and nurturing the research
infrastructure. This project could develop a highly integrated career-
development plan in nanotechnology research and education. The PI will focus on
improving education in this region through course offerings, research programs
covering K-12 to graduate students, conferences, and industrial collaborations.

