* 0348259
* CAREER: Colloidal Micelles as Multifunctional Vaccines
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Darrell Irvine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

0348259 Irvine Vaccination has produced some of the most spectacular successes
in modern medicine, including the elimination of smallpox and the control of
diseases such as polio and tuberculosis. However, traditional vaccines have
failed to initiate primary immune responses that provide protection against
persistent viral infections (e.g. HIV, hepatitis C, malaria) and also have not
succeeded in a therapeutic setting, as might be desirable for treatment of
cancer patients. During the primary immune response, dendritic cells (DCs) are
key 'sentinel' cells responsible for the collection of foreign antigen, which is
broken down into peptides and presented on Major Histocompatibility Complex
(MHC) molecules to activate naive T cells.

The investigators hypothesize that improved vaccines can be obtained by
addressing 3 limitations of current vaccination strategies: failure to ensure
co-delivery of antigen and DC activation signals, lack of antigen loading on
class I MHC, and limited numbers of DCs 'vaccinated'. The approach taken is to
deliver DC-specific molecular cues using engineered synthetic polymers that
sequentially attract dendritic cells, provide activation signals, and deliver
large quantities of antigen to intracellular MHC loading pathways. Delivery will
be achieved by the synthesis of two components: hydrogel nanoparticles that
deliver encapsulated antigen and trigger DC activation through surface-
immobilized ligands, and degradable microspheres that release chemokines at a
controlled rate to create an in situ DC-specific attractant gradient at the
vaccination site. These two components will be assembled into colloidal micelles
formed by linking the antigen delivery/DC activation gel particles to the
surface of the chemoattractant-releasing microspheres, promoting physical co-
localization of the gel particle signaling component of the vaccine with the
source of the chemoattractant gradient. The platform technology developed will
allow specific antigen and DC activation signals to be readily tailored to
program dendritic cells to respond in the most effective manner in a given
clinical setting.

The specific aims are: 1) synthesize antigen delivery/DC activation nanoparticle
gels and characterize their function in vitro, to determine how coupling
particle-based antigen to activation signal delivery affects the function of
dendritic cell; 2) synthesize chemoattraction microspheres and characterize
dendritic cell attraction to the microspheres in vitro, to determine how DC
accumulation by a chemoattracting vaccine varies with the identity of the
chemoattractant and quantitative temporal/spatial characteristics of the
chemoattractant concentration profile and 3) combine the components from Aims 1
and 2 by fabricating nanoparticle-microsphere colloidal micelles, and
characterize in vitro dendritic cell attraction and antigen loading by the
complete vaccine, to determine whether physical co-localization of vaccine
components can increase the number of activated, antigen-loaded DCs.

The educational goals focused on exposing undergraduate students and school-aged
students to the excitement and growing possibilities in research at the
interface of materials and biology. Specific activities include the development
of a summer program recruiting undergraduates to design laboratory experiment
modules that will be used 1) as teaching tools in the MIT undergraduate
materials science curriculum and 2) as outreach demonstrations to teach
elementary and high school-aged students about the content of materials science
and its application to biotechnology and bioengineering.