* 0348085
* Physiological Diversity of Hyperthermophilic Microorganisms in Diverse Hot Environments
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Derek Lovley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2008
* USD 497,688.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Derek Lovley of the University of Massachusetts
to investigate novel microorganisms, known as hyperthermophiles, that live at
the temperature of boiling water, or even hotter. The purpose of this research
is to evaluate the range of environmental conditions under which
hyperthermophiles can exist and the types of reactions that hyperthermophiles
can use to gain energy to support their growth. For example, the upper
temperature limit at which life is possible will be carefully evaluated. Studies
will be conducted to explore the hypothesis that there is a wide diversity of
hyperthermophiles capable of living in the absence of oxygen by oxidizing
hydrocarbons to carbon dioxide with the reduction of the iron oxides or sulfur
that are abundant in some hot environments. The possibility that there are
hyperthermophiles that can grow on soluble ferric iron under highly acidic
conditions will also be studied. New approaches to the isolation of
hyperthermophiles will be used in an attempt to isolate the microorganisms that
still exist on Earth that are most closely related to the microbes which are
thought to be the ancestors of all current life on Earth.

These studies are expected to improve the understanding of how microbial life
evolved on the hot, early Earth and the functioning of hot microbial ecosystems
in modern environments, such as those associated with terrestrial hot springs,
marine hydrothermal vents, and the deep subsurface. The results will help
further define the conditions under which life might be found on other planets.
This research has the potential to provide substantial economic benefit by
suggesting new strategies for the remediation of toxic contaminants and the
recovery of hydrocarbons from petroleum reservoirs. The findings may also
furnish information that will aid in the search for ore deposits and is likely
to yield new, heat-stable enzymes with possible industrial applications.