* 0348689
* Structure and Function of Mycorrhizal Mat Communities at the H. J. Andrews LTER Microbial Observatory
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Peter Bottomley, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2010
* USD 929,635.00

A Microbial Observatories grant has been awarded to Drs. David Myrold, Peter
Bottomley, Bruce Caldwell, Kermit Cromack, and Joseph Spatafora of Oregon State
University to study the microbial communities of mycorrhizal mats associated
with mature conifer stands in Oregon. The research sites will be located at the
H. J. Andrews Experimental Forest, which is a Long-term Ecological Research
site. Mycorrhizal mats can be seen with the naked eye and are formed by fungi
that have a symbiotic relationship with tree roots: the fungus provide the tree
with nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, and the tree supplies the
fungus with sugars derived from photosynthesis. In addition, the mycorrhizal
mats alter the soil environment and likely establish a unique microbial
community that also alters the carbon and nutrient cycling activities of the
soil microorganisms. The goals of this research are: (i) to identify the fungi,
bacteria, and other microorganisms that are part of the mycorrhizal mat
community, many of which may be new to science; and (ii) to determine the roles
that these different microorganisms play in the functioning of this community.
Modern methods, such as high volume DNA extraction and sequencing, will be
combined with more traditional culturing and activity measurement techniques to
gain insights into this unique microbial system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will enhance our understanding of the workings of coniferous forest
ecosystems, which are important sources of biodiversity of plants and animals,
potential sinks for atmospheric carbon dioxide, and economically important for
timber production. Several graduate students will be trained in contemporary
microbial ecology and the visible nature of the mycorrhizal mats will be used to
introduce middle and high school teachers to the microbial world just outside
their classrooms through annual training sessions.&lt;br/&gt;