* 0348354
* CAREER: X-Ray Diffraction Studies of Semiconductor and Metal Thin Film Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Randall Headrick, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2010
* USD 606,864.00

This CAREER project aims to develop a leading research and education activity in
the area of metal/semiconductor growth, and self-organized pattern formation on
surfaces. Through integra-tion of innovative research with a broad education and
outreach effort, the project expects to dramatically advance fundamental
understanding of organic and inorganic thin-film growth and etching kinetics. A
series of experiments are aimed at producing methods of controlling the
structure of thin films for the next generation of devices in several materials
systems related to information technology. Key areas include: (i) Kinetics of
pulsed laser Molecular Beam Epitaxy. Important issues are the formation and
ultimate limits of non-equilibrium alloys, and the interplay of structure with
carrier transport and magnetic properties. (ii) Patterning of surfaces by ion
etch-ing. This research seeks methods for self-organized fabrication of
nanostructured thin films and control of the structure of interfaces between
materials. (iii) Organic electronics, where it is of paramount importance to
understand the interplay of crystalline structure and thin film growth kinetics
with electrical properties and stability/reliability. The three research areas
have a common intellectual theme through greater understanding and development
of complementary thin film materials for applications in optoelectronics,
magneto-electronics, spintronics, and low cost electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in
electronic materials science having technological relevance. The research plan
is closely integrated with an energetic education and outreach program
incorporating extensive mentoring. New courses will be developed to provide un-
dergraduate and graduate students with a solid background in x-ray physics,
materials science, and nanotechnology. In addition to graduate research
assistants, undergraduate students will be involved in the research program,
providing them with valuable opportunities to complement their theoretical
training. Students at all levels will be encouraged to present results at
national meetings. A greater community focusing on thin film electronic
materials is envisioned from diverse groups across the campus and at other
colleges, universities, national laboratories, and local industry, which will
give students the opportunity to experience a multidisciplinary environment. The
program will make use of the multi-user facility for X-ray Studies of Materials
with Analysis in Real-Time (X-SMART) at the National Synchrotron Light Source
(NSLS), as well as facilities at the University of Vermont and at Cornell
University. An extended outreach program aimed at K-12 students and teachers,
female/minority colleges, and industry, will build on the Vermont HELIX program,
extending these benefits to rural Vermont and inner city New York schools. This
project will benefit society by creating new knowledge in an important area of
science re-lated to modern technology, by producing highly skilled workers for
related industries, and by raising the level of community interest in science
and technology. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;