* 0348110
* CAREER:  High Fidelity Numerical Modeling and Simulation of Fire Suppression
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Paul DesJardin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 09/30/2010
* USD 406,066.00

Abstract - DesJardin, 0348110&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objective of this research is to develop an advanced modeling and simulation
framework for predicting the suppression of large-scale fires using water mists
and sprays. The modeling is based on Large Eddy Simulation (LES) techniques
using probabilistic based sub-grid scale (SGS) models to account for multiphase
coupling of buoyancy-driven turbulence, combustion, suppression thermochemistry,
droplet transport, and thermal radiation heat transfer. Specifically, this
effort is focused on: (1) improved SGS turbulence models for buoyancy-driven
flows, (2) new SGS stochastic process descriptions to account for turbulence-
chemistry-radiation-particle interactions, and (3) radiation heat transfer in
turbulent multiphase flows. The implementation of these models also includes
development of advanced numerical algorithms for efficient implementation of
Monte Carlo solution procedures implemented on massively parallel computers and
development of gridless radiation methodologies for participating anisotropic
scattering media. This combined set of new models and algorithms should result
in a significant improvements in fire-suppression field modeling as well as
advance the quantitative treatment of other applications in which multiphase
combustion and radiation processes are important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significance of this effort is to offer scientific insight on suppressing large-
scale fires that have recently caught the attention of our nation, ranging from
the destruction of the twin towers in New York City to the wild fires that have
raged through the southwest. One of the challenges in controlling these fires is
predicting the performance of the water-delivery system, which depends on the
understanding of dynamics of flame suppression processes in highly turbulent,
strongly radiating, multiphase, reacting flows. One of the goals of this
research is to provide a high fidelity predictive tool to simulate these
processes. Such a tool will allow fire-protection engineers to design better
fire-suppression systems to insure fire safety for our nations' critical
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;