* 0348955
* CAREER:   Organic Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Edward Van Keuren, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 01/31/2010
* USD 512,420.00

The focus of this research is the study of organic nanoparticles prepared using
an arrested precipitation method called "solvent shifting." This plan will
involve study of fundamental aspects of the nucleation and growth of the
nanoparticles, especially the role of diffusion in supersaturated solutions and
the connection to solution crystallization. Mechanisms of the particle growth
will be determined in order to develop methods of stabilization and separation
from the solvent. Organic nanoparticles will be used in a number of innovative
applications such as polymer nanoparticles with narrow size distributions,
nanocomposite light emitting diodes, and nanoscale electronic components. The
plan is integrated with undergraduate training in optics and materials, both
through research participation and the development of an online optics reference
book. This reference book will have several innovative features, including
distributed authorship and the use of active learning by undergraduates in the
creation and revision of the material and the delivery of multiple levels of
content. A significant undergraduate participation in the organic nanoparticle
research is also planned, along with further development of a novel graduate
program in industrial physics. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
research project is to gain a better understanding of the underlying processes
of aggregation and self-assembly of organic molecules. A number of novel optical
characterization methods will be used to do this, including fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy, which looks at optical emission from small groups of,
or even single molecules, and diffusion measurements in microfabricated mixing
cells. There are many potential applications for these types of organic
nanoparticles, ranging from novel optical materials to biocompatible drug
formulations. Several applications will be explored: polymer dispersions with
well-controlled sizes and shapes, composites of nanoparticles for optical
displays, and nano-electronics using chains of organic nanoparticles. The plan
is integrated with undergraduate training in optics and materials, both through
research participation and the development of a novel online optics reference
book. This reference book will have several innovative features, including
distributed authorship and the use of active learning by undergraduates in the
creation and revision of the material and the delivery of multiple levels of
content.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;