* 0348207
* PECASE:  Development & Application of New Tools for Infrastructure Programming Decisions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Michael Garvin, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas A. Birkland
* 07/31/2006
* USD 179,593.00

Project Abstract: The asset management paradigm has emerged over the past decade
within the American infrastructure community in response to rising public
expectations, increased competitive pressures, new accounting standards and
federal funding devolution. The challenges presented by this emerging paradigm
are especially acute within the infrastructure programming process where current
research and practice deters movement toward a more complete, and optimum,
public sector capital programming posture.

This research project aims to drive the infrastructure community toward a more
ideal posture by developing new decision support systems that encourage
comprehensive and transparent decision-making and deploying professionals who
are prepared for 21st century infrastructure management. Specific research
objectives are to: (1) develop a flexible performance modeling method under
conditions of uncertainty and limited data, (2) apply and validate a general
approach to evaluate alternative investment programs at the portfolio level and
(3) establish heuristics and identify best procurement practices to support the
use of multiple project delivery methods during the capital development
lifecycle. Concepts and methods from the decision sciences provide the
intellectual substance necessary to accomplish the first two research objectives
while detailed case study work supports the third objective. In addition, the
plan capitalizes upon the involvement of two collaborative public sector
partners who will contribute the realistic context, input and feedback necessary
to insure that the proposed tools are applicable to authentic public sector
challenges.

The corresponding education plan will prime civil engineers for the
infrastructure management challenges ahead by: (1) improving a progressive
sequence of infrastructure management courses, (2) facilitating problem-focused
and team-based learning and (3) developing new educational materials. This work
will create specific educational products including web-based, multimedia
curriculum modules for middle school students and a continuing education
tutorial for industry practitioners.

This CAREER development program is noteworthy for its potential contributions to
the asset management paradigm. Through research aimed at producing tested
decision support systems and education targeted at developing a new generation
of infrastructure managers, this work will fundamentally improve the decisions
that impact the "fitness" of our built environment. Moreover, the decision
support tools that will result are applicable to any economic sector/enterprise
where large collections of real assets are common. Ultimately, this endeavor
will assist in attacking the perpetual challenge of maintaining, restoring,
modernizing and expanding our infrastructure base to meet social and economic
expectations.