* 0348552
* Emergency Preparedness Planning and On-Line Evacuation of Large Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/14/2003,01/31/2007
* Elise Miller-Hooks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 01/31/2007
* USD 235,230.00

The primary focus of this research activity is the development of the conceptual
framework and methodological steps for determining optimal and robust tactical
and operational strategies for rapidly evacuating a large burning building or a
building that has come under attack by enemy or natural catastrophe. Both
emergency preparedness planning and real-time execution are addressed. Tactical
preparedness concerns involve the selection of carefully planned a priori
evacuation paths that consider the inherent dynamic and uncertain nature of
conditions that exist in emergency situations requiring evacuation. Operational
concerns address the on-line determination of evacuation paths that are updated
in real-time as actual conditions of the building structures and circulation
systems (i.e. means of egress) are revealed and predictions related to risk of
continued failure concerning the structural members and portions of the
circulation systems are updated.&lt;br/&gt;The need for modeling the dynamic and
uncertain nature of conditions in emergency evacuation stems from the fact that
such events are often characterized by dangers that strengthen and spread over
time. These circumstances induce the possibility that successful egress may be
inhibited by partial or complete failure of key escape paths. Moreover, we
cannot know how the situation will progress with certainty even if the exact
location and type of event that initiated the need for the evacuation is known.
Existing methodologies for determining optimal evacuation paths do not consider
this uncertainty and the dynamically varying conditions inherent in post-blast,
fire or other situations requiring emergency evacuation. Instructions that do
not consider the evolution of damage over time and threats of probable
additional destruction and deterioration can result in suboptimal decisions that
can lead to unnecessary imposed risk and unnecessary lost lives. The algorithmic
developments undertaken in this research effort will explicitly consider these
characteristics in determination of the evacuation path strategies, resulting in
robust evacuation plans with lower probability of failure than paths determined
otherwise. &lt;br/&gt;Teaching, training and learning will be enhanced through
the development of real-world case studies that will be studied in the classroom
and through a comprehensive graduate course related to risk analyses and
emergency management. &lt;br/&gt;Evacuation plans resulting from the proposed
research activities will enable faster and more efficient evacuation of a
building in the event of military attack, fire, natural disaster, discovery of a
hazardous material or biological agent, or other circumstances warranting quick
escape. This will result in reduction in: the number of injured persons, trapped
evacuees, or lost lives. The methodologies developed in this research effort
will also be pertinent for evaluating existing evacuation plans and for
identifying potentially high-risk circumstances. These results will impact many
other functional areas as well, including, evacuation of a geographical region
due to military attack, human-made accident, or natural disaster, such as an
accident involving a nuclear power plant or escape of hazardous chemicals,
collapse of a structure such as dam walls, hurricane, earthquake, flooding,
volcanic eruption, or tsunami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;