* 0348720
* CAREER:  Miniature Scanning Endoscope for Multi-modality High-resolution Optical Imaging of Internal Organs
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Xingde Li, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0348720&lt;br/&gt;Li&lt;br/&gt;This Career Development Plan focuses on
developing a new-generation scanning endoscope that has all the major functions
of a conventional scanning microscope yet is sufficiently small for imaging
internal organs, with a long-term focus on early disease detection, particularly
early cancer detection. In addition to clinical applications, the device may
also be a valuable tool for basic biomedical research, particularly for those
involving serial in vivo animal model studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of the research plan is to develop a miniature, forward-looking,
multi-modality optical imaging device that can be delivered endoscopically for
examining internal organs at or near cellular resolution. The endoscope can be
used with optical coherence tomography (OCT), confocal microscopy and
potentially multiphoton (fluorescence) microscopy (MPM), to perform non-invasive
"optical biopsy." The year-by-year specific plans are to: (1) develop the
essential components for a scanning endoscope, including a miniature fiber-optic
beam scanner and high performance achromatic micro optics; (2) explore a novel
real-time focus-tracking mechanism using an ultrasonic micromotor; (3) develop a
new beam-scanning scheme that enables real-time ultrahigh resolution OCT imaging
with an ultra broadband light source, and study real-time en face confocal
imaging with the miniature scanning endoscope; (4) investigate the feasibility
of the scanning endoscope for assessing cancerous changes using a carcinogenesis
animal model; and (5) further miniaturize the scanning endoscope to interface
with conventional surface tissue endoscopes, and explore the feasibility of the
scanning endoscope for MPM imaging. In addition to clinical applications, the
proposed device can also be a valuable tool for basic biomedical research,
particularly for those involving serial in vivo animal model studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of the education plan is to create a
strong biomedical imaging and biophotonics research and education program, which
vertically integrates physics, engineering and clinical diagnosis applications.
The plan involves developing graduate and undergraduate courses and engaging
students (particularly, undergraduate students) in the investigator's research
program, thus providing students with the rigorous training necessary to bridge
basic biomedical engineering research and clinical applications.&lt;br/&gt;