* 0348918
* CAREER:  Vortices in Magnetic Superconductors Studied by Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Eric Hudson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2009
* USD 450,000.00

The study of vortex physics in magnetic superconductors, and particularly in
high temperature superconductors, is important for a number of reasons.
Technologically, it is critical to the development of high current
superconducting wires, as well as to other possible devices, including high-
speed switches and magnetic field detectors (SQUIDs). Scientifically it may lead
to a better understanding of superconductivity itself and to a better
understanding of other novel phenomena, such as phase transformations in
disordered systems. The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is to investigate, at the
atomic scale, the novel interactions in magnetic superconductors. Using a
scanning tunneling microscope (STM), these interactions will be probed by seeing
how local electronic structure is perturbed by the introduction of magnetic
vortices. In addition to these studies, the project will lay the groundwork for
future research, both by developing tools for use at MIT and elsewhere, and,
more importantly, by training graduate, undergraduate and high school students
(and teachers through outreach programs), providing them the experience of
designing, building and performing experiments to help solve some of the
greatest mysteries facing condensed matter physicists
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; High temperature superconductors, materials that
allow the flow of electricity without the wasteful generation of heat, have been
heavily studied over the past 15 years, but are still not understood. Recently,
it appears that novel magnetic interactions are responsible for these fantastic
properties. The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is to investigate, at the atomic
scale, the relationship between magnetism and superconductivity in these and
other related materials. In addition to gaining a better understanding of the
science of these materials, this study is also critical to future technologies,
such as the development of high current superconducting wires (e.g. for power
stations) and high-speed switches (e.g. for cell phone stations). In addition to
these studies, the project will lay the groundwork for future research, both by
developing tools for use at MIT and elsewhere, and, more importantly, by
training graduate, undergraduate and high school students (and teachers through
outreach programs), providing them the experience of designing, building and
performing experiments to help solve some of the greatest mysteries facing
condensed matter physicists today.&lt;br/&gt;