* 0348221
* CAREER:     Scalable Learning and Adaptation with Intelligent Techniques and Neural Networks for Reconfiguration and Survivability of Complex Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,04/30/2012
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 04/30/2012
* USD 473,966.00

Recently, intelligent techniques and adaptive critic designs have received
increasing attention. The dynamic stochastic optimization (DSO) of complex
systems such as the electric power grid and its parts can be formulated as
minimization and/or maximization of certain quantities. The electric power grid
is faced with deregulation and an increased demand for high-quality and reliable
electricity for our digital economy, and coupled with interdependencies with
other critical infrastructures, it is becoming more and more stressed.
Intelligent systems technology will play an important role in carrying out DSO
to improve the network efficiency and eliminate congestion problems without
seriously diminishing reliability and security. This project proposes to
investigate ways in which the power grid can be dynamically optimized, as a
testbed for advanced brain-like stochastic identifiers and
controllers.&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge and understanding on
how to carry out optimization of a dynamic stochastic system. A novel local and
global dynamic stochastic optimization strategy for a large scale complex system
will be designed. The operating safety margins that currently exist on the large
complex systems such as the electric power grid will be minimized, thus,
allowing maximum utilization of existing resources with increased system
reliability and security with optimal settings on devices throughout the entire
system. The capability of carrying out dynamic stochastic optimization is the
dream of today. This proposal is a first step in unfolding this dream to reality
using brain-like systems with learning and adaptation based on approximate
dynamic programming, advanced neural networks and other intelligent techniques
on complex systems. In addition, system survivability and availability will be
increased by improving reliability and fault tolerance of digital hardware,
where the critical algorithms are implemented, using evolution and intelligent
techniques. Fault tolerant designs to the unpredictable means robustness,
security and safety. &lt;br/&gt;The project will also include a major component
of educational outreach and of international collaboration including
intellectual exchange via faculty and student exchanges between the U.S. and
Nigeria, and US and Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;