* 0348455
* CAREER:     Influence of Soil Morphology, Biosolid Application Rate, and Wind Velocity on the Emission Flux of Biosolid Derived Microbial Aerosols
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Jordan Peccia, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 12/31/2006
* USD 265,180.00

0348455&lt;br/&gt;Peccia&lt;br/&gt;The flow regime of contemporary wastewater
treatment plants requires a constant demand and market for the resultant
biosolids. The beneficial use of biosolids in the United States through land
application, however, is a present environmental, public health, and public
acceptance concern. The purpose of the research portion of this CAREER proposal
is to develop a fundamental understanding of the effects of soil type, biosolid
characteristics, and wind velocity on the wind caused aerosolization of
particulate matter and associated pathogens from soils in which biosolids have
been applied. Specific objectives of this proposed research are the following:
(i) design, build, and test a DNA microarray(s) to detect relevant pathogenic
and indicator microorganisms in land applied and aerosolized biosolids; (ii)
based on soil, atmospheric, and biosolid characteristics, develop and test a
pilot-scale wind tunnel method for predicting the emission flux of respirable
particulate matter under variable wind velocities; (iii) characterize the
microbial fraction of particulate matter emitted from land applied biosolid
aerosolization and; (iv) conduct a multiyear field sampling campaign to
determine fine particulate matter emission flux under variable wind velocities
and to characterize the microbial content of the particulate matter and soil.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Completion of the proposed research
will significantly advance the understanding of the environmental conditions
that lead to biosolid atmospheric emissions and will provide a comprehensive
characterization of the microbial aerosols. With this understanding, a rational
engineering approach can be applied to decisions on where, when and how to land
apply biosolids and, lead to the development of techniques that mitigate
aerosolization. The approach is comprehensive. Molecular- and classically-based
microbial measurements will be mixed with pilot-scale wind tunnel experiments to
build a fundamental understanding and produce predictive capabilities. A full-
scale multiyear sampling campaign will provide monitoring data as well as data
to validate relationships derived at pilot-scale. The education of graduate and
undergraduate environmental engineering students on public acceptance issues and
university undergraduate students on local environmental issues will be used to
address the larger societal implications of this practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. By helping to confirm the safety of
biosolid land application or identifying aspects that are unsafe and then
providing mitigation strategies, this research will broadly impact the necessary
practice of wastewater solids disposal in the U.S. and abroad. The information
gained for predicting the release of fine particulate matter and bioaerosols, as
well as, the developments in the measurement of the concentration and type of
airborne microorganisms is of fundamental public health and ecological
importance and crosses many disciplines. Areas that can be advanced include the
detection of airborne infectious and allergenic diseases, spread of agricultural
and live stock pathogens, and the detection of intentionally release airborne
pathogens. The educational plan integrates public acceptance issues into the
undergraduate environmental engineering curriculum, develops an awareness of
environmental issues in the general student population, provides opportunities
for graduate students to work internationally, and provides a framework for
recruiting underrepresented students into engineering. The educational plan is
designed to impact society by educating undergraduate environmental engineers
that, in addition to a strong training in technology, have developed a relevant
global and social perspective of their profession. The purpose of the
educational portion of this CAREER proposal is to build future approaches in
environmental engineering education that more broadly integrate environmental
engineering technology with social considerations.