* 0348457
* CAREER:    Fostering Innovation and Learning in the AEC Industry Through Immersive Virtual Facility Prototypes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* John Messner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 05/31/2010
* USD 421,325.00

The design and construction of facilities requires the conceptualization of
complex systems and processes. While many industries have embraced rapid
prototyping processes and technologies, the use of prototypes in the building
industry remains in its infancy. There is a need to develop better methods to
visualize and manipulate virtual models of facilities and construction processes
within the Architecture, Engineering and Construction (AEC) industry. This
project aims to create a Virtual Facility Prototyping (VFP) process and tools
that will provide a foundation for the wide-spread implementation of virtual
facility prototyping in the AEC industry. The VFP process will lead to a
structure for developing innovative industry prototyping techniques and will
provide the foundation for visual and problem-based student learning
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to develop
methods to efficiently create and use immersive virtual facility prototypes that
foster more innovative building and infrastructure product and process designs.
More specifically, this research will explore the efficient development and use
of VFPs to foster innovation through the improved communication of the design
and construction process information between project team members including the
architects, engineers, contractors, owners and suppliers. Case studies and
structured experiments will be used to demonstrate how communication and problem
solving between collaborative teams can be facilitated through the virtual and
full-scale representation of design and construction
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this project
targets the development of case study learning modules using the virtual
facility prototypes in an active learning environment. These learning modules
will be implemented into the undergraduate curriculum and freely disseminated to
other universities for more widespread use. The use of VFPs in engineering
education will have a profound impact on the visualization of complex systems
and construction processes by students and clearly demonstrate successful
techniques for applying advanced visualization tools. When combined with
problem-based learning exercises, VFPs will help create active, engaging
learning environments and improve the attraction and retention of top caliber
students to engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this
project on the AEC industry will be significant and broad-reaching, as it will
redefine how facilities are conceptualized, designed, and constructed in virtual
environments. This project will also demonstrate the value of VFPs in creating
collaborative problem solving environments to other industries, such as ship
building, aircraft construction, and large equipment manufacturing
industries&lt;br/&gt;