* 0348142
* CAREER:  Self-Calibration Metrology Advances for Micro-Optics Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Angela Davies, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2010
* USD 440,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funds to advance
discrete-component metrology that directly impacts manufacturability and
inspection of micro-optic components. The measurement advances are based on
self-calibration and homogeneous transformation methods that will allow
interferometric measurements of the dimensional errors and optical performance
of micro-lenses. This will significantly reduce measurement uncertainty and
increase the types of parts that can be measured. Transfer of research advances
to industry will be accomplished through an industry-sponsored graduate student
internship and a continuing education workshop. The award will also be used to
advance graduate education through a laboratory course module on micro-optics
metrology and a new course on project management. High school summer internships
will be used to expose local students to the research program by leveraging an
existing NSF-funded GK12 program with a local high school.

Industry implementation of the metrology advances will improve manufacturing of
micro-refractive lenses by improving device yield and reducing testing time and
cost, and thereby enhancing U.S. competitiveness in this area. The research
accomplishments will also advance research and manufacturing capabilities under
a micro-optics testing and fabrication program at UNC Charlotte. The program
focuses on low-cost/high-volume micro-optic manufacturing research to develop
cost-effective manufacturing solutions for micro-optic components and systems.
The program falls at the interface between the Center for Optoelectronics and
Optical Communications and the Center for Precision Metrology at Charlotte, and
will be orchestrated under the Carolinas MicroOptics Triangle Agreement. This is
a multi-institution agreement aimed at stimulating economic growth in the
Carolinas through high-impact research, providing joint access for students and
faculty to advanced facilities, and delivering a well-trained workforce in opto-
technologies. The education objectives will enhance the retention and
recruitment of students in the area and contribute to the objectives of the
MicroOptics Triangle Agreement.