* 0348205
* CAREER:     Dynamics, Rheology, and Microrheology of Rigid Polymers and Brownian Fibers
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Jason Butler, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 03/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract CTS-0348205 J. Butler, U of Florida

The general objective of the research program is to elucidate the dynamics and
rheology of suspensions of Brownian rods while simultaneously developing
microrheology as a tool for characterizing complex fluids containing rigid,
Brownian particles. Improving the performance and creating new applications for
materials made with rigid polymers and Brownian fibers partly relies upon the
accurate determination of their physical properties. To characterize ridgid
polymers and Brownian fibers, materials scientists and engineers measure
quantities such as the particle diffusivities and fluid rheology. Interpretation
of the results depends upon theories which usually provide qualitative scaling
laws rather than quantitative predictions. To eliminate the disparity between
quantitative predictions and measurements, a combined program of experimental
and computational research is being pursued. The experimental program uses
microrheology to evaluate the linear viscoelastic response of a suspension of
isotropic Brownian rods and to measure the viscosity of a suspension of Brownian
rods aligned by a shear flow. A direct comparison with measurements of standard
shear-rheology will be made on the identical suspension. Simulations of the
rheology and microrheology will be used in interpreting the measurements. These
simulations will be the first rigorous and dynamic simulations for a suspension
of Brownian fibers and rigid polymers which include multi-body hydrodynamic
interactions. The results of the proposed experiments and simulations are
anticipated to provide significant insight into not only the dynamics of
Brownian fibers, but also the relationship between microrheology and
macrorheology measurements.

An integrated education program focused on incorporating stochastic processes
and models into the undergraduate curriculum of chemical engineering will be
carried out. The goal is to familiarize students with the fundamentals of random
processes which are important to the emerging areas of biotechnology and
nanotechnology; the current lack of these topics in the curriculum represents a
critical barrier to the full participation of graduates of chemical engineering
in these areas of technology. To address this significant issue, the PI is
developing highly structured computer modules which will implement a system of
self-study and take advantage of the simulation capabilities of the computer.
The concepts will be presented using examples taken primarily from the area of
biotechnology. This approach will provide the students with insights into
fundamental processes associated with biotechnology while they simultaneously
study the principles of stochastic processes. The modules will be used as
teaching tools or supplementary material in existing courses. Once completed,
the modules will be disseminated to educators through the internet and other
available means. To further enhance the education of students, the PI is
continuing to improve upon and expand the use of effective methods in teaching
and is providing technical training and career counseling to students at all
levels through direct participation in the research program.

Broad Impact The significance of the proposed research is underlined by the
improvement in the theories of semidilute solutions of Brownian rods which will
result from the calculations. Rigid polymers are widely used as high performance
plastics and examples of Brownian fibers can be found in the form of
macromolecules of biological origin and in nanotechnology in the form of
nanotubes and nanorods. Consequently, the research will have a direct impact on
existing and emerging technologies in polymer science, nanotechnology, and
biotechnology.

The education program addresses the necessity of providing students with skills
to participate in the emerging fields of biotechnology and nanotechnology. The
development and implementation of the instructional tools will meet this need
and create a technological workforce with appropriate training for participation
in these new technologies. This effort will result in an enhanced educational
experience and outcome for the students of the University; furthermore, the
final products will be disseminated to other educators and therefore impact many
additional students.