* 0348255
* LTREB: Collaborative Research: Experimental Manipulation and Monitoring of an Arid Ecosystem at Portal, Arizona
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Thomas Valone, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2009
* USD 187,499.00

The proposed research will continue long-term manipulations of rodents and ants
and standardized censuses of rodents, ants and plants to provide data on
responses of individuals, populations and communities both to experimental
perturbations and to background temporal and spatial variation in the
environment. The research will test several hypotheses: 1) Population abundances
of rodents are strongly influenced by extreme climatic events. While increased
precipitation generally affects animal populations in arid environments
positively, the research will examine how both winter and summer high rainfall
events can result in high rodent mortality; 2) Population dynamics are
synchronized by climate. Population changes are often driven by changes in food
abundance and so species feeding on different foods often exhibit different
population dynamics. The research will test whether the population dynamics of
seed-eating and omnivorous ants are synchronized by large-scale climatic
fluctuation, such as El Nino events; 3) Climate and livestock grazing interact
to control the desert-grassland transition. The research will compare vegetation
changes that have occurred both inside and outside the grazing exclusion fence
to evaluate hypothesized mechanisms of desertification and grassland
restoration; 4) Biotic resistance and productivity affect species invasion. The
research will test the proposed contrasting effects of community diversity and
productivity to explain the abundance of a recent invading plant species at the
site. Studying this system will provide general insights, useful to ecologists,
conservation biologists and ranchers working in arid grassland habitats, into
how biotic and abiotic factors affect the abundance of animal and plant
populations.