* 0348758
* CAREER: Biomechanics of Polymerization Motors and Cell Motility
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Daniel Fletcher, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 02/28/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0348758 Fletcher Many cell movements and shape changes depend on the cell's
ability to internally generate and control mechanical forces. Directed cell
movement is fundamental to both maintenance of health and spread of diseases
within the body. Polymerization of the cytoskeletal protein actin into networks
of filaments - like the expansion of a linear piezoelectric actuator upon
charging - creates directed forces that extend the cell's leading edge and play
a fundamental role in guiding cell motility.

This CAREER proposal focused on a key biomechanical question in cell motility:
how does actin polymerization, sometimes described as a polymerization motor,
generate force? Answering this question will help reveal the mechanical
mechanisms underlying cell motility and its role in disease.. Future development
of mechanical measurement techniques for studying force-generating cellular
"subsystems" may lead to new strategies for drug discovery that target specific
mechanical processes and novel sensors and actuators based on biological
building blocks.

The proposed research plan investigates the biomechanics of polymerization
motors through (i) instrument development, (ii) in vitro experimentation, and
(iii) cell motility modeling and measurement. Atomic force microscopy is an
increasingly popular tool for biomechanical studies of cells, but commercial
instruments are not appropriate for measuring polymerization forces over
biologically relevant timescales. This work develops a differential force
microscopy technique to directly measure actin polymerization rates and stall
forces. Using an in vitro motility system based on the bacterial pathogen
Listeria monocytogenes, experiments will determine the effect of nucleation
surface geometry and accessory protein concentration on polymerization dynamics.
Finally, results from the experiments will be compared to predictions from
existing models of actin-based motility and used to investigate differences in
the cell motility speeds and forces of normal and cancerous cells.

The proposed education plan provides learning opportunities for current and
future researchers in the mechanics of cell movement through (i) course
development, (ii) a mechanical property database, and (iii) hands-on
experiments. The PI will develop and teach a new course on the mechanics of
molecules in the Bioengineering Department at UC Berkeley that emphasizes the
role of mechanical properties of proteins in cell movements and the spread of
disease. A web-based database of the mechanical properties of proteins and other
macromolecules will be created to provide researchers in the field with an
organized summary of the currently known mechanical properties for use in
motility models and comparisons. To motivate the next generation of scientists
and engineers, the PI will work with undergraduate student groups to create
hands-on microscopy experiments for Oakland, CA elementary school children
introducing them to cell movements through microscopy activities with single-
celled organisms.