* 0348239
* CAREER:  Rational Synthesis and Studies of Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Stanislaus Wong, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 01/31/2010
* USD 568,352.00

This project, based on previous studies resulting in an ozonolysis protocol that
purifies single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) by removing amorphous carbon and
metal impurities and provides a new means for generalizing traditional chemistry
to SWNT sidewalls and surfaces, will explore further the properties of the
resultant ozonized tubes. Because ozonolysis is expected to introduce holes into
the sidewalls of SWNTs, this project aims to perform (i) spectroscopic
verification of electronic structure and bonding in these materials and (ii)
adsorption measurements to analyze the extent of porosity. The main goal is to
demonstrate that chemical manipulation (i.e. ozonolysis) can affect nanoscale
properties in a favorable, controllable manner. To further illustrate the
versatility of these ozonized tubes, the expected abundance of oxygenated groups
on the nanotube surface will be used to seed the formation of quantum dots so as
to create novel hierarchical assemblies. Graduate, undergraduate, and high-
school students will participate in all aspects of this research and in so
doing, will take advantage of the unique resources also available at facilities
available through the Brookhaven National Laboratory. Moreover, students will
have the opportunity to present their research at an annual interdisciplinary
Stony Brook-BNL nanoscience symposium. This arrangement truly widens their
educational and career possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Single-walled
carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) are thought to have a host of wide-ranging, potential
economic applications including as catalyst supports, field emitters, high
strength fibers, sensors, actuators, gas storage media, and as molecular wires
for the next generation of electronics devices. Understanding the chemistry of
SWNTs is critical to rational and favorable manipulation of their properties. It
has been shown that SWNTs in the presence of ozone result in a product that is
not only very pure, but also hypothesized to contain holes in its sidewalls,
important for gas storage applications. Furthermore, synthesized ozonized SWNT-
nanocrystal based heterostructures may be critical for devising molecular scale
computing devices. From a teaching perspective, the PI will emphasize unique
interdisciplinary nanoscience research opportunities at Brookhaven National
Laboratory to Stony Brook undergraduate and graduate students as well as to high
school students, especially from underrepresented groups, through a mixture of
laboratory tours, talks, courses, and workshops. The multifaceted strategy
proposed will generate highly-trained interdisciplinary students, ready to make
significant technical and socially beneficial
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;