* 0348039
* CAREER:     Critical Issues for Biomolecular Simulations: Organic Solvents, Protein-Protein and Nucleotide-Protein Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Celeste Sagui, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award supports research and education in computational biophysics.
Research activities will focus on biomolecular applications, and build on
methodological advances made by the PI in the treatment of long-range
electrostatic interactions between biomolecules, as well as new multiscale
developments. Specific research goals focus primarily on aspects of nucleic acid
recognition, and on protein-protein interactions as they occur in the Ras
superfamily of GTPases. Crucial cell processes such as DNA replication, repair
and transcription, mRNA translation, viral RNA insertion, etc., all involve
complex interactions between proteins and nucleic acids. A true, physics-based
characterization of these interactions has remained elusive, because of their
relatively small magnitude and their varied physical origins. These interactions
determine the "recognition" contacts between molecules, which allow for site-
specific binding proteins to choose the correct nucleic acid sequence from
millions of possibilities. Similar concepts of complexity and technical
difficulty apply to protein-protein interactions. As a particular model for
investigation with large-scale biomolecular simulations, the PI has chosen the
family of GTPases, which act as molecular switches involved in signal
transduction cascades and motility in mammalian cells. Additionally, the PI will
also investigate the properties of selected organic solvents for the
determination of protein surface binding sites. Experimentally, it has been
established that the structure of many proteins solvated in a variety of organic
solvents is almost identical to that in an aqueous environment. So, organic
solvents allow experimentalists to probe the binding sites of proteins via the
multiple solvent crystal structure (MSCS) method. Currently, there is little
theoretical understanding of the properties of proteins solvated with organic
molecules, which therefore represents an important opportunity for research. The
PI plans to carry out these investigations in consultation and collaboration
with other researchers at NC State and at a local NIH laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will focus on teaching two courses that showcase the power of biomolecular
simulations and the applications outlined under this CAREER proposal. These
courses aim to satisfy local needs for a survey course on atomistic simulation
methods and an intense "short-course" on biomolecular simulations. These courses
will form part of the educational effort of the Center for High Performance
Supercomputing (CHiPS). Plans to recruit students from underrepresented groups,
especially women and hispanics, and to participate in international
collaborations are integrated into research and education activities. Broader
impacts: The research component impacts the fields of quantitative biology as
well as theoretical and computational materials research. The education
component supports a computationally able 21st century workforce and provides
opportunities for members of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an integrated
research and education plan in the area of Computational Biophysics. Based on
recent algorithmic advances combined with the growing power of parallel
computing, it is now becoming possible to directly investigate the action of
biomolecules with the power of molecular dynamics simulations. The PI's research
will primarily focus on: (i) organic solvents for the determination of protein
surface properties; (ii) DNA sequence-dependent structure in solution; (iii)
protein-protein interactions as they occur in the Ras superfamily of GTPases.
The investigations of these systems will all represent an important step in
enhancing our understanding of fundamental biomolecular processes. The
educational goals of this CAREER proposal, are based on the concept of a
"multiscale" education for graduate students which is to take place under the
auspices of a newly developed Center aimed at fostering high performance
supercomputing, i.e., an education that ensures that students have a broad set
of computational simulation skills at their disposal, rather than being focused
on a narrow field. To this end, the PI - who is an active member of the Center-
will develop a survey course on atomistic simulation methods and develop
important "short courses" on biomolecular simulation methods. These courses will
provide specific venues for integrating and highlighting the research efforts of
the PI with the educational effort. In addition, the PI aims to work on
recruiting underrepresented students into the research group, with a particular
focus on women and hispanics. Fully recognizing the importance of international
collaborations for both research and education, the PI is currently involved in
two separate initiatives to set up a foreign exchange program - one with the TU-
Berlin and one with Argentina. Broader impacts: The research component impacts
the fields of quantitative biology as well as theoretical and computational
materials research. The education component supports a computationally savvy
21st century workforce and provides opportunities for members of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;12345678901234567890123456789012345678901234567890123456789012345
6789012&lt;br/&gt;