* 0348138
* CAREER: Cyclic Behavior of Cemented Sands: Testing, Field Verification, and Modeling
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Lynn Salvati, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 01/31/2009
* USD 120,261.00

Large seismically induced landslides in cemented materials, such as the
landslides occurring during the 1989 Loma Prieta and 1994 Northridge
earthquakes, and the well-documented case of liquefaction in cemented soils at
Apra Harbor during the 1993 Guam earthquake have increased awareness of the
damage that can occur in cemented soils. However, most of the geotechnical
engineering tools used to evaluate seismic hazard and predict damage are
applicable only to clean, unstructured sands. Since cemented sands are common in
many seismically active areas of the world, it is important to extend these
tools to the case of cemented sands. To do this, a better understanding of the
response of these sands to cyclic loads is needed. The response of artificially
cemented soils is important as well, due to their role in ground modification:
admixtures such as lime and cement have been used to increase soil strength, and
promising methods to mitigate liquefaction risk in built-up areas are being
developed based on grouting techniques.

The main objectives of the proposed research are to improve the fundamental
understanding of cemented sands, and to develop methods to predict their
response to monotonic and cyclic loads. To achieve this objective, an extensive
series of monotonic and cyclic tests will be performed to evaluate the effect of
pressure, density, soil grain size and gradation, type and level of cementation,
and method of sample preparation on the response of cemented sands. In order to
compare samples that are grouted in the laboratory to soils grouted in situ, a
field test program will be undertaken. Examination and testing of field grouted
samples will be used to develop and validate a method of grouting samples in the
laboratory that is representative of the grouted soils at the field test site.
An environmental scanning electron microscope will be used to characterize the
grouted soils and to examine how and where the cementation bonds were broken.
Using the results from the field and laboratory testing programs in conjunction
with the principles of damage mechanics, an existing constitutive model that
describes the response of unstructured sands to monotonic and cyclic loading
will be extended to describe the response of cemented sands.

The educational plan includes outreach activities, such as expanding the 'Shakes
and Quakes' program, and using it to introduce K-12 students to geotechnical
engineering, as well as to increase interest in civil engineering careers.
Semester-long projects involving problem-based and active learning will be
incorporated into the geotechnical courses as a way to maintain interest in
civil engineering at the undergraduate level. In order to increase the number of
students pursuing advanced degrees in civil engineering, especially women and
minorities, a lab shadow program will be developed that introduces
undergraduates to research underway in the department, and aspects of the
proposed research will be integrated into undergraduate classes. In addition,
the research program will involve and foster collaboration with practicing
engineers, leading to increased exchange between academia and engineering
practice.