* 0348582
* CAREER: Quantitative Ultrasonic Atomic Force Microscopy of Thin Films and Subsurface Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Levent Degertekin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 04/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

The atomic force microscope (AFM) has become an indispensable tool for
nanoscience and nanotechnology providing excellent lateral and vertical surface
topography resolution non-destructively using soft cantilevers with sharp tips.
To probe the mechanical properties of solid surfaces and obtain information
about subsurface interfaces and defects, however, the AFM cantilever needs to be
stiffer. One can increase the effective stiffness of the AFM by vibrating the
AFM cantilever at ultrasonic frequencies surfaces while maintaining the
outstanding lateral resolution with low DC or tapping contact force. This
research proposal aims to investigate the potential of ultrasonic AFM techniques
for non-destructive, quantitative measurements of thin film material properties
and interfaces, and more specifically, for in-situ imaging of subsurface defects
in electronic interconnect structures and other nanoscale devices. The proposed
innovative research plan has the following specific aims: (a) Development of
theoretical models of the interactions of the AFM cantilever tip and patterned
surfaces and subsurface defects at ultrasonic frequencies, (b) Development of
measurement methods combining tapping mode imaging with ultrasonic AFM to have
repeatable, intermittent contact force with the samples for quantitative, in-
situ measurements, and an ultrasonic AFM to apply shear stresses to the sample
surface at the nanoscale for enhanced sensitivity to interface defects.
Furthermore, these techniques will be applied in fluidic environments for
biological and chemical applications using acoustic radiation pressure actuation
of AFM cantilevers. The educational development plan is focused on long-term
contributions to the partnership programs between the local K-12 education
institutions and Georgia Tech through mentoring of participating graduate and
undergraduate students, supporting high school student science projects, and
K-12 educators. Undergraduate research assistants selected from minorities and
underrepresented groups will be involved in the research project as well as
graduate students from different disciplines. In addition to hands on training
of students in the nanotechnology area, a graduate level course on Scanning
Probe Microscopy will be developed in collaboration with other faculty members
at Georgia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;