* 0348299
* Mechanism of Translation Inhibition and mRNA destabilization by Pokeweed Antiviral Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2010
* Nilgun Tumer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2010
* USD 626,000.00

Ribosome inactivating proteins (RIPs) are protein toxins produced by organisms
ranging from bacteria to plants. RIPs have become important agents in
agriculture and medicine mainly by virtue of their broad-spectrum antiviral
activity and cytocidal properties against cancer cells, however their
therapeutic potential has been limited because of their undesirable side
effects. Their potent toxicity has been exploited in biological warfare and more
recently in bioterrorism. The plant RIPs, ricin and pokeweed antiviral protein
(PAP), depurinate the highly conserved sarcin/ricin (S/R) loop of the large rRNA
and inhibit translation. The mechanism by which RIPs inhibit translation and
cell growth is not entirely understood. This project uses PAP as a tool to
understand the mode of action of RIPs. Besides depurinating the rRNA, PAP binds
to the cap structure and depurinates capped, but not uncapped RNAs. This project
will test the hypothesis that PAP inhibits elongation as well as re-initiation
of protein synthesis by breaking the interaction between the cap and the poly(A)
tail of the mRNA. The functional relationship between rRNA depurination, cap
binding and translation inhibition will be analyzed to determine if PAP affects
the cap-dependent translation initiation complex. This project will contribute
to our basic understanding of the mechanisms that regulate cellular translation.
It will provide an interdisciplinary training opportunity and will be integrated
into undergraduate and graduate courses to expose students to the state-of-the-
art methods in post-transcriptional control of gene expression.