* 0348234
* CAREER: Kinetics and Engineering of Functional Nanoscale Organic-Inorganic Hybrids
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Stephen Rankin, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2010
* USD 405,700.00

This CAREER grant combines research and educational initiatives in the area of
bringing the control of organic-inorganic hybrid materials synthesis closer to
the level of control currently enjoyed for organic
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis of
organic-inorganic hybrid materials will be investigated with a combination of
in-situ kinetic experiments and computer modeling. These materials consist of
organic and inorganic components combined during the polymerization of
alkoxysilane precursors. In the short term, the PI will focus on amine-
functional silanes and their mixtures with regular silica-forming precursors.
Later he will also investigate alkylene bridges and other common functional
groups such as mercaptopropylsilanes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;He plans to develop
and apply kinetic models of the reactions of these precursors, capturing the
competition of reactions among and between components. He hypothesizes that
cyclization to form small (6- to 10- atom) rings plays a significant role in the
structure development of these precursors. He will compare the implications of
these rings for precursors with dangling organics and with organics bridging
pairs of silane units. By determining the kinetic parameters for reaction among
and between the precursors, he will quantitatively relate synthesis parameters
(monomer, water and catalyst concentrations, solvent type, addition rate, etc.)
and the molecular homogeneity and structure of the growing hybrid. The models
will require both continuum and dynamic Monte Carlo simulations, and can be used
to optimize homogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Greater understanding of the polymerization
kinetics of organically modified aloxysilanes will impact the synthesis of
materials for diverse applications including chromatography, catalysis,
adsorption, biomedical and dental materials, environmental remediation, and
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities will include the
development of a course on inorganic materials chemistry and engineering. This
will be an upper-level elective designed so that it is directly related to, and
provides modular instructional materials for, core chemical engineering classes.
The PI will also implement computational tools throughout the chemical
engineering curriculum, starting with a course for students in their first two
years of college, including an upper-level molecular simulation
elective.&lt;br/&gt;