* 0348734
* Collaborative Research:  Loihi Seamount as an Observatory for the Study of Neutrophilic Iron-Oxidizing Bacteria and the Microbial Iron Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Craig Moyer, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan L. Perkins
* 08/31/2010
* USD 350,316.00

Abstract The importance of metals to life has long been appreciated. Iron (Fe)
is the fourth most abundant element, and the second most abundant redox-active
element in Earth's crust, rendering it the most important environmental metal.
In recognition of this, a recent surge in research on microbial Fe redox
transformations in the environment has resulted in many exciting discoveries and
enhanced appreciation for the importance of these processes (Lovley 2000). Most
of these studies, however, have focused on the reductive Fe cycle and organisms
such as the Geobacteraceae. This is in part because Fe-oxidizing organisms,
particularly those who inhabit circumneutral pH habitats, have been notoriously
difficult to culture and study in the lab. However, recent successes on this
front have resulted in the isolation of a number of novel chemolithoautotrophic
Fe-oxidizing bacteria (FeOB). Studies of these bacteria have revealed a
remarkable diversity, both physiologically and phylogenetically. This perhaps
should not be surprising given that Fe is the most abundant lithoautotrophic
energy source in Earth's crust, but is not in keeping with the present attention
given to their study. This project is initiating a microbial observatory for the
study of iron-oxidizing bacteria (.FeMO.) at the Hawaiian Seamount, Loihi. The
major purpose of the project is to elucidate the full physiological,
phylogenetic, and biochemical diversity of this group of prokaryotes. Loihi was
selected as the study site because: (1) FeOB have been recognized and studied
there previously; (2) Loihi displays a wide-range of FeOB habitats: from
hydrothermal fluids to rocks, from low-flow, low-T (10C) seeps to high-flow,
high-T (>60C) vents; (3) previous studies provided an excellent geochemical
framework on which to base these studies; and (4) Loihi is very accessible,
located only 25 miles SW of the big island of Hawaii. The research group
represents a cross-section of expertise on FeOB. Principal components of the
FeMO project include (1) cultural analysis of FeOB, (2) kinetic studies on Fe-
oxidation rates, (3) biochemical studies on the Fe oxidase, and (4)
biogeochemical studies on colonization and solid rock utilization by FeOB.
Microbial Fe redox transformations are well known to impact environmental and
human health, for example in organic contaminant degradation and via sorption of
toxic radionucleotides, particularly in terrestrial and coastal marine habitats.
In the more poorly studied, oligotrophic deep-sea, chemoautotrophic FeOB have
recently been recognized for their potentially important role in production of
new biomass carbon. This research is leading to significant advances in the
study of FeOB and understanding their environmental activities and capabilities,
and would enable more accurate predictions about them in many poorly-accessible
habitats. The FeMO PIs are involved heavily in middle and high-school teacher
education and enhancement efforts at WHOI. These include participation in
existing summer workshops, the development of a new school-year weekend mini-
workshop, and the direct involvement of a teacher in the FeMO fieldwork. FeMO
participants are also be strongly involved with higher education on multiple
fronts, including the specific recruitment of female and minority undergraduates
from a New England women's college (Smith) for summer internships via the Praxis
program.