* 0348767
* PECASE:  Fabrication of Hierarchically Structured Open Cell Porous Polymers for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Wei Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2010
* USD 400,473.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funding to
establish an integrated research and educational program on the fabrication of
hierarchically structured porous polymers for biomedical applications. The
research objective of this program is to develop an innovative process to create
polymeric microstructures with well-defined, interconnected pores on the scale
of one hundred nanometers to several hundred micrometers and at desired
locations. Such microstructures allow particles and fluids to flow through,
offering tunable mass transport properties that are crucial to many emerging
applications such as tissue engineering scaffolds, controlled drug delivery
devices, adsorption sites for bio-chemical sensors, and catalyst carriers for
fuel cells. The approach to the research objective is to selectively foam gas-
impregnated polymers and implode the gas bubbles using focused ultrasound of
various frequencies and amplitudes. Inert gases such as CO2 and N2 will be used
as the blowing agents. The research will involve fundamental studies to explore
gas-polymer interaction, bubble dynamics, and ultrasonic cavitation, implosion,
and bubble enhanced heating. Many of these underlying mechanisms are not well
understood. Findings from this research will enhance the scientific knowledge
base and enable technology advancement. The educational plan of this CAREER
program focuses on promoting interdisciplinary training, which will better
prepare our students for the rapidly changing technical diversity of today's
engineering profession. The planned activities include innovative curriculum and
teaching method development, women and minority students recruiting and
mentoring, and the involvement of undergraduate students, K-12 students and
teachers in research.