* 0349927
* Dissertation Research - Swamp Rats, Fat Cats and Soggy Suburbs: Civil Engineers and City Planners in southeast Florida
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Eran Ben-Joseph, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2004
* USD 8,166.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
project will study how Civil Engineers and City Planners have affected the shape
of cities through their professional practices in relation to infrastructure.
Funds from the grant will support expenses related to travel. As a case study,
the researcher will examine how involvement of Planners and Engineers in the
planning and construction of drainage canals in the Everglades in the 20th
century exposes the political, social, economic and environmental issues of
infrastructure conception, implementation, and their relation to urban
expansion. Evaluating the roles and influences of Civil Engineers and City
Planners in this context constitutes an important social study of technology and
its effect on these professions as well as on urban growth. Although both of
these professions are directly involved with growth and urban development, Civil
Engineers have had a greater physical impact on the shape of cities but they do
not explicitly discuss this outcome. City Planners have also underestimated the
implications of infrastructure networks due to a lack of introspection on their
own professional practice, and a limited appreciation of the significance of
Civil Engineering. The political, economic, social and environmental contexts of
the region are unique in their detail, but the larger implications of their
interaction with a technological network and associated professions have
significant lessons for expanding cities and suburbs. A better understanding of
how these infrastructure systems have been lobbied for, designed, built and
maintained in the past, should broadly impact on the ability of today's Civil
Engineers and City Planners to more effectively meet the present and future
needs of growing cities.