* 0349460
* SBIR Phase II:  Animated Real-Time Road Traffic Visualization for Broadcast and the Internet
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Andre Gueziec, Triangle Software
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2007
* USD 914,608.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims at 2D/3D
visualization of real-time traffic/traveler data (incidents, speed/density,
public events) and computer traffic simulations. The rapid production of data-
driven, information-rich animations has previously proved very difficult. With
the notable exception of weather forecast animations, requiring highly expensive
complex multi-computer systems, quality animations are routinely produced weeks
ahead of time for television documentaries. Traffic/traveler data represents
particular challenges such as the fact that data changes very frequently and
becomes stale in minutes. Much of this data is in textual form, as reported on-
scene by police or emergency crews. Reliability and utility to the traveler are
concerns. Consequently, the four major weather broadcast companies have scarcely
addressed the traffic market. This project will develop traveler data processing
algorithms for predicting travel time, mining large databases of traffic
information, and intelligent text- processing. It will also develop traffic
micro-simulations, automating data-driven animation, and exploiting programmable
graphics hardware for broadcast-quality real-time informative animations. The
expected results of this project are: 1) algorithms providing useful information
to travelers/commuters from raw real-time police reports and sensor data; and 2)
a product animating real-time traffic/traveler information for TV broadcast and
the Internet, exploiting gradual improvements of raw data, as departments of
transportation equip highways with speed/density sensors, and enforcement
agencies open their servers.

The Federal Highway Administration reports that the cost of traffic congestion
in 1999 came to $78 billion nationwide, including 4.5 billion hours of lost time
and 6.8 billion gallons of fuel wasted. Most transportation experts estimate
that the ability to quickly provide accurate traffic information as proposed in
this project has many benefits: 1) for drivers to plan alternative routes, keep
on their schedules, and to reduce stress, 2) for overall congestion and better
road maintenance, 3) for safety and road-rage mitigation, and 4) for improved
pollution control.