* 0349663
* SBIR Phase II:  Mobility Agents for Persons with Cognitive Disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Alexander Repenning, AGENTSHEETS INC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 02/28/2006
* USD 512,000.00

This Smal Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
Mobility Agents that help persons with cognitive disabilities use public
transportation systems. The realization of an operational system that wirelessly
connects users to real-time bus information through Mobility Agents depends on
the fact that public transportation systems are increasingly equipped with GPS
(Global Positioning System) systems connected to control centers through
dedicated wireless networks. Controllers use this infrastructure to schedule and
optimize operations and avoid organizational problems such as bunching.
Agentsheets proposes to use this existing infrastructure to compute highly
personalized information and deliver it on PDAs or cell phones to persons with
cognitive disabilities. Wireless devices with location aware Mobility Agent
services that help travelers use public transportation systems, permit
caregivers to customize these agents, and monitor the progress of travelers by
means of utilizing The Pragmatic Web, a framework for highly customizable Web
information; and Deductive Tracking, a combination of sensor fusion and
minimalist common sense AI that creates more reliable tracking information.
Agentsheets will explore design and implementation issues for agent-based real-
time user interfaces on handheld devices; build the system, and test it in a
real-world setting using the Boulder bus system as a public transportation test
bed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mobility Agents technology turns general GPS-based
information into personalized, practical information. Customization mechanisms
range from simple preferences to rule definition, and are relevant to the fields
of End-User Development/Programming, Visual Languages, and Human Computer
Interaction. Deductive Tracking contributes to Sensor Fusion and Artificial
Intelligence. Parts of a Phase I 3D engine, used in the real-time transportation
visualization, have been made available to other research organizations and are
already in use. This technology proffers assistance to persons with cognitive
disabilities. The elderly and other groups will also benefit from the same
technological developments. This technology creates new service organizations.
It reduces the need for human escorts, increases the autonomy of persons with
cognitive disabilities, and decreases the need for federal support.
&lt;br/&gt;...