* 0349963
* Cross Cultural Study of Demographic Processes in Maya and Pume Transitional Subsistence Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Karen Kramer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2007
* USD 131,867.00

Most of the world's subsistence populations, hunter-gatherers and
agriculturalists, are becoming incorporated into the labor-market economy, with
unexpected effects on fertility. Previous research among the Maya suggests that
economic developments augment children's economic value and raise parental
fertility. When child mortality is low, as it is among the Maya of Mexico and
Guatemala, this leads to rapid population growth. This trend is not evident in
national census data and raises the question of whether fertility processes
through the transition to modernization are far more variable than previously
thought. This research seeks to broaden our understanding of how aggregate and
individual data give different views of current demographic processes, and the
potential demographic effects that development has on nonindustrialized
populations. The advantage of small-scale population studies is that the
methodology allows more direct observation of the systematic interactions and
complex pathways through which economic development affects fertility and
mortality. &lt;br/&gt;This research initiates ethnographic study in several
Venezuelan Pume foraging and agricultural communities to address the interaction
between economic development and demographic processes and compare the results
to results from prior research among the Maya. Fieldwork involves living with
the Pume for several months each year during the funding period to collect
economic, census and reproductive history data in several savanna and river
villages. Data collection and subsequent analyses will focus on identifying
variation in subsistence, sedentarization, education, availability of market
foods, health care and proximity to transportation routes, and how these
economic markers vary with the value of children's labor, child mortality and
fertility. &lt;br/&gt;The Pume are an ideal study population for comparative
analyses because 1) the savanna and river groups express a continuum of economic
strategies and demographic situations in the same general environment, and
because 2) the Pume are entering the national economy through participation in
wage labor rather than agricultural intensification, as are the Maya. Comparing
the Maya demographic response to economic change with the contrasting Pume
communities will identify additional demographic responses to alterations in
nutrition, labor, and economic opportunity. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The new
knowledge from this project will be of interest to population planners and
service providers concerned with developing regions. In addition to the value of
this research to development programs and policy making, the project will
initiate a program in Pume Cultural Survival, promotes international involvement
of students and scholars from Argentina, Venezuela and the U.S, and provides an
opportunity for students to participate in foreign study and actively pursue
their own advanced research. &lt;br/&gt;