* 0349333
* SBIR Phase II:   Integrated Electric and Magnetic Free-Space Sensor for Geosciences
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Andrew Hibbs, Quasar Federal Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2007
* USD 708,367.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to integrate a
new, free-space electric field (E) sensor with a recently introduced,
miniaturized magnetic induction (B) sensor to form a compact six-channel sensor
system. The proposed new E-field + B-field sensor should offer a completely new
instrumentation capability for geosciences, providing for the first time
measurement of all components of the electromagnetic (EM) field vector at low
frequency in a single package without contact to the ground or any other
physical object. The Phase II objectives are to develop a system prototype with
sensitivity and bandwidth suitable for the majority of applications in
geophysical surveying, lightning detection, electromagnetic sounding for
detection of buried objects, and for general EM research. A side-by-side
comparison with state-of-the-art conventional technology will be performed for
magneto-tellurics and lightning detection in collaboration with academic and
industry experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology should help
develop products for the stand-alone electric and magnetic sensors, as well as a
new class of bio-electrode that shares the same basic technology as the E-field
sensor. Applications for the bio-electrodes are for human physiologic monitoring
such as the electrocardiogram (ECG) and the electroencephalogram (EEG&lt;br/&gt;