* 0349723
* CSN5 in Drosophila Oogenesis: Roles in Ecdysone Signaling and Border Cell Migration
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Steven Beckendorf, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 02/28/2007
* USD 388,350.00

Summary

CSN5 encodes one subunit of the COP9 signalosome (CSN), a multisubunit complex
that has been implicated in a wide variety of cellular regulatory events
centered around protein stability and ubiquitin-dependent degradation. Prominent
among the regulated proteins are signal dependent transcription factors, such as
Jun, NFKB, and the nuclear steroid hormone receptors, and cell cycle regulators
like p27Kip1 and p53 (reviewed in Schwechheimer and Deng, 2001). It was recently
shown that the CSN5 counterpart in fission yeast regulates the attachment of a
ubiquitin-like protein called NEDD8 to E3 ubiquitin ligases (Lyapina et al,
2001). Thus, the wide variety of CSN regulation may be achieved by the selective
degradation or stabilization of specific proteins.

Here Dr. Beckendorf is particularly interested in the role of the CSN in the
response to the steroid hormone ecdysone and in the migration of the border
cells during Drosophila oogenesis. This proposal has three specific aims:
Establish whether CSN5 participates in the ecdysone response along with the
ecdysone receptor and the TAIMAN coactivator.

Establish whether, in regulating the migration of border cells, CSN5 acts
independently or as part of the CSN complex.

Establish whether CSN5 (and the CSN) directs receptor degradation through the
NEDD8-ubiquitin ligase-proteasome pathway.

This proposal has broader impacts on the educational development of postdoctoral
fellows, and both graduate and undergraduate students. In addition to developing
their experimental abilities in the laboratory, both postdocs and students
participate in weekly laboratory meetings and multi-laboratory research
presentations and journal clubs.

The broader impacts of the research itself center around the control of normal
development and around diseases that affect human health. Ubiquitin-dependent
protein degradation is involved in the regulation of essential cellular
processes such as the cell cycle, signal transduction and antigen processing.
The COP9 signalosome is a protein complex that acts at the intersection between
signal transduction and Ub-dependent proteolysis. Some of the substrates it
controls are crucial tumor suppressors, such as p53, or proto-oncogenes, such as
p27kip1. In the current proposal we study the impact of the CSN on steroid
hormone regulation and cell migration. Precise control of steroid hormone
signaling is required for human development and reproduction. In addition,
several of the most frequent and most devastating human cancers, including both
breast and prostate cancer, are dependent on steroid hormone signaling. Cellular
migrations are involved in embryonic patterning, organ formation, and immune
responses. Invasive cell migrations are also part of late stage oncogenesis,
including infiltration of normal tissues and metastatic spread from the initial
site of the tumor to other tissues in the body.

