* 0349864
* The dynamics of interorganizational relations in the market for professional services
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Mark Fichman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2008
* USD 125,021.00

This study asks how industrial markets for auditing and advertising services
operate. In particular, how are ties between service providers and their clients
formed and sustained? Such ties form interorganizational networks that influence
the social structure of our economy. The particular research focus in this
project is how interpersonal individual attachments between key executives and
directors in client firms strengthen or weaken interorganizational relations.
Sustained ties may be a basis for continuity but also a basis for rigidity. How
are the needs for continuity and renewal balanced? How do they affect
performance in the relationship? The study will be conducted using data
collected from past research by the PI, archival sources, and industrial
databases. These data will be merged and analyzed primarily using event history
methods. In the case of auditing, we will examine if and when continuity in
auditor-client relations can threaten auditor independence. This in part was the
problem with audit failures at Enron. The broader impacts of the proposed work
are several. The work provides opportunities for graduate student research and
training. The project will generate data of interest to other researchers that
will be made readily available to them along with software tools to use the
data. The results will be disseminated in classroom teaching, executive
education, journal articles, professional conferences and meetings. For policy
makers this study of auditor independence will provide insight into the
conditions under which longer-term attachments between auditors and clients
threaten auditor independence.