* 0349443
* Structure-Function Studies of Ribosomal Proteins L4 and L22
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Janice Zengel, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/29/2008
* USD 445,000.00

Ribosomes, the cellular organelles that function as the factories for protein
synthesis, are composed of several RNAs and 50 or more proteins. Although
several key functions of the ribosome are catalyzed by the RNA, ribosomal
proteins probably also play a key role in ribosome function. Such roles might
include regulation of the activity of the RNA-based peptidyl transferase,
control of the migration of nascent protein through the ribosome exit tunnel,
and guidance of the peptide chain into the chaperone system that assists proper
folding of nascent proteins. The Zengel laboratory has developed methods for in
vivo synthesis of 50S ribosomal subunits containing mutant ribosomal protein L4
or L22. The activity of such mutant ribosomes will be analyzed in order to
determine which ribosomal functions are dependent on L4 and L22. The work will
focus particularly on versions of L4 or L22 lacking the characteristic tentacle
that extends from the globular surface domain to the peptide exit tunnel.
Preliminary experiments indicate that tentacle-less L4 or L22 can be stably
incorporated into subunits that pair with 30S subunits and enter polysomes.
Ribosomes containing mutant L4 or L22 will be analyzed for their in vivo and in
vitro translation activity. This project will contribute to the elucidation of
the molecular mechanisms of ribosome function, an essential function for all
cells in all forms of life, and will provide training for the next generation of
biologists, both at the undergraduate and graduate level and including
significant numbers of minority students.