* 0349844
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Implications of Social and Economic Mobility for Transnational West African Migrants in Spain
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Maxine Margolis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/2004
* USD 11,846.00

While migration and return migration have a long history, our contemporary
world's inexpensive communications and transportation systems have allowed
transnationalism-the maintenance of current social lives in two or more
societies-to flourish. In the past two decades the immigration of Africans to
Spain has increased significantly, especially to urban areas such as Barcelona.
At the same time as African immigrants adapt to the social environment of Spain
they remain connected to their countries of origin through sending money to
support relatives, visits to home, investing in land and housing, financing
entrepreneurial ventures, and membership in hometown associations. African
immigrants' participation in transnational activities varies depending on their
level of integration in Spain, particularly their immigration status and
occupation. The monetary resources available to West African immigrants in
Barcelona's labor market and the legal status of those immigrants account for
much of the variance in their cross-border activities.

This dissertation research project by a cultural anthropologist tests the
hypothesis that immigrants with greater social and economic mobility in the host
country will demonstrate a wider range and greater frequency of transnational
activities. It examines immigrant integration in diverse types of cross-border
activities in the case of Barcelona, Spain. To understand the relationship
between integration and transnational activities, the researcher and Spanish
collaborators will measure the level of incorporation in Spain's economy; the
level of social adaptation; the types of cross-border activities African
immigrants practice; and the frequency of engagement in these activities. The
researchers will also collect life histories from a sub-sample of those with
long-term residence in Spain in order to analyze changes in cross-border
activities over the course of settlement. The broader impacts of this research,
in addition to its contribution to the education of a young social scientist, is
the new knowledge it will provide on how immigration policies and the social
context of reception affect the integration of migrants into their host society
and their subsequent transnational activities. This knowledge will be of
interest to policy makers and service providers in Spain and other countries
with high rates of transnational activities.