* 0349319
* CAREER: Teaching the Physics of Electromagnetism in Optics Through Research on Magnetic and Optical Nanostructures
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Mladen Barbic, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2009
* USD 319,848.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development project is to establish a
research and teaching program at the Department of Physics and Astronomy of the
California State University, Long Beach, that will serve the urban, ethnically
and culturally diverse student community of southern California. The goals of
the projects will include investigation of the physics of dynamical and thermal
properties of individual magnetic nanostructures, as well as the spin electronic
properties of tunable magnetic nanowire-based atomic point contacts and
nanogaps. Additional focus of the research efforts will be in utilizing recently
developed integrated optical and magnetic nanostructures towards the development
of novel ultra-sensitive nanowire-based mechanical resonators integrated with
the metallic plasmon optical nano-reflectors. Finally, new sensors and
methodologies for magnetic resonance imaging will be explored and developed that
include novel inductive and mechanical detection principles. These projects
provide an excellent opportunity for both undergraduate and graduate students at
the university that primarily serves traditionally underrepresented groups to
learn about applications of magnetism and optics to a variety of
interdisciplinary fields in nanotechnology.

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development project is to establish a
research and teaching program at the Department of Physics and Astronomy of the
California State University, Long Beach, that will serve the urban, ethnically
and culturally diverse student community of southern California. The goals of
the projects will include investigation of the physics of individual magnetic
nanostructures (only several hundred atoms across in size), as well as the
electronic properties of magnetic atomic point contacts (spin electronics).
Additional focus of the research efforts will be in utilizing recently developed
integrated optical and magnetic nanostructures towards the development of novel
ultra-sensitive nanowire-based mechanical resonators for magnetic resonance,
biological, and chemical sensing applications. Finally, new sensors and
methodologies for magnetic resonance imaging will be explored and developed that
include novel inductive and mechanical detection principles. These projects
provide an excellent opportunity for both undergraduate and graduate students at
the university that primarily serves traditionally underrepresented groups to
learn about applications of magnetism and optics to a variety of
interdisciplinary fields in nanotechnology.