* 0349669
* SBIR Phase II:   HIVbase, Data Integration Software to Support the Study of Chronic Viruses
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Susanna Lamers, Gene Johnson, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 02/28/2007
* USD 679,504.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will provide HIV
researchers with progressive approaches to manage and analyze genetic data.
There is a crisis developing in biology, in that completely unstructured
information does not enhance understanding. Today's HIV investigators possess
massive amounts of research information in user-hostile formats, error- filled
spreadsheets, outdated databases, and directories containing thousands of
individual files. These researchers need advanced protocols for extracting value
from their disorganized information. Phase I feasibility study proved that the
proposed solution provides a quality link between collection and the analysis of
data that has never before been available to HIV researchers. This link helps
HIV researchers do their job and ultimately promotes understanding for the most
deadly and costly epidemic of our time. This project aims to solving researchers
problems through the development of software that combines the power of unique
data storage and integration with novel applications for data mining, analysis,
and data retrieval. The goal is to provide researchers with a combination of
modern querying, database, and analysis approaches.

The initial target market for the proposed product is made of HIV researchers
and their associated facilities. This market is large, growing in multiple
directions, and in need of this product. HIV infects an estimated 40 million
people and is being funded at record levels from both government and private
organizations. The major significance of the proposed product is in its ability
to assist accelerate the efforts of the many scientists, epidemiologists and
pharmacologists to make important discoveries relating to this on-going and
tragic epidemic