* 0349729
* SBIR Phase II:   Crystalline Ferroelectrics Combined with Transistor Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Zhiyong Zhao, NGIMAT CO.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2005
* USD 512,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project will focus on
developing tunable microwave devices that utilize ferroelectric thin films for
their electronic properties. Specifically, barium strontium titanate (BST) thin
films are being used to develop new classes of tunable microwave devices,
including phase shifters, delay lines and frequency-agile filters. Currently,
these ferroelectric devices suffer from two drawbacks: easily formed planar
devices demand very large tuning voltages on the order of 100 Volts , while
easily tuned parallel plate devices require sophisticated processing techniques.
These problems have inhibited the development of commercially viable components.
The current project proposes combining silicon based circuitry with
ferroelectric devices on the same substrate. For example, a silicon charge pump
circuit can be integrated on-chip to provide high tuning voltages for a
ferroelectric phase shifter. The voltage will be isolated to the chip and less
than 3 Volts would be needed to externally drive the device. Combining silicon
semiconductor technology with ferroelectrics will enable development of devices
which take advantage of ferroelectric's dielectric properties and overcome the
current roadblocks in the way of commercializing these devices. Commercially, a
great deal of interest has emerged in the use of ferroelectric thin films in the
wireless industry because of the material's ability to dramatically improve the
functionality of existing devices. For example, a ferroelectric duplexer is
possible which has one third the size of existing duplexers, while using 40%
less power. Today's multiband handsets use up to four filters, so the potential
for ferroelectrics is tremendous. A key wireless handset manufacturer identified
at least six applications for tunable devices inside their telephones. Overall,
the wireless telecommunications market has spawned the need for small, low
power, high bandwidth microwave components. Over $50 billion of wireless
handsets were sold in 2002, with $6 billion being spent on RF semiconductor
components. With the trend towards highly functional wireless appliances like
PDA's, the demand for wireless components will continue skyrocketing.