* 0349694
* SBIR Phase II:  Improved Magneto-Optical Imaging Films Employing Surface Plasmon Resonance
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Jeff Lindemuth, Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 02/28/2006
* USD 498,774.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II research project is to
develop an improved magneto-optical (MO) visualizer based on a laser-scanning
polarimeter and a MO imaging film (MOIF) utilizing surface plasmon resonance. In
Phase I, the feasibility of substantial improvements in spatial and magnetic
field resolutions and imaging bandwidth over existing methods were demonstrated.
In Phase II, the MO material quality and sensor design will be further
optimized. The visualizer will be adapted to maximize the many advantages
offered by the improved MOIF material. Software will be developed to provide
automatic system control and conversion of the acquired image into the
quantitative spatial magnetic field distribution. The capabilities of the
prototype systems and sensors will be evaluated in terms of magnetic field
resolution, spatial resolution and speed through the imaging of electrical
current patterns and data storage devices.

Commercial market needs include sensors, instruments and systems for improved
magnetic field imaging. Applications include magnetic character reading,
magnetic code reading for security, superconductor research, spin valve and
magnetic RAM research and manufacturing, integrated circuit electrical current
imaging, structural composite stress imaging using magnetic and magnetostrictive
materials, flaw detection in metals, biomedical tagging and identification of
cancer and other cells, research and testing of MEMS actuators and devices.