* 0349517
* SBIR Phase II: Multimodal High-Conductivity Filler for Epoxy Molding Compounds
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Jared Sommer, Sommer Materials Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 07/31/2006
* USD 499,422.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will focus on
developing more efficient semiconductor packaging materials, which is one of the
key challenges of the electronics industry where increasing power and reduced
size of integrated circuits is creating heat dissipation challenges. Most epoxy
molding compounds used to encapsulate semiconductors contain fused silica
(55-70% by volume) to maintain a compatible thermal expansion coefficient and
impart moisture resistance. However, the resulting thermal conductivities of the
composite compounds are very low (<1 W/mK). The low thermal conductivity of the
epoxy molding compound increases the operating temperatures, which in turn
decreases the reliability and processing speed of microprocessors. As
semiconductor clock speeds continue to increase and chip sizes decrease, the
need for higher thermally conductive molding materials has become a stark
necessity. In Phase I of this project multi-modal distributions of high-
conductivity diamond powder where optimized to obtain high packing densities
(over 72% by volume) in epoxy molding compounds. The resulting thermal
conductivities of diamond/epoxy composites were almost 8 times higher than
conventional silica-filled epoxies and almost 30 times higher than the epoxy
matrix. The thermal expansions of silica and diamond filler are similarly low,
thus allowing better matching to silicon. In this Phase II project significantly
higher thermal conductivities are to be achieved by optimizing the
epoxy/hardener system with the diamond filler to improve bonding and thereby
improving the heat transfer mechanism. The diamond filler will be used as a
direct substitute for commercially available silica filler, requiring little or
no modification of existing equipment or processing. The diamond/epoxy molding
compound will effectively act as a heat-spreader. The diamond filler will allow
higher switching speeds, thinner oxide gates and increased reliability of
electronics. The project team will work with an epoxy molding compound (EMC)
manufacturer to introduce the diamond filler into the commercial market towards
the end of Phase II.

Commercial markets for this EMC technology include high-performance aerospace,
automobile and microelectronic packaging applications, where heat dissipation
from the packaging material outweighs the increased material cost. The increased
thermal conductivity offered by the diamond filler will benefit the business and
scientific community by increasing computing speed and hardware reliability.
Studies indicate that heat dissipation and associated thermal problems are the
most critical factors in determining the efficiency and reliability of
electronic devices. In terms of scientific and educational value, EMC's
incorporating the optimized diamond filler will exhibit the maximum thermal
conductivity obtainable and serve as the upper-limit benchmark in thermal
conductivity for the composite material.

