* 0349630
* SBIR Phase II:     Artificial Intelligence Software for Student Assessment in Chemistry Education
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Benny Johnson, Quantum Simulations Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 01/31/2007
* USD 770,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project builds Phase I work on
development of meaningful interactive tutoring and assessment capabilities for
chemistry education software. Despite clearly articulated teacher and student
demand for improvement, this area has been repeatedly identified as that where
existing offerings are weakest. Quantum Simulations proposes a new and different
approach, adapting and incorporating new concepts from artificial intelligence
(AI). More than just assigning a grade, meaningful opportunities will be created
for students to learn directly from the assessment itself. The proposed
technology will benefit all students; however, it is specifically targeted to
help those who have the greatest need--such as students of average or marginal
performance and students from historically underserved groups-- by lowering
barriers to accessing high-quality science instructional software. Quantum
Simulations has partnered with members of the Department of Education's STAR
Schools program to further these goals.

Quantum Simulations' customers include textbook publishers, software providers,
hardware vendors and distance learning companies. A prominent textbook
publisher, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, has entered into a long-term contract and
has partnered with Quantum Simulations to commercialize this Phase II
technology, resulting in rapid dissemination to an established end user base.