* 0349857
* Consuming Landscapes: The Impact of Technology on Roadway Design in the US and Germany, 1920-1970
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Thomas Zeller, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2006
* USD 85,000.00

Increasingly, experiencing the natural world has become a technologically
mitigated activity during the 20th century. Rather than living in a world where
one may leave clearly delineated technological spaces for demarcated natural
spaces, the industrial and post-industrial experience has been one of meshing
environment and technology into zones of crossover and hybridity. Analyzing the
workings of this process can help in understanding the history and future
meaning of technological artifacts as well as of the environment. &lt;br/&gt;As
a study of one particular field on the intersection of the environment and
technology, this project will explore the way roads have been redesigned for the
automobile as parkways since the 1920s in the United States and Germany, what
meanings they acquired, and how drivers and passengers experienced them. These
roads constituted nature, prescribed a way of seeing it, and turned the scenic
view into a visual commodity that could be consumed akin to other mass-produced
artifacts. However, this was a contested process, in which civil engineers,
landscape architects and the consumers of these roads and views--car drivers and
passengers--competed with each other over questions of expertise, meaning, and
proper usage. This study analyzes the ways in which these landscapes of mobility
have been planned, contested, constructed, and used. &lt;br/&gt;As the most
prominent specimens of these roads, the Blue Ridge Parkway in the United States
and the Deutsche Alpenstrasse in Germany will be analyzed by way of a
comparison. The project relies on historical methods, including research in
archives and libraries in Germany and the United States. It will produce
conference papers, articles, and a book. &lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of this
project are threefold. First, it aims to contribute to the partial
methodological convergence of the history of technology and environmental
history. Both fields' disciplinary boundaries have discouraged studies utilizing
methodological tools from either source until very recently. Secondly, the case
studies analyzed in the project integrate the environmental history of
technology squarely into the study of consumption, which is recently being
recognized as a defining characteristic of recent societies, despite
ideological, political, and cultural differences. Lastly, the historical
comparison hopes to overcome national boundaries inherent in many research
projects, historicize notions of "national styles," and trace the formation and
exchange of technological and environmental knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;