* 0349070
* CAREER: Response of Fault Systems to Shifts in Tectonic Regime: Implications for the Evolution of and Present-Day Activity of Fault Systems in Southern California
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Michele Cooke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2009
* USD 473,223.00

How do faults in the Earth's crust evolve? In the 100 years since the 1906 San
Francisco earthquake, which instigated the study of earthquake science,
geologists have learned much about how faults accumulate stress and interact
with one another. However, fault behavior still cannot be predicted. The next
revolution in understanding active faulting will consider not just individual
faults but entire systems of three-dimensional faults. This project is
developing innovative computer tools that will enhance our understanding of
fault system evolution and is also incorporating deaf high school students into
the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates the systemic
evolution of faults by assuming that faults evolve to minimize the energy in the
system; in other words, fault systems grow along paths of least resistance. By
assessing the work associated with active faulting, the evolution of fault
systems is simulated in three-dimensional computer models. In particular, how do
fault systems adapt when their tectonic setting changes? For example, faults
that developed in an extensional tectonic setting might deform inefficiently
under later contraction. The computer models show that upon such tectonic
shifts, some faults reactivate, some link up and some new, more efficient fault
surfaces develop. Many parts of the world have undergone tectonic shifts. Of
particular interest is how the present-day fault systems in Southern California,
evolved over the last 6 million years. The combination of dense population and
active faulting makes understanding fault evolution in Southern California quite
important for estimating potential damage from future
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important component of this project is the
validation of model predictions of fault evolution with table-top experiments.
Faults are put into a thick layer of clay that is then stretched to simulate
deformation of the Earth. The experiments are being performed by the researchers
as well as deaf teachers and students at three high schools around the country.
Incorporating deaf students into the project may: 1) motivate life-long interest
in geoscience, 2) inspire deaf students to pursue science in college, 3) improve
the technical communication skills of the students 4) empower students by
utilizing their spatial visualization skills and 5) dispel views of geoscience
as an able-bodied occupation. Deaf students use American Sign Language, an
inherently spatial language. The use of spatial language is expected to foster
spatial cognitive skills critical for analyzing interacting, three-dimensional
fault surfaces. In fact, geoscientists may learn from the deaf community
innovative approaches for presentation of 3D data.