* 0349257
* CAREER:  Surfactant-Mediated Epitaxy of Semiconductors on Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Oscar Dubon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 04/30/2010
* USD 499,999.00

This CAREER project addresses fundamental details epitaxy utilizing the
surfactant effect in the epitaxial growth of silicon-germanium on crystalline
calcium fluoride. The surfactant-an impurity overlayer that promotes epitaxy as
it floats on the surface of the growing film-can be used to manipulate growth
kinetics and access both compositions and morphologies that have not been
previously achieved. The approach utilizes the group IV element Pb as the
surfactant species; Pb as a surfactant can mediate epitaxial growth without
degrading electronic properties of the semiconductor film due to its
isoelectronic nature with respect to Si and Ge. Fundamental issues such as
growth kinetics of semiconductors on epitaxial insulators and the role of
isoelectronic surfactants, doping limits and dopant properties in ultra-thin,
electrically isolated semiconductor films as well as three dimensional device
integration will be studied. The growth of Ge and alloys made from Ge and Si are
expected to uniquely enable the study of the effect of lattice mismatch induced
strain on thin film synthesis and properties, both structural and electronic.
Materials will be deposited by molecular beam epitaxy. Sample characterization
will be carried out using a collection of complementary analysis techniques
including atomic resolution transmission electron microscopy, atomic force
microscopy, and variable temperature Hall effect. The proposed work has as its
mission to understand and manipulate the processes involved in the epitaxial
growth of highly dissimilar materials for the realization of novel quantum
structures. The project expects to establish advanced synthesis capabilities
that are well matched to a broad range of research activities on the Berkeley
campus as well as local industries.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses fundamental research issues in electronic materials science having
techno-logical relevance. Elements of this research will be integrated into a
laboratory module on the materials science of thin-films and nanostructure
synthesis. This module will be implemented as both part of a summer research
program and as a culminating research experience in a senior-level capstone
course in experimental materials science. In both cases, students will be
involved in activities that will promote inquiry-based learning and information
literacy and advancement through the levels of cognitive operations (Bloom's
taxonomy). An electronic version, a virtual laboratory module, will be created
to provide a research experience beyond the confines of the university campus,
promoting scientific literacy in general to a broader audience. Successful exe-
cution of the laboratory research module will encourage the development of
research-based teaching innovations at a broader scale at the university.
Integrated research-education activities are expected to stimulate the
development of critical thinking skills of participants across a range of
educational levels. Education activities will address interests of high school,
community col-lege, and university students. Outreach efforts to increase the
number of minority applicants to graduate school will also be carried out.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;