* 0349756
* SBIR Phase II:   Nematode Intestinal Proteins as Anthelmintic Targets
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Michelle Hresko, Divergence, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 01/31/2008
* USD 961,021.00

0349756 Hresko

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to develop
transgenic roots that are resistant to nematode infection, through expression of
small proteins, protein domains or peptides which when ingested by the nematode
interfere with the function of essential proteins of the nematode intestine. The
longer term goal of the project is to develop transgenic crops (soybeans, corn
and cotton), that are resistant to parasitic nematodes. In Phase I research,
essential proteins exposed in the nematode intestinal lumen were identified as
outstanding targets for anti-nematode agents produced by plants. These proteins
are accessible to the environment since the lumenal membrane of the intestine is
the surface through which nutrients are absorbed by the nematode. This Phase II
project is expected to show that transgenic expression of nematode intestine-
toxic peptides at the site of infection would create inhospital host plants for
plant parasitic nematodes and would result in resistant crops which do not
require application of toxic chemicals for nematode control.

The commercial impact of this project will be on nematode control in major
crops. Plant parasitic nematodes are reported to cause $80 billion in crop yield
damage annually. The current chemical solutions are limited, environmentally
damaging, and toxic to the applicators. Transgenic resistance to nematodes will
provide an economically competitive and environmentally safe alternative.