* 0349059
* CAREER: Controlling Biological Effectors with Light
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Timothy Dore, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2010
* USD 555,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program support Professor Timothy Dore
of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Georgia in a research
program that seeks to develop new photochemical technology to study biological
function. Light sensitive organic molecules will be designed, synthesized, and
attached to biological effectors (such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, DNA, RNA,
or other bioactive messenger) in order to inactivate or "cage" the effector
until a flash of light releases or "uncages" it in its biologically active form.
If the light source is a pulsed IR laser and multiphoton excitation (MPE, a
special non-linear optical process) occurs, then the timing and location of the
effector release can be carefully controlled, allowing the study of temporal and
spatial requirements for biologically important events. The outcome of many
physiological processes often depends on the timing of the event and the
immediate local environment. The technology developed will be used to regulate
protein synthesis, control gene expression, and engineer cell surfaces in order
to study a variety of biological processes. The educational plan aims to bridge
the gap between undergraduate and graduate science programs, demystifying the
process of doctoral education, and thereby encourage undergraduate science
majors to pursue a Ph.D. A series of seminars and multimedia programs for
undergraduate and new graduate students will highlight the exciting career paths
of doctorate recipients and provide them with practical information for
navigating the process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic
and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Dore will demonstrate that the
broader impacts of this work lie in its multidisciplinary nature and focus on
developing human resources in science. The research will enable less invasive
methods of studying cellular function and impact biological disciplines in the
sub-areas of cell and developmental biology, genetics, neuroscience, microscopy,
biochemistry, and biotechnology. The research is an excellent medium to train
students to become outstanding scholars with a depth of understanding of photo-
and organic chemistry and a breadth of scientific knowledge. The programs on
doctoral education are targeted at underrepresented groups in science, seeking
to improve their chances of success in graduate programs. They also aim to
increase the number of students who pursue careers in science and science-
related areas, helping to fulfill a national need for human resources in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;