* 0349740
* SBIR Phase II:   Automated Personalized Rich Media Broadcast Generation
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Robert Rubinoff, STREAMSAGE INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 02/28/2006
* USD 494,723.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II research project will create a
prototype system that will cut through the overload of audio/video (rich media)
content by generating personalized broadcasts from a library of rich media
documents. Building upon existing expertise in dealing with rich media, the
proposed research will apply and refine the techniques discovered in phase I to
organize relevant material using both the context of the documents and the
topics of the selected material. The prototype will also apply the phase I
results to identify and fill in the critical gaps between segments of material
extracted from the source documents with bridging text that will provide
necessary context and structure, allowing the system to present the relevant
material as a single coherent broadcast.

This research will result in new techniques that allow separately obtained
passages of audio/video (or even text) to be joined together coherently. It will
also provide techniques for organizing information based on both contextual and
topical cues. These techniques will be applicable in any context in which
information in natural language form is being extracted from a source
collection. Furthermore, the research results will provide cost efficiencies for
a number of specific important vertical markets (e.g. finance, broadcast news
monitoring, etc.). The resulting software products will dramatically reduce the
costs of the currently manually intensive information extraction process
employed by firms in these markets. More generally, the software products that
are derived from the company's current technology platform will also increase
individuals' ability to find and absorb relevant information from diverse
information sources, many of which are entirely intractable today. This ability
is important in a wide range of communities such as academic institutions,
intelligence agencies, homeland security agencies, financial institutions, and
news broadcasters.

