* 0350441
* Stark-type Conjectures "over Z" and the Equivariant Tamagawa Number Conjecture
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Cristian Popescu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 95,208.00

The theory of special values of L-functions is a major, active area
of&lt;br/&gt;research within the general fields of number theory and
arithmetic&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry. Stark's Main Conjecture provides a link
between&lt;br/&gt;special values of Artin L-functions and the arithmetic of the
associated&lt;br/&gt;Galois extensions. In recent years, Rubin and Popescu have
formulated&lt;br/&gt;refined, integral versions of Stark's Main Conjecture in
the case of&lt;br/&gt;abelian L-functions of arbitrary order of vanishing at the
origin. Also,&lt;br/&gt;Burns and Flach, by reworking earlier conjectures of
Bloch-Kato and&lt;br/&gt;Fontaine-Perrin Riou, have formulated the Equivariant
Tamagawa Number&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture for certain classes of motivic L-functions.
If restricted to&lt;br/&gt;the case of Artin L-functions, the Burns-Flach
conjecture can also be&lt;br/&gt;viewed as a refined, integral version of
Stark's Main Conjecture. The&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator focuses on
providing evidence for, studying the&lt;br/&gt;functorial behavior of, and
finding links between the Conjectures of&lt;br/&gt;Rubin, Popescu, and Burns-
Flach. He also works on developing&lt;br/&gt;Gross-type p-adic refinements of
these statements, as well as building&lt;br/&gt;bridges between these statements
and the Theory of Euler Systems,&lt;br/&gt;Equivariant Iwasawa Theory, and the
Conjectures of Brumer, Leopoldt,
and&lt;br/&gt;Chinburg.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The L-functions are
mathematical objects of analytic (continuous) nature,&lt;br/&gt;encoding an
enormous amount of extremely interesting and useful&lt;br/&gt;information of
arithmetic (discrete) nature. The main goal of this&lt;br/&gt;project is to
continue a program initiated by Stark, Rubin, the
principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator, and Burns-Flach, and develop general recipes
(conjectures)&lt;br/&gt;aimed at retrieving the arithmetic data encoded in a
special type of&lt;br/&gt;L-functions (the Artin L-functions), and follow these
recipes (in other&lt;br/&gt;words prove these conjectures) in several important
special cases. In&lt;br/&gt;parallel, the Principal Investigator is developing
links between these&lt;br/&gt;conjectures and other, already developed theories,
dealing with objects of&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic (discrete) nature, such as the
theory of Euler Systems and&lt;br/&gt;Equivariant Iwasawa Theory. Aside from its
importance for the central&lt;br/&gt;areas of pure mathematics called number
theory and arithmetic algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometry, this research could have far
reaching practical applications to&lt;br/&gt;the development of new data
encryption algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;