* 0350155
* Return to Robbers Cave:  Co-existence between Groups in Conflict
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Stephen Worchel, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2006
* USD 338,453.00

This project evaluates the impact of a unique program aimed at promoting
peaceful co-existence between national and ethnic groups currently involved in
intense and protracted conflict. One aim of the research is to develop a
developmental model of how changes in perceptions of the self, ingroup, and
outgroups relate to improving intergroup relations over time. Participants
include adult leaders and adolescent males and females (ages 13-16) from several
regions of tension including the Middle East and Cyprus. Participants spend
three weeks at the Seeds of Peace International Camp, in a summer camp in Maine.
The camp program includes activities designed to enhance cooperative equal
status contact between group members, promote the exchange of information, and
teach skills of communication and co-existence. Since its inception in 1993,
over 1400 individuals have "graduated" from the camp. Although the program has
received significant national and international attention, there has been no
study of its impact. Changes in the cognition and behaviors of camp participants
will be compared with a Control Group composed of individuals who do not attend
the camp. Data will be collected on a variety of dimensions that have both
applied and theoretical importance. These data include self-esteem, self-
identity, stereotypes of ingroup and outgroups, perceptions of group homogeneity
and threat, and behaviors between members of the different groups. The results
of the study will address three issues: 1) The degree to which the camp
experience has a positive effect on the relationship between the different
groups at the camp; 2) Whether changes in the perceptions and behaviors that
occur at camp generalize to the larger groups represented by the campers; and 3)
The extent to which these changes endure over an extended time period (20-24
months). The project represents a special opportunity to test and extend
theories of intergroup relations. The measures employed to evaluate the program
are based on existing social psychological theories and research. The results
will indicate the longevity of the effects of intergroup contact on intergroup
attraction. Hypotheses relating to how intensity of conflict affects the
influence of intergroup contact will also be examined. The design allows a
comparison of the effects of contact on perceptions of the self, the ingroup,
and outgroups. Several components of stereotypes (competence, warmth, salience,
and homogeneity) will be measured and related to improving intergroup relations.
Underlying processes such as recategorization and cross-categorization will be
inferred from responses. The research is significant because it employs
theoretically-based measures to examine a program that is designed to address a
critical social problem. The research program also represents a cooperative
effort between an academic institution and private nonprofit
organization.&lt;br/&gt;