* 0350079
* Doctoral Dissertation: Living With Disabilities in Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Carolyn Sargent, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2005
* USD 11,949.00

The objective of this dissertation research is to examine the structural and
cultural issues surrounding the rehabilitation and education of persons with
disabilities in Ecuador through an exploration of the lives of disabled children
in Quito. This project builds upon existing research by examining how the
disability experience is shaped in a society where a formal structure
surrounding disability issues has not fully developed. It explores how the
disability experience is influenced by the structure of policy, international
pressure on nations to address disability, an individual's relationship with the
formal system, and the individual's personal experience with disability. This
research will first entail the assessment of policy and service development
directed towards persons with disability in Ecuador. Secondly, by eliciting
narratives from parents, caretakers, teachers, therapists and disabled children
about their life experiences, this research will provide a multi-voiced account
of how disability is lived within this context. Finally, through a quantitative
comparison of families who receive health and education services and those who
do not, an assessment will be made on how involvement with these institutions
affects how individuals and families construct the meaning of disability, or
their "disability model." The results will encourage dialogue between disability
scholars (both inside and outside anthropology) and those who study the forces
of policy formation, thereby adding the issue of disability to the literature on
the social location of caretaking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the
Research The objectives of this research will benefit curriculum and program
development for disciplines that work with disabled populations. These data will
be useful in the development of effective models and pedagogic approaches within
special education. Furthermore, by illustrating the linkage between policy and
experience, this research provides information that is relevant to national and
international disability policy formation. In addition the research will
contribute to the education of a young social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;