* 0350018
* Committee on Hydrologic Science
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Stephen Parker, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2007
* USD 223,509.00

0350018&lt;br/&gt;Parker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Water Science and Technology
Board (WSTB) and Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate (BASC) of the
National Research Council (NRC) propose to continue the work of the Committee on
Hydrologic Science (COHS). The Committee's objectives are to provide a venue for
discussion of priority research topics in the hydrologic sciences among academic
and professional groups, government agencies, interagency organisms, and private
industry; identify opportunities for development of new activities in hydrologic
science, advise the National Academies on matters pertaining to hydrologic
science; and oversee approved projects conducted under its
auspices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In its first five years, the Committee has
authored or co-authored four reports. These were: Hydrologic Science Priorities
for the U.S. Global Change Research Program: An Initial Assessment; review of
USGCRP Plan for a New Science Initiative on the Global Water Cycle; Report of a
Workshop on Predictability and Limits-to-Prediction in Hydrologic Systems; and
Groundwater Fluxes across Interfaces. COHS also sponsored a workshop in 2000 on
Research at the Boundary of Ecology and Hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual Merit: Plans for 2004-2006 include oversight of a study on
"Pursuing New, Complementary Spaceborne, Sub-orbital, and Ground-based
Observations for Advancing Hydrologic and Related Sciences." This is a topic
that was designated as meriting highest priority attention by both committee
members and scientists and managers from the sponsoring federal agencies. The
goals of this study are to examine the potential for integrating existing and
new space-borne observations with complementary airborne and ground-based
observations to gain holistic understanding of hydrologic and related
biogeochemical and ecological processes and to support water and related land-
resource management. It is particularly timely since land-based hydrologic
networks have deteriorated substantially while simultaneously NSF is
establishing land-based observatories for accumulating hydrologic,
biogeochemical, and ecological data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In
summary, there is a need for continued work of the Committee on Hydrologic
Science. The committee's work has a broad impact on the academic community in
helping to guide the national and international scientific enterprise. And its
work is influential among government scientists and managers, thus helping to
assure high quality and timely hydrologic science input to U.S. and
international programs with hydrologic components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
total estimated cost of this activity for the period August 1, 2003 through July
31, 2008, is $1,230,000, of which $210,046 is requested from the National
Science Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;