* 0350142
* SGER: A Search for a Hot Oxygen Corona Using High Spectral Resolution OII 732 nm Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2003
* Robert Kerr, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 11/30/2003
* USD 42,909.00

This project evaluates the proposition that a population of non-thermal O and O+
atoms commonly exists in the upper atmosphere and topside ionosphere. This "hot
oxygen" population is identified in the literature by scale heights of [O] and
[O+] derived from visible and ultraviolet twilight airglow emissions, and by
measuring the thermal line width of the O+ 732.0 nanometer spectral feature. The
aim of the project is to achieve a direct evaluation of the O+ temperature at
mid-latitude by comparing optical and radar measurements. The tasks include: (1)
Derivation of O+ temperature from high spectral resolution 732.0 nm measurements
made at the Arecibo Observatory in May, 2003, (2) Acquisition of a new set of
732.0 nm data indexed to simultaneous measurements of O+ temperature using the
Arecibo Incoherent Scatter Radar (ISR) technique, and (3) A review of previous
7320 nm line profile data. Preliminary analysis of the May 2003 data, demanding
treatment of a mixed doublet spectral feature, do not indicate a significant
population of hot O+ based on the profile widths. However, new astronomical data
suggest that the doublet splitting is significantly larger than earlier research
has determined, and a new analysis of temperature derived from the mixed doublet
is necessary. The study involves an observational campaign in the early fall of
2003 using clustered instrumentation at the Arecibo Observatory to
simultaneously measure the Doppler profiles of the OII 732.0 nm emission, the OI
630.0 nm emission, and the HI 656.3 nm emission during twilight periods.
Simultaneous ISR measurements of the O+ temperature will be obtained between the
zenith and 75 degrees elevation during this experiment. The observations will
thus employ three Fabry-Perot interferometers (FPI), two photometers, an all sky
imager, and the incoherent scatter radar (ISR). The results shall provide four
independent measures of temperature: one from just below the F2 ionospheric peak
(from the OI 630.0 nm profiles), two from near the shadow terminator in the
topside ionosphere (from the HI 656.3 nm and OII 732.0 nm profiles), and one
from the ISR technique. This research broadly impacts upper atmospheric and
topside ionospheric composition research by other experimental and analytical
techniques. The topside ion composition, derived from radar techniques,
currently depends upon the assumption of negligible hot O in the topside. The
significance in turn impacts the space weather need for reliable H+ composition
in the topside, which are currently best supplied by radar techniques.