* 0350110
* Theoretical Prediction of Coarse Particle Shape Evolution During Attrition in a Stirred Vessel
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Priscilla Hill, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 05/31/2005
* USD 63,535.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0350110&lt;br/&gt;P. Hill, Mississippi State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attrition of particles is of significant
scientific and industrial interest because it alters the size and the shape of
the particles. Both product quality and process operability strongly depend on
particle size and shape. Despite previous work on the evolution of the particle
size distribution due to attrition, little research has been done on the affect
of attrition on particle shape. The objectives of this project are to correct
this deficiency by investigating the evolution of both particle size and shape
of coarse particles in a stirred vessel, and to train future engineers to
account for particle size and shape in the evaluation of solids processes. The
project has two major sections: research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will compare and adapt two attrition
theories to determine if they can predict the evolution in size and shape of
coarse particles in a stirred vessel. The research will consist of two parts: 1)
adapting the theories to predict evolution of coarse particle size and shape and
2) collection of experimental data to test the theories. This research to
develop new breakage distribution functions based on fracture mechanics and
vessel characteristics will provide a basis for prediction and simulation of
breakage in stirred vessels. The scope of this project is limited to the
evolution of the size-shape distribution of coarse particles due to attrition.
Fragmentation is not included. The education program consists of engaging
graduate and undergraduate students in active research, and incorporating
particle technology concepts in existing courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to
benefit both academia and industry. The key to designing better solids processes
is quantitatively incorporating fundamental physical phenomena and properties
into the design process. The proposed work would make a significant addition by
providing a basis for including particle shape changes due to breakage and
attrition in a design methodology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;This plan provides for educational outreach to undergraduate and
graduate students. Diversity is enhanced by actively recruiting undergraduate
and graduate students from underrepresented groups to participate in research
activities. Completion of this project is expected to lead to the development of
teaching examples in this area. Results will be published in appropriate
refereed journals to disseminate information. Although this research is
developed for particle attrition in stirred vessels such as crystallizers, it
has broader impact in other unit operations that have particle attrition such as
crushers, fluidized beds, pumps, and mixers. Not limited to chemical engineering
operations, it would have applications in other industries such as
pharmaceutical, mineral, and food processing. &lt;br/&gt;