* 0350501
* Optimal Design and Retrofit of Sensor Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Miguel Bagajewicz, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2008
* USD 201,424.00

Research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the development of new
methodologies for the design of instrumentation networks in chemical process
plants. The PI has been working on developing methods to obtain cost-optimal
sensor networks and he has addressed new concepts including estimability,
residual precision, resilience and gross error detectability of sensor networks.
He has also looked into the consideration of maintenance (corrective and
preventive) and has proposed several methods for the cost efficient upgrade of
sensor networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will continue the work in
this area. Existing solution procedures do not perform well for medium
industrial size problems, the ultimate user of this technology. Therefore, the
present project will develop new and more efficient numerical procedures to
solve instrumentation design problems. Specifically, the project will develop:
(a) new network performance measures: residual reliability and accuracy of
estimators; (b) an unconstrained optimization model (such models relate all
sensor network properties to economic measures, allowing the problem to be
solved as a net present value maximization problem); (c) inclusion of financial
risk management; and (d) new and more efficient numerical procedures. The use of
groups of variables (members of cutsets), instead of one variable at a time, in
branch and bound procedures, will be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses critical issues that will
facilitate industry's task of retrofitting more sophisticated instrumentation as
it becomes available. The project has industrial support (OSI software) and
therefore technology transfer will be facilitated. Findings of this research
will help produce a generation of engineers capable of looking at plant
operations issues with a different perspective. The project therefore has the
potential to run chemical plants more efficiently and thus positively impact the
US economy. The PI himself is a member of an underrepresented group and is
planning to involve students from underrepresented groups in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;