* 0350543
* Collaborative Research: Internal Waves and Mixing on the Near-Critical Oregon Continental Slope
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Jonathan Nash, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2009
* USD 522,902.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0350543

Breaking of shoaling internal waves is a likely cause for the enhanced mixing
observed above continental slopes. The PI's will deploy moored profilers and use
ship-based instruments to examine the internal wave climate and energy budget on
the Oregon continental slope. Particular attention will be paid to the low-mode
internal wave energy-flux impinging onto the slope from the deep ocean, its
interaction with cross-isobath topography, and the relationship between cross-
isobath energy-flux convergence and turbulent energy dissipation/mixing. This
approach allows quantification of an energy budget between incoming and outgoing
internal waves, and the turbulent sink. Based on the physical characteristics of
the area and on earlier work on the Virginia continental slope, it is expected
that the energetics will be dominated by incident low-mode internal tides being
critically reflected to high wavenumbers, with consequent elevated losses to
turbulence. Sampling will capture the impinging low-mode energy flux and the
reflected/scattered low and high wavenumbers. The Turbulent dissipation and
mixing will be measured from overturning scales and inferred from finescale
parameterizations which showed skill on the Virginia continental slope and on
the flanks of the Hawaiian Ridge. The results of this research will contribute
to better understanding of the sinks for internal waves generated in the deep
ocean and the role of elevated turbulence on the continental slope in abyssal
mixing.

Broader Impacts: Where and how mixing and turbulent dissipation takes place are
long-standing and fundamental questions with far-reaching implications for large
scale ocean circulation. The results of this research will contribute to better
understanding of these areas. In addition this project will also integrate ocean
waves into pre-college classrooms through existing programs at K-6 and high-
school levels. At least one female graduate student will participate in the
research cruise.