* 0350305
* SLC Catalyst: The Study of Problem Solving
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* David Jonassen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Kozhevnikov
* 09/30/2005
* USD 250,002.00

This SLC Catalyst activity seeks to establish a Science of Learning Center, the
International Center for the Study of Problem Solving, that plans and implements
a systematic research agenda on everyday and professional problem solving
encountered in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics contexts. Those
problems are ill-structured and require substantially different thinking and
reasoning processes from the well-structured story problems that students
normally solve in secondary and higher education. Better understanding the
nature of problems that are solved in science and engineering contexts will
focus research on the social and intellectual processes engaged by those
problems. That research will enable the development of instructional methods to
better prepare students to solve the complex and ill-structured problems
encountered in the workplace. The project will begin to analyze and articulate
the problem-solving demands of the workplace, set research agendas, assemble a
collaborative team of international researchers and practitioners in medicine,
engineering, manufacturing, military, agriculture, psychology, psychiatry, and
other domains, and prepare a proposal for funding of a full center. The ultimate
goal of the Center will be to help change the paradigm of formal education from
knowledge dissemination to meaningful problem solving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
everyday and professional practice, science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics professionals being prepared in universities are paid to solve
problems. Although national standards for science and engineering students
emphasize problem solving processes, they are too infrequently engaged in
secondary and university programs. Although mathematics, science and engineering
courses and curricula require students to solve problems more than any other
curricula, most problems are well-structured story problems, whereas scientists
and engineers in industry are required to solve complex and ill-structured
problems. Recent research shows that learning to solve well-structured story
problems does not help students learn how to solve complex and ill-structured
professional problems. Yet, most of the research on problem solving has examined
only story problems. We need to better understand how workplace problems are
solved in order to develop methods for preparing faculty members to teach their
students how to solve different kinds of problems. A more skilled professional
workforce will make science and engineering firms employing these graduates more
productive and efficient at solving the increasingly vexing problems that face
American industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SLC Catalyst activity will 1)
organize, analyze, and articulate existing research in problem solving; 2) plan
and conduct an international workshop in which a multi-disciplinary team of
practitioners and researchers from diverse backgrounds will negotiate research
agendas to be pursued by the Center; 3) publish the results of the workshop in a
book; and 4) prepare a full proposal to establish the International Center for
the Study of Problem Solving. The grant will begin to develop business and
university partnerships where diverse researchers can generate and test more
effective approaches to preparing students to become effective problem solvers.
&lt;br/&gt;