* 0350322
* SGER-Nanoscale Study of Cement Hydration by Nuclear Resonant Reaction Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Jeffrey Schweitzer, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 03/31/2006
* USD 135,622.00

Nanoscale Investigation of Cement Hydration by Nuclear Resonant Reaction
Analysis Nuclear Resonant Reaction Analysis (NRRA) has been applied to study
cement hydration. Through the use of this technique, the change in hydrogen
concentration on a few nanometer scale (corresponding to a few unit cells) can
be studied as a function of time during the induction period. Initial results
have demonstrated that the surface layer formed during the induction period on
the tricalcium silicate grains (used in this study) is consistent with a
tobermorite-like material, based on the absolute value of the observed hydrogen
concentration and the measured thickness of the surface layer. The use of a very
narrow nuclear resonant reaction (in this case the 1 H (15 N?) 12 Creaction at
6.4 MeV), when performed with a beam of nitrogen ions that has excellent energy
resolution, is capable of measuring the hydrogen concentration of a thin layer.
Optimum beam energy resolution is a critical parameter as the spatial resolution
of the measurement is defined largely by the energy resolution of the incident
ion beam. Therefore, the Dynamitron Tandem accelerator at the Ruhr Universitat,
Bochum, Germany is being used for the experimental studies as this machine has
had extensive work done over the last fifteen years to generate the best
possible energy resolution for ion beams. By raising the beam energy,
progressively deeper layers can be investigated. Thus, by using nitrogen beams
of successively higher energies from the 6.4 MeV resonance, a profile of the
hydrogen concentration as a function of time in the hydration process can be
determined. The hydrogen concentration is obtained over a depth of a few
nanometers at the surface of the grains and can be measured continuously to a
depth of about 2 microns into the grains. A study of the hydration process of
tricalcium silicate at 20 o C determined an induction time of 4.25 hours with a
statistical precision of 0.07 hours. Temperature dependent results form an
Arrhenius plot yielding and activation energy of 69 kJ/mol.&lt;br/&gt;