* 0350356
* SLC Catalyst: Perceptual Learning and Brain Plasticity
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Nancy Kanwisher, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maria Kozhevnikov
* 09/30/2006
* USD 200,838.00

The aim of this SLC Catalyst activity is to develop plans for an
interdisciplinary multi-institutional center devoted to translating contemporary
research on perceptual learning and brain plasticity into educational and
rehabilitation outcomes, with special emphasis on the needs of the 3+ million
Americans with impaired vision. The Center will be composed of a partnership
among teams of researchers at five leading sites for vision research: University
of Minnesota, Vanderbilt University, Boston (MIT, Harvard, and Shepens Eye
Research Institute), UCLA, and the Max Planck Institute for Biological
Cybernetics (Tubingen, Germany) . These teams combine interdisciplinary
expertise in perceptual development, impaired vision and special education,
computational vision, neuroscience, and behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
idea behind the proposed center is that learning and adaptation take place
within the visual and other perceptual pathways. Understanding the principles of
learning at this early input stage of information processing is a critical
prerequisite for understanding human capacities that rely on sensory
input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following planning activities will be completed:
1) Identify the most important educational and rehabilitation needs related to
perceptual learning and brain plasticity in reading, recognition and spatial
navigation. 2) Identify the existing research barriers to solving them, and
potential research solutions. 3) Hold a workshop to arrive at a consensus for a
center's educational and rehabilitation priorities. 4) Incorporate these plans
into a full Center proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of its intrinsic
importance to human nature, vision is a model system for researchers interested
in development, neuroscience, cognition and behavior, and artificial
intelligence. Vision is also a topic of primary concern to educators and
rehabilitation specialists with visually impaired students or clients, and to
engineers and computer scientists who design adaptive technology for visually
impaired people. For the most part, these two communities -- vision researchers,
and vision educators and engineers -- have had little interaction, leaving
unfulfilled opportunities for translating the huge body of research findings
into improved quality of life for visually impaired people. Three burgeoning
areas of vision research provide the basis for bridging this gulf -- perceptual
learning, brain plasticity, and machine learning. Recent advances in these three
areas has overturned the prevailing view that human vision is frozen in
structure following a brief early critical period. There is a sea change in
thought in which the visual system (and presumably other neural systems) is
beginning to be regarded as modifiable throughout the human lifespan. Just how
modifiable, on what time scale, and at what level of specificity are key
unresolved issues to be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;