* 0350746
* RUI: Polyhalomethanes in Marine Waters: The Role of DOC and Extracellular Bromoperoxidase
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Steven Manley, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2009
* USD 249,081.00

ABSTRACT OCE-0350746

Polyhalomethanes produced by marine algae, supply reactive bromine and iodine
atoms to the atmosphere where they promote the destruction of both tropospheric
and stratospheric ozone, and in the case of iodomethanes, promote the formation
of marine aerosols. Polyhalomethanes are indirect products of marine algal
haloperoxidase activity, formed as a consequence to destroy toxic H2O2 produced
both within and outside their cells.

Looking to link algal physiology, marine chemistry and atmospheric science,
researchers at the California State University at Long Beach will demonstrate
that marine DOC can form polybromo- and polyiodo- methanes catalyzed by algal
extracellular bromoperoxidases (BrPO). Measurement of polyhalomethane production
will be quantified using a GC-ECD; GC-MS will confirm peak identity. The active
DOC fraction(s) will be characterized by their MW size class, using stirred
N2-pressurized ultrafiltration. Seawater collected from different coastal
locations during the summer and winter will be used to ensure differences in DOC
quantity and quality, and will be analyzed for salinity, DOC (high temperature
combustion technique) and H2O2 (fluorometric assay). Polybromomethane production
from DOC (i.e. ng CHBr3 - biomass-1) by a seaweed and diatom species will be
determined from measuring the number of BrPO units present on their surfaces
(spectrophotometric assay) and from measuring the rate of polybromomethane
production from DOC per commercial BrPO units (similarly defined). Other
experiments will directly contrast total polyhalomethane production from these
species in seawater of known DOC concentration, to production in seawater in
which the DOC has been removed. Comparison of results from these two different
methods will allow for the assessment of the significance of this process. This
biologically mediated transformation of DOC to polyhalomethanes, which is
eventually lost to the atmosphere, is a unique biogeochemical process. Unlike
the extracellular enzymes of heterotrophic bacteria that degrade DOC as a source
of nutrition (with the production of respiratory CO2), marine algae do not
derive any nutritional benefit from the halogenation of DOC and may compete with
certain bacteria for the same compounds.

