* 0350127
* Dissertation Research: Smallholders' Land-Use Strategies and Land-Cover Change in the Nepal Himalaya
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Robert Rhoades, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Understanding human modification of land surface is one of the greatest
challenges in global change research. Agricultural land-use strategies involving
socio-cultural, economic, and ecological factors are a major factor contributing
to changing land-cover. To better understand how and to what degree such land-
use strategies are associated with broader land-cover change, this dissertation
research will investigate land-use strategies of mountain smallholders in
Lamjung district of Nepal, which has witnessed significant shifts in
agricultural strategies, declining forest and pasture resources, and increasing
landslides in the last thirty years. After participant observations, a household
survey of 60 households will be followed by in-depth interviews of key
respondents and collection of training samples. This research will assess the
extent to which cultural knowledge and rules of agriculture and land-use
strategies are shared and how those influence land-use decisions at household
and community level. This research will also capture how an important cross-
section of actors perceive, manage, and change land resources in the Nepal
Himalaya--one of the environmentally critical regions of the world. In doing so,
it will attempt to fill theoretical and methodological gaps in agricultural
anthropology, land-use and land-cover change research, and ethnoecology of
mountain resources and environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Mountain agriculture and environments have been critical for centuries to
millions of rural inhabitants both in the uplands and downstream. This research
will inform the existing and future community-based conservation and development
programs on the historical, socio-cultural, economic, and ecological influences
relevant to land-use and land-cover change in the mountain areas, where
agriculture practices depend heavily on forests, other common pool resources,
livestock, and cultural-ecological adaptation. In addition it furthers the
education of a young social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;