* 0350900
* Integrating Monetary Theory and Mainstream Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Randall Wright, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 226,053.00

Mainstream macroeconomics has for a long time adopted what may be called a
reduced-form approach to money, which means that it makes assumptions such as
"money in the utility function'' or "cash in advance" that proxy for a deeper,
more explicit, model. Such short cuts can be useful, but most scholars agree it
is better to make things explicit. At the same time, there has been considerable
success recently developing serious microfoundations for monetary theory.
However, this work on has not had that much of an impact on the mainstream: even
those who might applaud the efforts to build a better microfoundations for
monetary economics end up dismissing the approach because it is just too
distinct from what they know and do. The current proposal involves an ongoing
project that attempts to reduce the gap between theories with relatively serious
microfoundations and mainstream macroeconomics. It is now possible to analyze
general models that capture the standard search-theoretic monetary model and
textbook macro model as special cases. It remains to explore the implications of
these integrated models. It seems clear they will generate new and interesting
insights, both theoretical and quantitative, into the role of money and monetary
policy in the economy.

Broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity Monetary policy is a big
concern in modern economies. Policy makers or their advisors are forced to
appeal to theories and models that do not do a very serious job of explaining or
analyzing the role of money in the first place, and that often contain logically
inconsistent assumptions. This is because there are no real alternatives --
models that try to do a serious job of explaining and analyzing the role of
money and that try to maintain logical consistency are too far removed from
reality (and even from mainstream macroeconomic theory). The proposed research
will reduce this gap between serious theories and practical policy. In the not
too distant future, perhaps we will have better monetary policy because of a
better understanding of monetary theory, and how it fits in with macroeconomics,
more generally.

