* 0350561
* Synthesis of Polymer Encapsulated Nano-clay Hybrid via Miniemulsion Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Yulin Deng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2007
* USD 262,971.00

Research:

Polymer-nanoinorganic hybrids are new paper-coating materials that could
potentially improve the coating smoothness, gloss, printing quality, and scratch
properties of coated papers. The basic idea is to combine the properties of an
inorganic nanoparticle with those of the polymer system in an advantageous way,
e.g., merging the thermal stability, the mechanical strength, or light
scattering power of the inorganic nanoparticle with the elasticity and the
ability of the polymer to form films.

Most polymer-nanoinorganic hybrids are available only in bulk form and there are
few water-based nanohybrid suspensions available. Water-based suspensions are
desirable for environmental reasons as well as being required for most paper-
coating and some painting applications. The focus of this research is to develop
both fundamental understanding of the synthesis of water-based and polymer
encapsulated nanohybrid suspensions, and the technological development of using
the methodology for paper coating. Both emulsion and miniemulsion polymerization
techniques will be tested for polymer encapsulated nanohybrid synthesis. Within
these suspension particles, the nanoclay is exfoliated by the polymer matrix.
The fundamental understanding of the nanoparticle encapsulation, exfoliation,
and the physical properties of the final nanohybrids can also be used to guide
other encapsulation reactions such as ink, toner, etc.

Impact:

The PI has an educational plan to establish a program that is capable of
providing outreach activities to local communities and colleges in the Atlanta
area. In addition, developing this environmentally benign technology could be of
great benefit to the pulp and paper industry.