* 0350869
* F03 Symposium Q:     Mechanical Properties of Nanostructured Materials and Nanocomposites; December 1-5, 2003; Boston, MA
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

Symposium Q&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical Properties of Nanostructured Materials and
Nanocomposites&lt;br/&gt;to be held at the 2003 MRS Fall
Meeting&lt;br/&gt;Boston MA, during December 1-5, 2003&lt;br/&gt;The main aim of
this Symposium is to provide a critical, up-to-date review and
discussion&lt;br/&gt;on science and technology of nanostructured materials and
nanocomposites, with&lt;br/&gt;focuses placed on a fundamental understanding of
the relationships between their&lt;br/&gt;fabrication, structure, strength and
ductility. The organizers aim to gather researchers&lt;br/&gt;who will review
recent advances in mechanical properties of nanostructured
materials&lt;br/&gt;and nanocomposites, assess the impact across materials
science, and chart a course for&lt;br/&gt;future work in research, fabrication,
design, and application. The Symposium covers&lt;br/&gt;nanoscience and
nanoengineering of bulk and composite materials, thick coatings
and&lt;br/&gt;thin films with enhanced mechanical properties for structural and
functional applications.&lt;br/&gt;Particular emphasis is placed on bringing
researchers working on theoretical and&lt;br/&gt;modeling aspects closer to
those working on developing processing, fabrication,
and&lt;br/&gt;characterization techniques in this new and rapidly growing
area.&lt;br/&gt;Project/Abstract Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
partial financial support of travel and registration fees for&lt;br/&gt;graduate
students, Post-doctoral researchers and invited speakers to attend the
MRS&lt;br/&gt;Symposium Q: Mechanical Properties of Nanostructured Materials and
Nanocomposites,&lt;br/&gt;which will be held in Boston, MA, from December 1-5,
2003. MRS meetings promote a&lt;br/&gt;unique communication among materials
researchers from academia, industry and&lt;br/&gt;government for the advancement
of interdisciplinary materials research. Symposium Q&lt;br/&gt;creates a forum
for researchers involved in nanoscience and nanoengineering of bulk
and&lt;br/&gt;composite materials, thick coatings and thin films with enhanced
mechanical properties&lt;br/&gt;for structural and functional applications.
Invited speakers for the symposium include&lt;br/&gt;well-known researchers from
academia, industry and national laboratories, providing a&lt;br/&gt;critical,
up-to-date review and discussion on science and technology of
nanomaterials&lt;br/&gt;and nanocomposites, with focuses on a fundamental
understanding of the relationships&lt;br/&gt;among fabrication, structure,
strength and ductility, and performance.&lt;br/&gt;Prepared: 8/23/03