* 0350912
* Modeling the Impact of Icebergs on the Southern Ocean Freshwater Budget and Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* David Holland, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2007
* USD 183,792.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0350912

Icebergs released from the Antarctic Ice Sheet are dispersed by the winds and
ocean currents, ultimately melting and accounting for up to 30 percent of the
freshwater input to the Southern Ocean. In the absence of comprehensive
observational estimates of long-term iceberg calving fluxes, oceanic
distribution and dissolution, the investigation of icebergs in the Southern
Ocean is limited to indirect estimates, and theoretical and computational models
of iceberg processes. This study, will develop a model of the complex land ice-
iceberg-sea ice-ocean, validate it against glaciological and oceanographic
observations, and run with it climatic change and variability scenarios. Off-
the-shelf models of the land ice, sea ice, and ocean components will be combined
with a novel formulation for iceberg transport. A computationally efficient
Eulerian approach based on the calculation of a time-dependent distribution
function for iceberg size will be used instead of the more common Lagrangian
iceberg models which require far more computational overhead. Such a
distribution function conveys information on the probability of finding icebergs
of a predetermined size at a given point in space and time, without the need of
tracking each of them independently. A 1-km-resolution, "iceberg-resolving"
model will also be used to reproduce the evolution of the giant iceberg B-15
across the Ross Sea from 2000 till today. Analysis of the experimental results
will help to improve existing parameterizations of the iceberg momentum balance
and the development of new ones if necessary. Broader impacts will include
improved iceberg parameterization for present-day and paleoclimate studies. With
close collaboration with the Oceanography Section of NCAR, the iceberg model
will be incorporated into the Community Climate System Model. A summer
undergraduate student will be trained and introduced to current problems in
ocean and climate dynamics. A high school student will be mentored within the
scope of this project to participate in the Intel Science Talent Search
competition.



