* 0350656
* Dissertation Research: Transnational Response to a novel epidemic : TSE in the U.S. and U.K.
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Gaylene Becker, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 02/28/2005
* USD 9,040.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
researcher will study science policy surrounding Transmissible Spongiform
Encephalopathy (TSE), a devastating and biologically unique form of infectious
disease, many of whose properties remain uncertain or unknown. Funds from the
grant will support travel, room and board expenses, as well as some expenses fro
equipment. In both the U.S. and U.K., scientific researchers are in the process
of attempting to understand TSE and produce strategies and tools to help protect
the population. The goal of the project is to test the hypothesis that
representations of risk and uncertainty, as well as the instruments and methods
that produce them, serve as key devices for maintaining exchange relationships
while at the same time preserving the boundaries between these two domains. In
both the U.S. and U.K., the researcher will interview scientific researchers and
conduct participant- observation field work, analyze the historical and
scientific literature, observe TSE advisory committee meetings, interview
committee members, and analyze transcripts, correspondences, and media coverage
related to the events. All data will be managed with NUDIST text-coding-
retrieval software and analyzed using the qualitative methodology of grounded
theory. The project has broad implications both in relation to TSE specifically,
and in relation to all matters that concern the health of the population and
involve substantial scientific uncertainty. Issues related to TSE include the
safety of the blood supply, the food supply, and surgical intervention. This
study will offer valuable insight into the process through which these risks are
managed - both scientifically and governmentally.