* 0350549
* An Initiative for Investigation  of Worldwide Weathering
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Susan Brantley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2004
* USD 27,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rates at which minerals weather at the earth's
surface are important in a number of environmental issues, including soil
nutrient cycling (Huntington et al., 2000), neutralization of acidic
precipitation in watersheds (Drever and Hurcomb, 1986) and long-term draw-down
of atmospheric CO2 (Berner and Berner, 1997). It is also possible that mineral
weathering controls the overall rates of denudation or erosion in some settings.
During fall 2003, we propose to convene a group of 20 geochemists and
geomorphologists interested in weathering to spearhead a new program to
investigate quantitative weathering science in natural laboratories. The
Workshop on Worldwide Weathering (WWW) will be held in a small meeting center in
either Baltimore, Washington D.C., or Philadelphia and will convene a group of
experts in weathering, geomorphology, geomicrobiology, and soil formation; we
present a possible budget for the meeting to be held in late October at Airlie
House, Virginia. The group will be challenged to put together a game plan for
organization of a coordinated effort to quantify weathering rates representing a
variety of lithologies, climate regimes, and other characteristics controlling
soil formation, nutrient flux, and denudation. The conference will include
mainly scientists from the U.S., but will also bring in two to three non-U.S.
scientists who are leaders in the field of low-temperature geochemistry. The
meeting will allow the formulation of a white paper outlining the emerging plan
for a proposal to organize and coordinate data-gathering and data management for
investigation of weathering reactions in geochemical settings from around the
world. In this proposal we ask NSF to fund travel and expenses for up to 20
participants. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this funding are the following:
1) improved understanding of the current diversity of questions within the field
of weathering science including geochemistry and geomorphology; 2) improved
understanding on the part of scientists from the U.S. of weathering initiatives
occurring abroad; 3) development of a coordinated plan to quantify weathering
rates in diverse settings; 4) development of a plan to standardize data
gathering in the field of weathering science; 5) development of a plan to store
and disseminate data from weathering sites worldwide for use by the entire
community. &lt;br/&gt;The meeting organizers will summarize the thoughts of the
workshop participants and will wordsmith the writing that is accomplished at the
meeting itself into a document to be published in EOS. The document will
describe a proposed plan for the organization and funding of a coordinated
effort to quantify weathering rates and investigate all aspects of weathering
and will call for ideas and participation from among the community of low-
temperature geochemists and geomorphologists interested in these topics. A
second, open meeting will then be held at the upcoming Water Rock Interaction 11
meeting in June 2004 at Saratoga Springs, NY. Our plan is that by January 2005
we may be ready to submit a full proposal for a programmatic weathering
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;