* 0350302
* Money, Intermediation and Financial Markets.
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Douglas Gale, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2008
* USD 206,691.00

ABSTRACT Prop ID: 0350302 PI: Gale, Douglas M. Organization: New York University
Title: Money, Intermediation and Financial Markets

Project Summary Recent events, including the financial crises in South Asia and
elsewhere and the expansion (and later collapse) of the stock market bubble in
the United States have focused attention on the relationship between monetary
policy and the financial system. Concern about financial fragility means that
any turbulence in the financial system leads to questions about what can and
should be done by policy makers. Should the Federal Reserve System target stock
prices as well as the prices of goods and services in formulating its monetary
policy? Can interest rates control the stock market? What impact does the wealth
effect have on real consumption? What is the optimal policy with respect to
financial crises? Can timely provision of liquidity prevent crises? Should
crises be prevented at all costs or is a cost-benefit analysis necessary to
decide which crises to prevent?

The objective of this project is (i) to incorporate money in a meaningful way
into a theoretical account of transactions and monetary equilibrium and (ii)
show how the CB's control of standard instruments (money supply, interest rates)
determines the price level and hence the real value of financial securities and
then (iii) to apply these tools to the understanding of financial
intermediation, markets, and crises.

Intellectual merit of proposed activity The project will develop theoretical
tools and frameworks for the analysis of activist monetary policy, for the
analysis of optimal liquidity provision, and the design of optimal financial
system. It will also address important policy issues which will provide greater
insight into the formulation of policies in areas such as deflation, liquidity
traps, and monetization of the debt; the role of liquidity in asset price
volatility; and optimal currency areas.

Broader impacts of proposed activity The results of this research will be
disseminated through publications in peer reviewed journals, through the World
Wide Web, and through conferences and seminar participation. Graduate students
will be involved in the research directly as RAs and indirectly as participants
in workshops and graduate courses where the results and methods will be taught
and discussed. As indicated above, the ultimate aim of the research is to inform
ongoing debates about the policy of governmental and inter-governmental
organizations, such as the Federal Reserve, the IMF, the ECB, etc. Every effort
will be made to encourage the most diverse participation possible in the public
activities associated with the project.