* 0350584
* Incremental Heuristic Search
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Sven Koenig, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 08/31/2008
* USD 368,933.00

This project will develop incremental heuristic search methods, study their
properties analytically and experimentally, and demonstrate their applicability
and advantages for different artificial intelligence applications, including
symbolic planning problems, reinforcement-learning problems, and control
problems. Heuristic search methods are widely used in artificial intelligence.
They find shortest paths for graph search problems much faster than uninformed
search methods. Incremental search methods, on the other hand, are almost
unknown in artificial intelligence. They find shortest paths for series of
similar graph search problems much faster than is possible by solving each graph
search problem from scratch. Incremental heuristic search methods have four
advantageous properties:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Incremental heuristic search
techniques speed up replanning substantially since they combine two different
principles for speeding up the search. They can speed up replanning by one to
two orders of magnitude compared to replanning from scratch. This is important
because replanning problems are often time critical and have large state
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The quality of the plans that result from
replanning with incremental heuristic search techniques is as good as the
quality of the plans that result from planning from scratch. This property is an
important difference to many conventional replanning methods (such as case-based
planning, planning by analogy, plan adaptation, transformational planning,
planning by solution replay, and repair-based planning) that usually cannot make
guarantees about the resulting plan quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Incremental
heuristic search techniques are very versatile and apply, for example, to
symbolic planning problems, path-planning problems, reinforcement-learning
problems, and control problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Heuristic incremental
search techniques have a solid theoretical foundation and thus well-understood
properties. Their simplicity allows one to prove a number of properties about
them, including their termination, correctness, efficiency, and similarity to
A*, which makes them easy to understand, easy to analyze, easy to program, easy
to optimize for efficiency, and easy to extend. Incremental heuristic search
methods have the potential to improve a variety of artificial intelligence
applications, that might, for example, result in decision-support systems with
smaller response times but higher quality plans than is possible today, in
crisis situations such as marine oil spills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
results will be made available to a broad audience by presenting them at
conferences, on web pages, and via tutorials. The project will improve the
education of graduate students, undergraduate students, high-school students,
and minority students (mostly by volunteering for educational activities). For
example, interested undergraduate students will be very actively involved in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;