* 0350651
* Salinity Effects on Nitrogen Dynamics in Shallow, Coastal Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Jay Brandes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 05/31/2008
* USD 499,885.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0350651&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers
at the University of Texas at Austin hope to advance our understanding of the
mechanisms controlling the concentrations, forms, transformation rates, and fate
of biologically relevant nitrogen compounds over a range of salinities in
coastal ecosystems. Nitrogen often limits primary production in coastal regions.
Shallow water sediments are primary biogeochemical sites regulating the
transformation and fate of N in coastal ecosystems. Upper sediment layers
provide environments conducive to microbial N cycle transformations, including
organic N mineralization, nitrification (to nitrite and nitrate),
denitrification, and dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium (DNRA), but the
importance of each process varies with salinity and other factors. Recent
evidence indicates that traditional paradigms of key processes, such as
denitrification, may not be accurate or complete for all sediment systems. The
objectives of this investigation are to compare and combine chemical, isotopic,
and molecular biology methods to define N transformation mechanisms in coastal
systems over a salinity gradient. Specific hypotheses to be examined
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Salinity and available organic matter control the
fate of regenerated N by affecting sulfide concentrations in shallow coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;2. The importance of N2O release and DNRA, relative to N2
production, increases with salinity in reduced
sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments are expected to yield
information relevant to issues of international concern including coastal
eutrophication, harmful algal blooms, freshwater supply, and global change. They
will advance marine methodological development by combining molecular biology
techniques with chemical and stable isotopic approaches to clarify the structure
and function of bacteria involved in N transformations. Opportunities will be
provided for minority institution students and high school teachers and students
to participate in field research on coastal environments and learn about the
importance of nutrients and salinity to coastal ecosystem processes.&lt;br/&gt;