* 0351352
* The Cyclical Behavior of Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Robert Shimer, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 193,177.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0351352&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
University of Chicago&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shimer,
Robert J&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: 0351352&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to
improve our understanding of fundamental questions at the intersection of macro
and labor economics---why aggregate shocks primarily affect employment rather
than wages. Search models break that question into two: (i) why do so many
workers lose their job during a recession rather than take a wage cut? (ii) why
don 't firms create more new job openings during recessions in anticipation of
unemployed workers be willing to work at a low wage? This research focuses on
the latter question, which has received relatively little attention in recent
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research first documents the low level of
vacancy creation, and consequent&lt;br/&gt;high unemployment duration, during
and immediately after a recession. Research confirms that high unemployment
duration has become relatively more important than high unemployment incidence
during recent recessions. A robust phenomenon that needs an explanation is that
unemployment duration has increased and the vacancy-unemployment ratio has
fallen in every recession since World War II. Current economic theory, such as
labor market search and matching models, are incapable of explaining this
phenomenon. This research will develop alternative theories that can explain why
vacancy creation falls so much and wages fall so little during a recession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research has uncovered four fruitful avenues
for further work that will be pursued both theoretically and empirically in this
research. First, if the matching function exhibits sufficient substitutability
between unemployment and vacancies, strong procyclicality of vacancies may be an
optimal response of the economy to fluctuations in labor productivity.
Alternatively, if unemployment and vacancies are complements, fluctuations are
suboptimal and potentially very costly at business cycle frequencies. Second, if
recessions are periods with low average productivity but also a high degree of
worker uncertainty about actual productivity at the firm level, workers may
optimally refuse to accept wage cuts despite high levels of aggregate
unemployment. Third, on-the-job search may amplify and propagate shocks by
changing the composition of the searching population at business cycle
frequencies. Finally, time variation in the matching of heterogeneous workers to
heterogeneous jobs may significantly increase exogenous shocks or induce
endogenous business cycle fluctuations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
could yield new insights into matching models that are applicable in other areas
as well as lead to new mathematical tools that will be useful in economics
generally. The results of this research will also help in labor market policy
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;