* 0351996
* Emotion and Cognition in Moral Judgment
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Joshua Greene, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 09/30/2006
* USD 99,999.00

Drs. Cohen, Darley, and Greene's research funded by NSF on neuroscientific moral
psychology was inspired by a puzzling set of moral dilemmas posed by
philosophers. Consider the following case: A runaway trolley is headed for five
people who will be killed if it proceeds on its present course. The only way to
save them is to flip a switch that will turn the trolley onto an alternate set
of tracks where it will kill one person instead of five. Ought you to turn the
trolley in order to save five people at the expense of one? Most people say yes.
Now consider a similar dilemma: As before, a trolley threatens to kill five
people. You are standing next to a large stranger on a footbridge spanning the
tracks, in between the oncoming trolley and the five people. This time, the only
way to save the five people is to push this stranger off the bridge and onto the
tracks below. He will die if you do this, but his body will stop the trolley
from reaching the others. Ought you to save the five others by pushing this
stranger to his death? Most people say no. For over twenty years, moral
philosophers have been puzzling over cases such as these, wondering what makes
it acceptable to sacrifice lives in some cases but not others. In their
research, Drs. Cohen, Darley, and Greene attack these problems from the point of
view of social psychology and cognitive neuroscience: What goes on in people's
brains that makes them say "yes" to the first case and "no" to the second case?
Existing theories of moral psychology suggest strikingly different answers to
this question. According to the rationalist tradition in moral psychology, moral
judgments are caused by episodes of reasoning and reflection. More specifically,
a rationalist would say that people arrive at different answers in these two
cases by applying abstract moral principles that explain why these cases are
importantly different. A more recent trend in moral psychology places increased
emphasis on emotion. According to an emotivist model, differences in emotional
response are to explain people's divergent answers in these two cases. Drs.
Cohen, Darley, and Greene believe that rationalists and emotivists are both
partly correct. Their NSF-supported research is aimed at understanding how
emotional and "cognitive" processes interact to produce moral judgments. Their
research uses both traditional methods such as questionnaires and measurements
of reaction time in conjunction with cutting-edge neuroimaging techniques that
allow them to see what is going on in people's brains while they make moral
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has natural connections to matters
of both private and public concern. First, understanding the psychological and
biological bases of human morality is of fundamental humanistic importance. Like
research concerning the origins of life on Earth or the large-scale structure of
the universe, this research addresses questions that are of intrinsic interest
to people around the world. Our capacity for moral judgment is central to our
humanity, and yet it is not well understood by science at this time. This
research is an important step toward remedying this ignorance. Second, moral
judgment is of immense practical importance. Many of the great public debates of
our time such as those concerning abortion, stem cell research, the limits of
justifiable war, the appropriate response to terrorism, etc. exist because
different people have different intuitions about these and other matters of
right and wrong. To make progress on these issues it may be useful, if not
essential, to understand the psychology and underlying biology that produces
moral judgments, and different moral judgments in different people. One of the
goals of this research is to study culturally-based differences in moral
judgment, which has the additional benefit of ensuring the participation of
groups who are underrepresented in American science. This research will also
explore differences in moral judgment based on gender and individual
temperament. At the same time, however, this research is aimed at understanding
that which is universal in human moral judgment.&lt;br/&gt;