* 0351165
* DIMACS Special Focus on Computation and the Socio-Economic Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 225,000.00

Partnerships between mathematicians and social scientists have existed for a
long time, but partnerships between computer scientists and social scientists
are relatively new. In the past 5 years, they have begun to sprout and several
important new fields of research are already thriving as a result. Applying
computational methods to the solution of modern social science problems requires
the development of new data structures, algorithms, and other tools that are in
the domain of the computer scientist. This project seeks to develop the new
``social-science-based'' CS methodologies and to investigate their application
to problems of information technology and to problems of the social sciences of
fundamental importance to modern society. It also seeks to investigate computer
science tools that are especially relevant to emerging problems of the socio-
economic sciences. Research into issues of this type requires new
interdisciplinary partnerships among computer scientists, mathematicians,
operations researchers, economists, experts in business applications, political
scientists, psychologists, sociologists, and researchers specializing in the
handling of information. This project seeks to catalyze such
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of the project will be
organized around interdisciplinary working groups of researchers, with students
and junior researchers included. Tutorials will introduce researchers and
students to relevant methods of computer science and the social sciences and
relevant applied problems. Workshops will identify areas for research, seek to
catalyze interdisciplinary collaborations, and focus on future research
challenges, and they will have an educational component with tutorial
presentations and opportunities for students to participate. All working groups
and workshops will seek an interdiscipinary mix of participants. Working Groups
will investigate Game Theory, Computation, and Behavior; the Mathematics of Web
Search and Meta-Search; and Distributed Computing, Social Networks, and Disease
Spread Processes. Workshops will be held on Markets as Predictive Devices
(Information Markets); Computational Issues in Auction Design; Electronic Voting
(Theory and Practice); and Polyhedral Combinatorics of Random Utility.
Additional workshops will cover the topics Network Economics; Bounded
Rationality; and Yield Management and Dynamic Pricing.