* 0351302
* Changes in the Frequency of Extreme Warm Season Surface Dewpoints in the Midwestern U.S.:  Implications for Weather-Related Hazards
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* David Changnon, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2007
* USD 100,000.00

Land - atmosphere interactions in the Upper Midwest have been largely ignored
even though it is a major agricultural region (i.e. corn and soybean) and is an
area that experiences dangerous heat waves and frequent warm season thunderstorm
development. Modeling studies suggest that land - atmosphere interactions in
mid-continental locations are important for global induced climate changes and
that even subtle land use changes may have important impacts on the occurrence
of climate extremes. This study will develop a multi-decadal extreme dew point
climatology, determine the temporal and spatial distribution of surface
atmospheric moisture, and identify regions favorable to moisture pooling in the
Upper Midwest. This will be achieved by integrating ground-based observations,
high-resolution satellite data, and geographic information systems. These data
and tools will allow the investigators to determine the role of land cover,
vegetation (including agriculture), and topography in enhancing the spatial and
temporal distributions of low-level atmospheric moisture. &lt;br/&gt;
Determining the spatial distribution of low-level atmospheric moisture and its
source regions during the warm season will forward our understanding of patterns
conducive to the development of thunderstorms and dangerous heat waves in the
Upper Midwest. By detailing and mapping the evolution of warm season extreme dew
point events, we will provide tools to forecasters and other researchers in
mitigating the hazards associated with heat waves/heat stress conditions,
derechos, and the combination of urban heat and high humidities. We will also
inform emergency service agencies and the public of detailed regional risks
associated with extreme dew point events. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;