* 0351041
* Building Capability in Philosophical Approaches to Ethics and Science and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Michael Kelly, American Philosophical Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 04/30/2007
* USD 81,000.00

The purpose of this project is to institutionally advance the study of ethical
issues in science and technology among professional philosophers through the
American Philosophical Association (APA). The APA is the largest organization of
professional philosophers in the U.S. While it has previously worked with the
NSF on issues concerning diversity in the development of science and technology,
the APA hopes now to expand these efforts to include the professional
development of philosophers working on ethical issues concerning technology in
broader areas of inquiry. In consultation with several advisors, the principal
investigators will organize a special Advisory Committee on Ethics and
Technology as part of the standing APA Committee on the Status and Future of the
Profession. Activities of the Advisory Committee on Ethics and Technology will
include (1) featuring research on ethics and science and technology at the next
APA supported special conference on ethics in the 21st century at the University
of Delaware in October 2004, (2) organizing a series of sessions at the annual
meetings of the APA over the next three years on ethical issues in science and
technology with a focus on educating the membership of the association on the
importance of these issues and on strategies to increase the profile of
philosophers and philosophy departments working in these areas, (3) sponsoring a
graduate student award and travel stipend competition for the best submitted
paper on ethics and technology at annual meetings of the APA, (4) advising the
Executive Director of the APA on strategies to improve relations between
philosophy departments and faculties of engineering and applied science
throughout the US, (5) encouraging the formation of a coalition of research
centers in applied philosophy working in areas relating to ethical issues in
science and technology, and (6) strategizing means to create a permanent
presence in the meetings and publications of the APA on the ethics of science
and technology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of this project on
the future of work in this area is quite strong. While more specialized
philosophical organizations have long been active in the promotion of research
on ethics and science and technology, the scope and reach of the APA has even
greater potential to influence the profession as a whole and possibly help in
the creation of new job opportunities for philosophers working in this area. In
turn, the &lt;br/&gt;project will help to connect the research of philosophers
already working in this area to the larger profession, as well as to public
venues where philosophers may be more influential on the discuss on of ethical
issues in science and technology policy.&lt;br/&gt;