* 0351192
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Legal Capacity in WTO Dispute Settlement
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Marc Busch, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 05/31/2006
* USD 104,720.00

&lt;br/&gt;The adjudication regime of the World Trade Organization (WTO) is
widely touted as more successful than any such multilateral institution today.
According to conventional wisdom, the key is the WTO's legalistic architecture,
making it an island of the rule of law in a world of power-oriented economic
diplomacy. Proponents argue that, because "right perseveres over might" in WTO
dispute proceedings, developing countries face a reasonably level playing field
in such trade conflicts. Are poorer countries indeed as likely to participate
and prevail in WTO disputes as their wealthier
counterparts?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Member-states can only take advantage of the
WTO's robust "rule of law" if they have adequate legal capacity, defined as the
institutional resources required to prepare and prosecute a case. Developing
countries lack such capacity, albeit to varying degrees. The PI's hypothesize
that, given cases with the same salience and potential, a poorer country will be
much less likely to bring a WTO complaint than will a developed country.
Likewise, a poorer complainant will be less likely to induce a defendant to
liberalize once a suit is filed. Of course, these biases could also trace to
power-oriented disadvantages, such as asymmetric dependence on large markets or
on donated aid and preference programs. The PI's contend, however, that legal
capacity matters even controlling for power-related
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will gather new data. The
innovation is a reliable list of hundreds of potential disputes never filed as
WTO complaints, involving scores of states, using an official source. The PI's
also propose to collect original indicators of legal capacity, legal merits, and
the salience of each potential dispute, using well-defined operational measures.
The project will include a survey of the delegations of all 146 WTO members,
supplemented by in-depth elite interviews. The PI's will assess the impact of
legal capacity on dispute initiation and outcomes using the new data on "non-
cases" along with data on filed complaints developed by the PI's in previously
published work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study innovates by
highlighting the requirement for legal capacity in a properly-functioning "rule
of law" regime. The literature on international law so far has ignored this
fundamental point, despite the revealed importance of such capacity in domestic
legal contexts. The project will also provide extraordinary new data on "non-
cases," widely considered the "holy grail" of empirical analyses of
international institutions. These data will allow scholars to definitively
investigate selection biases that may exist in studies limited to formally filed
complaints. Such potential bias remains the most important question mark for the
rapidly growing body of work on trade disputes. Because the PI's have carefully
refined the proposed study's concepts and operational measures in published work
using parallel units of observation (formally filed disputes), and because the
PI's have built up close contacts with WTO-related organizations and
individuals, the project is feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's will
disseminate the resulting data through various channels, providing the first
public data on "non-disputes" in addition to new variables concerning formal
complaints. The findings will help broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in WTO lawsuits, shedding light on the efficacy of publicly-sponsored
legal aid and training programs designed to help developing countries use the
regime's rules more effectively. Finally, the project's findings will help
scholars and diplomats alike assess the ramifications of debates in the current
round of WTO trade talks (and in other, regional, trade arrangements) over the
optimal design of the dispute settlement system.&lt;br/&gt;