* 0351024
* Collaborative Research: College Choice and the Texas 10% Policy
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Bonnie Ghosh-Dastidar, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2007
* USD 67,208.00

This research investigates college choice for Texas high school students who
made their plans and decisions under the top 10 percent law (H.B.588) after
affirmative action was judicially banned by the 1996 Hopwood decision [Hopwood
v. University of Texas 78 F.3d 932, 944 (5th Cir.)]. Although most studies of
the impact of percent plans focus on institutional diversification using
administrative records, whether H.B. 588 increased application and matriculation
probabilities of black and Hispanic students is unclear. This project will
analyze racial and ethnic differences in college choice using a customized,
statistically representative survey of Texas high school sophomores and seniors
who made their college plans in the post-affirmative action, percent-plan
regime. From the baseline surveys of approximately 14K seniors and 19K
sophomores, random subsamples (N = 6K and 3K, respectively) will be followed
over time--the seniors for at least six years post high school graduation and
the sophomores at least through their senior year. The statistical analyses will
address various facets of the college choice process (application, admission,
and enrollment), including postponement decisions, and early withdrawal or
transfer behavior. Special attention will be devoted to the influence of the top
10% law and class rank on college decision-making. Methodologically, the study
design avoids the selection biases inherent in studies based on enrollees by
portraying the full range of post-secondary school choices, including part-time
enrollment and intermittent participation as well as work and military options.
The project's broader impacts include: Practically, the analyses will address
policy-relevant questions that currently are the subject of ideological debate,
such as whether highly qualified students from the most competitive high schools
are leaving the state because they rank below the guaranteed admission
threshold, or whether students transfer high schools to improve their rank
standing. The study will be of interest to researchers and policymakers
interested in untangling "school effects" from other factors contributing to
student outcomes. Finally, by building on a survey tailored to learn about how
high school students perceive and respond to the top 10 percent law, the study
will advance understanding of whether high ranked minority students, the
intended beneficiaries of the percent plan legislation, take advantage of their
college options to the same extent as nonminority students.