* 0351449
* Synergistic Partnership for Research and Education on Functional and Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Eric Hellstrom, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Jones
* 03/31/2010
* USD 2,805,001.00

The mission of the Partnership for Education and Research in Materials (PREM)
between the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez and the University of
Wisconsin at Madison is to establish a permanent relationship between both
institutions to foster collaborative research and education in the area of
Materials Science and Engineering. The essential components of this partnership
are the already successful and well established materials-related research and
education infrastructure of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, including its
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) on Nanostructured
Materials and Interfaces, the Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT)
on Epitaxial Magnetic Oxide Structures for Nanoscale Spin Devices, and the
steadfast, growing initiatives in the field of Materials Science and Engineering
(MSE) at the University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez. This project will create a
number of robust collaborative research groups in three topical areas,
Spintronics and Nanostructures Magnetic Materials, Nanocomposites Synthesis and
Characterization, and MgB2 Superconductors, sustained by a solid partnership in
engineering materials education and outreach. One of the main overall
contributions of the project will be to help crystallize the first MSE graduate
program in Puerto Rico. This will open the doors to further MSE education in PR
and foster MSE research in many areas. Puerto Rican MSE graduates will increase
the number of Hispanics in the MSE field. Once this Master of Science's program
is successfully in place at UPRM, a doctoral program in Materials Science would
be a natural offshoot. This doctoral program will build on a solid foundation:
the wealth of facilities and human resources developed and facilitated by this
PREM proposal. UW's experience and partnership will be invaluable in this future
venture. By raising awareness about MSE issues among different groups
(university and school students and teachers and, indirectly, the general
community) the project will create a fertile ground where this area of research
will be further promoted in Puerto Rico. Potential impacts on the Puerto Rican
economy will include: creation of well-trained body of professionals,
exploration of novel research areas by existing and new companies, creation of
new jobs in areas related to MSE, formation of a network of scientists and
engineers working on MSE related projects, and improvement of K-12 education.
The existence of high-level MSE researchers at UPRM linked with first-rate
research US universities will generate possibilities to foster more national and
international materials scientific meetings in Puerto Rico. This will create a
hub for research on advanced materials to be recognized nationwide