* 0351018
* Collaborative Research:  Causes and Consequences of the Growth of Regionalism
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Scott Baier, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 154,865.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO: 0351018 INSTITUTION: Clemson University NSF PROGRAM: ECONOMICS PI:
Baier, Scott L TITLE: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Causes and Consequences of the
Growth of Regionalism

Although more than half of the 240 international economic integration agreements
(IIAs) were formed in the past 15 years, econometric evidence reveals small
positive (even negative) effects of seemingly successful IIAs on members' trade.
Such estimates are biased because countries select systematically into IIAs.
This research will develop an empirical framework (based on a general
equilibrium model) suggesting economic and political economy determinants of
formation of IIAs. The model lends itself to econometric analysis (discrete
choice models, gravity equations) that sheds light on causes and consequences of
the growth of regionalism.

A central notion is that discrete IIA indexes are endogenous and functions of
observable economic and political variables. This research builds on recent work
which shows that countries with free trade associations (FTAs) tend to share
economic characteristics that the theory suggests should enhance members'
welfare. This research generalizes this static theoretical and empirical
framework for explaining the growth of regionalism. The researchers will
construct a panel data set categorizing all IIAs among 100 countries for the
years from 1960 to 2000. The theoretical model will be extended to analyze
relative welfare benefits of preferential vs. free trade agreements, FTAs vs.
customs unions, and customs unions vs. common markets. Preliminary evidence
suggests that FTAs' trade effects have been underestimated by as much as 90%
after accounting for endogeneity and non-linearities.

The results of this research will aid national policymakers addressing three
questions: With whom, if anyone, should a country form an integration agreement?
What should be the depth and breadth of integration? How will integration affect
a country's trade? The research should help address a shortcoming in the
international trade literature: ii there is not now a careful, generally
accepted analysis of the pattern of multilateral trade when transport costs
matter. The data that will be assembled for this project will be extremely
helpful to other researchers FTAs.

