* 0351496
* Collaborative Research: The Extent and Underlying Cause(s) of Corporate Malfeasance in US Corporations
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Harland Prechel, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2007
* USD 112,688.00

Currently there is not research that provides a systematic explanation for U.S.
corporate malfeasance and why it has escaped early detection by governmental
oversight agencies. The PIs will explore whether changes in regulatory law
during the latter half of the 20th century have allowed corporate
characteristics to develop that encourage and reward malfeasance. Specifically,
the research will investigate whether working malfeasance has been steadily
increasing, reaching its maximum in recent years. They will first quantify over
time the frequency and kinds of corporate malfeasance by conducting univariate
and bivariate analyses of the largest 500 U.S. corporations. Second they will
identify the cause(s) of corporate malfeasance. The PIs hypothesize that the
emergence of multilayer-subsidiary corporate form and the irregularities it
encourages are responsible. Using discrete time event history analysis and
Possion regression the PI will be used to test several specific hypotheses. The
research is innovative in that it addresses under-investigated aspects of
corporations that have great potential importance as the underlying causes of
malfeasance. The study also extends beyond previous studies of corporate
malfeasance, which disproportionately focused on the contributions of
individuals to malfeasance, examined only those social acts that have been
identified as a crime, or did not examine the effects of change to the
multilayer-subsidiary corporate form. Research findings can contribute to
helping us better understand corporate malfeasance and provide evidence-based
changes in preventive regulatory policy will become
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Society as a whole would benefit economically if
corporate malfeasance could be substantially reduced or eliminated. The damage
done to the U.S. economy and the financial security of individuals as a
consequence of recent corporate malfeasance has been enormous. To assure maximal
benefit from the proposed studies, the results will be disseminated widely
through presentation at meetings, publication in peer reviewed journals, and
distribution to relevant governmental regulators. Teaching and learning will be
an integral part of the research. For example, the results will be included in
the investigators' scholarly and public lectures, and both undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved in developing the data. Historically, the
numbers of students from underrepresented groups have been disproportionately
high in the principal investigator's research programs. The intent is to
continue that recruitment approach.&lt;br/&gt;