* 0351559
* Collaborative Research:  Th(IV) and Pa (IV,V) Binding to Exopolymeric Acid and Polysaccharides in Marine Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Peter Santschi, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2009
* USD 550,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0351559 / OCE- 0350758&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Th(IV) and
Pa(IV,V) isotopes are important proxies in oceanographic investigations, such
as, for tracing particle dynamics and particulate organic matter (POC) fluxes
out of the euphotic zone through the use of 234Th/POC ratios, and for studying
boundary scavenging, paleoproductivity and ocean circulation through the use of
231Pa/230Th ratios. Even though almost routine, these approaches rely on often
poorly constrained, empirically determined and variable isotope ratios or ratios
to POC. Previously conducted laboratory and field investigations suggest that
Th(IV) removal could be controlled through binding by exopolymeric acid
polysaccharide (APS) rich biomolecules, potentially produced by both
phytoplankton and bacteria. However, researchers at Texas A&amp;M University -
Galveston and the University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus believe that Pa(V)
present in ocean water must first be reduced to Pa(IV) by organic biomolecules
before efficient binding to solid phases can occur, and that the most efficient
binding would occur to APS-rich biomolecules produced by phytoplankton species
such as diatoms, prymnesiophytes and cyanobacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
study, the team of scientists at Texas A&amp;M Research Foundation and the
University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus will investigate the possible
fractionation mechanisms between Pa(IV,V) and Th(IV) in the ocean. It is
essential to understand such a mechanism, since the Pa/Th ratio is frequently
used as a proxy in oceanographic applications. The proposed interdisciplinary
experimental approaches will require instrumental approaches for
characterization studies, in combination with controlled laboratory and field
experimentation. Laboratory studies consist of uptake experiments to a number of
substrates, including purified APS harvested from phytoplankton and bacterial
cultures to be used in Th(IV) and Pa(IV,V) binding assessments. The most
important analytical task will be to better characterize, both chemically, in
terms of molecular composition, and physically, in terms of surface activity,
the newly discovered strongly Th(IV) complexing APS of ~13 kDa molecular weight,
found in particulate and colloidal material collected from the Gulf of Mexico,
Atlantic and Pacific Ocean and the South China Sea. The field program in this
study will include collection and extraction of diverse types of organic matter
for use in laboratory studies, as well as the determination of temporal and
spatial variations of radiochemical and biochemical parameters.&lt;br/&gt;