* 0351175
* Multivariate Multinomial Logistic Regression Models as Item Response Theory Models with Covariates
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Carolyn Anderson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/31/2006
* USD 60,000.00

Responses to tests and surveys are typically viewed as indicators of underlying
variables such as ability, achievement, or attitude. This project develops a
flexible class of models that can be used to analyze response data that also
incorporates additional information about the respondent, response options,
question content, and other collateral information. The models for observed
data, which are log-multiplicative, are derived from statistical graphical
models that give schematic representations of the models themselves, as well as
from conditional specification of a (multinomial) logistic model for each item.
The two major foci of the research are estimation and further model development
approach. The modeling aspect is an extension of previous research undertaken by
the investigator where it was discovered that the general model encompasses much
of standard item response theory. Given this discovery, in the current research
the relationship between standard item response theory methods and the log-
multiplicative association models will be more fully studied both from
theoretical and empirical perspectives. Further development of the models will
include multiple correlated latent variables and observed covariates. The major
bottleneck for wide-spread application of log-multiplicative association models
is estimation. The current estimation methods are limited to relatively small
data sets for relatively simple models. Two potential solutions are explored in
this research: pseudo-likelihood estimation and an iterative conditional
estimation method. Both of these models are feasible for moderate to large data
sets and can incorporate covariates. Computer programs implementing these
methods will be written and tested so that the estimation methods can be
empirically studied. Programs written as part of this research will be made
available on a web-site devoted to this project.

The flexibility of the models combined with developments in estimation will
provide researchers in behavioral, social, educational, and other areas
statistical tools to analyze responses to tests and questionnaires that go
beyond current capabilities in terms of the complexity of the underlying
variable structure as well as the inclusion of concomitant information. Unlike
traditional item response theory approach to estimation, the research framework
in this project derives a model for observed data that does not require
numerical integration for estimation. This feature of the estimation permits
models to be estimated that have a large number of correlated latent variables.
The primary application of the current research is aimed at models for use in
educational measurement; however, the range of applications of the models is
extremely broad. For example the methodology could be used to develop a scale or
measure based on coded verbal or written responses to questions. The graphical
aspect of the approach makes the methodology more accessible to non-psychometric
researchers. The algebraic models can be very complex, but the graphical
representations greatly facilitate model applications and communication among
statisticians and non-statisticians.