* 0351023
* US-France Cooperative Research:  High-and Ultrahigh-Intensity CPA Lasers and Their Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Gerard Mourou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2005
* USD 47,400.00

0351023&lt;br/&gt;Mourou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As laser peak power increases to
extremely high levels, laser-matter interaction will demand the cleanest pulses
both in time and in space. These advanced lasers are necessary for so that
experiments in a new intensity regime can be performed at the highest intensity
level possible, without any preformed plasma. In this U.S.-France cooperative
research project led by Gerard Mourou of the University of Michigan's Physics
Frontier Center and Daniele Hulin at the Ecole Polytechnique's Laboratoire
d'Optique Appliquee (LOA) the objective is to produce the highest intensity
laser with the highest temporal contrast. They propose to develop a pulse
cleaner that will make possible the generation of pulses with a peak to
background contrast greater than 10^10/1. Postdoctoral researchers, one at the
University of Michigan and another at LOA in France will work on different
approaches to the problem. This one-year grant and comparable funding from the
French National Center for Scientific Research provides support for this
exchange of postdoctoral research fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will have broad impact on the ultra-high intensity community. Presently
experiments at the highest intensity possible cannot be accomplished because of
the lack of temporal and spatial quality of the pulses. The proposed cooperative
research project, if successful, could lead to development of a new, high
intensity laser (1000 Terrawatts).&lt;br/&gt;