* 0351319
* Collaborative Research: SODA: A Climate Reanalysis for the Oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* James Carton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2009
* USD 606,907.00

0351319/0351804&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will explore the
application of eddy-permitting sequential data assimilation to ocean reanalysis.
The domain is the global ocean, with an emphasis on the upper 1000m where the
observational record is more substantial. The time period is the past six
decades corresponding to the period of atmospheric reanalyses. The ocean model
will be the Parallel Ocean Program model and the data assimilation represents an
evolution of the Simple Ocean Data Assimilation sequential estimation approach
with an emphasis on including explicit bias-correction. The main goal of the
study is to provide a reference climate for the oceans that may be used as a
basis for examining other physical, chemical, and biological analysis products,
for providing the large-scale context for observation sets, as well as for
studies of the ocean's contribution to climate variability. The ocean reanalysis
will be used to carry out a kinematic description of variability on seasonal,
inter-annual, and decadal timescales including examination of covariations with
index time series such as El Nino- Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the Arctic
Oscillation (AO), the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO), etc. The reanalysis
product will be compared with independent observations in order to learn about
the uncertainties in the reanalysis. Finally, a focused examination of low
frequency climate variability in the tropical oceans will be
preformed.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The set of reanalysis
experiments resulting from this work along with forcing and ocean data sets will
be made available to the scientific community at large and offer many
opportunities for students and researchers to explore ocean climate variability.
Training will be provided to two graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;