* 0351115
* Effortful Self-Control, Consumption, and Wealth Accumulation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Andrew Caplin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 271,868.00

Introspection tells us that agents often exert effort to overcome temptation. In
addition, such effortful self-control is broadly consistent with the findings of
Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (QJE, forthcoming) that agents who plan and budget
tend to save more and accumulate greater wealth. It is important to develop new
theoretical models and to enrich the empirical evidence on self-control. There
are two related, but independent, parts to the proposal. The first part is
empirical. Caplin and Leahy will use a new survey designed and implemented in
cooperation with TIAA-CREF to study the role of self- control problems in wealth
accumulation and to study the mechanisms that people employ to overcome these
problems. Preliminary findings indicate that the measure of self-control
developed in this survey is strongly correlated with wealth accumulation and
that there appear to be two important types of self-control problems: over-
consumption and under-consumption. The next stage is to examine the economic,
behavioral and demographic correlates of self-control. Prof. Tom Tyler of the
Psychology Department of New York University and Dr. John Ameriks of the TIAA-
CREF Institute will be collaborating on this research.

The second part of the proposal is theoretical. Caplin and Leahy will develop
new models of effortful self-control and investigate the implications for wealth
accumulation. A preliminary model indicates that attitudes towards risk affect
the incentive to attend to consumption expenditures with important implications
for saving behavior. John Ameriks will be collaborating on this research. (1)
The Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity The project will increase our
understanding of consumption and saving behavior. There has been little prior
work on effortful self-control and few estimates of the effect of self-control
on wealth accumulation. Professors Caplin and Leahy have experience in survey
design and in the construction of theoretical models of economic behavior. A
previous survey led to one publication the Quarterly Journal of Economics and a
submission to the Review of Economics and Statistics. (2) The Broader Impacts
Resulting from the Proposed Activity o Results of this research will be
disseminated broadly through conference presentations and through submissions to
academic journals. o Collaboration with Prof. Tyler will deepen the interactions
between the departments of Economics and Psychology at New York University. This
should lead to further fruitful interaction between the fields of economics and
psychology. o Professors Caplin and Leahy will make every good faith effort
consistent with Federal and local law to make the data that is collected during
this project available to other researchers.