* 0352670
* Recording Movement with Motion Capture Animation Technology: A Field Test
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Lee Cronk, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2004
* USD 24,506.00

The ability to record human movements for later analysis is essential to a
variety of topics in anthropology, including research on locomotion and gestural
communication. Videotape, the method normally used to record such movements, is
of limited usefulness for this purpose. For example, simple videotaping does not
create a record of the movements that can be digitally analyzed or that can be
evaluated without the risk that human raters will be influenced by such
extraneous features as subjects' physical appearance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will explore the potential of motion capture animation technology to
improve the way anthropologists record motion in field settings. Motion capture
technology is most commonly used to create the movements of animated characters
in films, but it is also widely in use as a research tool for studies of motion,
gesture, and facial expression. Until recently, motion capture technology was
rather cumbersome, sometimes even requiring that the performer be tethered to a
computer or wear an elaborate motion-sensing suit. Now, however, it is possible
to create detailed and lifelike animations using only an array of video cameras
with strobe lights, a laptop computer, and small reflectors on the performer's
joints and extremities. The new technology makes it possible to set up a motion
capture studio in virtually any setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
build upon the Rutgers Jamaican Symmetry Project, which has been recording
physical and behavioral data for almost a decade. A motion capture studio will
be established in St. Elizabeth Parish, Jamaica, to record dance performances.
Using motion capture technology to record dances will provide the researchers
with records of the performances that can then be assessed independently of the
individual's appearance. In addition to the animations, they will also be
collecting a series of physical measures of the performers and administering a
questionnaire about health and reproductive status. The focus on dance will also
allow the researchers to connect this research at a theoretical level with
signaling theory, sexual selection theory, and dance ethnography and to test
hypotheses derived from those theories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
generate a variety of benefits and broader impacts. It will be the first use of
motion capture technology in an anthropological field setting. In the future
this technology may prove useful for data collection on many topics other than
dance, including locomotion and gestural communication. The involvement of both
computer scientists and anthropologists will foster partnerships between these
two fields, enriching them both. Given that dance is a popular topic to which
many lay people can relate, this project is also likely to receive widespread
attention and so enhance public understanding of science.&lt;br/&gt;