* 0352829
* SGER:     Dynamics of Encapsulated Microbubbles for Medical Ultrasound
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Kausik Sarkar, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2005
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0352829&lt;br/&gt;K. Sarkar, University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbubbles are intravenously introduced into a
patient's body to enhance the contrast of an ultrasound image. Our aim is to
develop a reliable mathematical model for these microbubble contrast agents and
characterize different agents with it. Specifically the focus of the modeling is
the protective encapsulation of a contrast microbubble made of lipids, proteins
or surfactants. Even though free microbubbles (without encapsulation) perform
much better in reflecting ultrasound and enhancing image contrast, they issolve
in blood stream in few seconds. The encapsulation stabilizes them making
contrast imaging possible. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical merit: A new
interface model for the encapsulation with surface rheological properties will
be developed. These properties will be determined by in vitro attenuation
experiments with clinically approved contrast agents Definity and Optison. We
claim that the proposed model of absorbed interface contains the essential
physics, and will remain valid over a wider range of frequency and amplitude. We
will test this hypothesis by comparing model predictions with scattering
experiments (different from those used for model determination). The model
parameters will be determined using a linearized version of the model
appropriate for experiments with pulses of less energy. However, the developed
models nonlinear dynamics will be compared with measured harmonic and
subharmonic emissions. Our preliminary modeling with experimental data available
in the literature for Optison shows encouraging agreement with measured
subharmonic emission. We are collaborating on the clinical implementation of our
research with Professors Flemming Forsberg and Barry Goldberg, MD of the
Radiology Department at Thomas Jefferson Medical College and Hospital. Beyond
contrast ultrasound the proposed research will provide critical understanding of
interface dynamics in colloids and suspensions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Ultrasound examination is the safest and the most popular means of
imaging (one in every three imaging studies performed in the world is an
ultrasound test). Utility of ultrasonography images however is limited due to
poor contrast. For instance, 20 percent of the 17 million echocardiography
performed in the United States in 2000 were suboptimal, i.e. did not provide
definitive diagnosis for coronary heart disease. A good contrast agent will
enable reliable imaging of abnormal blood flows leading to early reliable
diagnosis. Use of contrast agent is not limited to heart; it also includes
imaging kidney, liver and brain. Development of effective contrast agents and
efficient modality can only be achieved through in vitro research with clinical
collaboration such as proposed here. The proposed characterization will be used
to provide useful guidelines to agent developers (e.g. Amersham Health, Bristol
Myers Squibb) and scanner manufacturers (e.g. GE). The research will involve
engineering graduate and undergraduate students in a non-traditional cross-
disciplinary science of medical imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;