* 0352807
* US - South Africa Cooperative Research: Advanced Flotation Chemistry Technology for the Improved Recovery of Strategic Mineral Resources Containing Platinum Group Metals (PGMs)
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 03/31/2008
* USD 30,000.00

0352807 Miller This award funds a collaborative research program between the
flotation chemistry research groups at the University of Utah, USA, and Pretoria
University in South Africa to study advanced flotation chemistry technology for
the improved recovery of strategic mineral resources containing platinum group
metals (PGMs). Existing flotation chemistry for increased recovery of PGM
sulfide minerals from current deposits can be improved for most operations. More
importantly, however, the efficient recovery and utilization of new PGM mineral
resources (the Platreef deposit of South Africa and the Great Dyke deposit of
Zimbabwe) will require quite significant improvements in flotation chemistry.
For example, the new strategic PGM resources are significantly different from
current PGM resources, being complex arsenides and tellurides that are now lost
using current processing chemistry. Three major flotation chemistry research
problems associated with the processing of PGM mineral resources will be
addressed: flotation of PGM arsenide and telluride minerals, control of
pyrrhotite flotation, and depression of talc gangue minerals. This research
program is designed to establish surface chemistry and/or electrochemistry
conditions which will provide a fundamental basis to solve these problems and
improve the efficiency of the PGM flotation separation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed collaborative research program has broad
potential impact. The need for such surface chemistry research is significant in
view of the importance of PGM production to both the U.S. and South Africa. The
efficient recovery of PGMs is also of critical importance to the global
community because of increased demand for PGMs, for example, because of their
use in catalytic converters to reduce pollution from automotive exhaust. The
project is expected to extend collaboration beyond the initial partners,
Pretoria University and PGM companies in South Africa such as Impala Platinum.
Not only will this research provide much needed new technology for the PGM
industries, but it also affords the opportunity for students and researchers
from both the U.S. and Africa (South Africa, Botswana, and Zimbabwe) to build
professional and personal collaborations that can expand scientific, social and
cultural understanding. Finally, the proposed research has been organized to
include the exchange of graduate students with opportunity for students from
Pretoria University to use advanced instrumentation at the University of Utah
while students from the University of Utah will travel to South Africa for
evaluation of new flotation chemistry technology at plant sites.&lt;br/&gt;