* 0352918
* Testing for Paleoindian Aggregations: Internal Site Structure at Bull Brook
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Brian Robinson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2008
* USD 87,373.00

Paleoindian research provides the earliest substantial evidence of how people
coped with Late Pleistocene environmental fluctuations and low population
density, while sharing aspects of culture across North America. From about
11,000 radiocarbon years ago, the well known fluted projectile points are highly
visible but often scarce, which turns out to be a good combination for some
research. The distribution of sites, artifact clusters and exotic raw materials
provide unusually clear evidence of settlement pattern, in part because they are
not blurred by abundance. The largest Paleoindian sites in the Northeast are
often composed of separate clusters of artifacts (hut locations?) seemingly
unobscured by repeated occupation. The large sites pose a problem, however,
because they occur in areas that seem to have had low population densities. Do
the large sites represent repeated occupations by a few families, or large
groups coming together from great distances? These questions are important to
understanding all mobile hunter-gatherers.

The Bull Brook site in Ipswich, Massachusetts has over 40 loci that form a large
ring-shaped pattern, the largest and most regular settlement plan known from the
Late Pleistocene of North America. The site was excavated between 40 and 50
years ago in a cooperative effort between avocational archaeologists and
professionals. The excavators insisted that the large ring-shaped pattern
resembled a large camp circle, but anthropologists 40 years ago found this
difficult to believe. Since then, the idea of large social gatherings among low
density populations has become acceptable. Although the Bull Brook site is
widely known, the evidence has not been published in sufficient detail to test
some of the implications of the ring-shaped plan.

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Brian Robinson (Climate Change
Institute, Alaska Project, and Anthropology Department at the University of
Maine) will work with faculty, graduate students and colleagues from New England
and Quebec, to test whether the settlement plan at Bull Brook reflects the
organizational characteristics of ring-shaped settlements among recent hunter-
gatherers. The Bull Brook site plan will be meticulously reconstructed from
original records, with direct assistance from some of the original excavators.
Aerial photography, field reconnaissance and subsurface coring of an adjacent
marsh will be used to reconstruct the modern and ancient landscape. The entire
Bull Brook collection (over 8000 artifacts) was donated to the Peabody Essex
Museum by the excavators. It will be newly described with two lithic specialists
among the senior personnel to identify stone sources. The structure of the Bull
Brook settlement plan will be analyzed from the distribution of artifacts and
materials in the 40 artifact concentrations.

The history of research at Bull Brook reflects the interplay between discovery,
changing theory and the quest for more precise evidence. Rare archaeological
contexts that are particularly revealing must be "revisited" with new questions.
The Bull Brook site has provided significant inspiration for theories on
Paleoindian settlement and social organization. Although the site was destroyed
long ago, it retains fundamental evidence of hunter-gatherer organization that
is rarely preserved and excavated at a scale large enough to evaluate. The
resulting monograph will be accompanied by a digital record of artifact catalogs
and field records, allowing researchers to evaluate and address a wide variety
of problems. A popular account of the remarkable salvage effort by the dedicated
group of avocational archaeologists is also planned, for its broad appeal and
educational value.