* 0352689
* Neolithic Voyagers-Inter-Disciplinary Investigations at Ais Yiorkis and the Colonization of Cyprus
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Alan Simmons, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 109,348.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Allan Simmons will conduct two
seasons of archaeological investigation into the initial colonization of the
Mediterranean island of &lt;br/&gt;Cyprus,. For many years, scholars considered
the Mediterranean islands as &lt;br/&gt;late recipients of human occupation.
Cyprus, however, had the earliest &lt;br/&gt;evidence, with most data pointing
to the founding of the first villages during &lt;br/&gt;the later Neolithic
period, around 6,000 B.C. The Neolithic, the transition &lt;br/&gt;from hunting
and gathering economies to those based on food production, first
&lt;br/&gt;occurred on the Near Eastern mainland about 9,000 B.C. and thus the
colonization &lt;br/&gt;of the Mediterranean islands was seen as relatively
late. Furthermore, the &lt;br/&gt;island Neolithic was characterized as a
nondescript counterpart of its &lt;br/&gt;mainland ancestors, often regarded as
little more than a footnote in the wider &lt;br/&gt;Neolithic world. Research at
Ais Yiorkis challenges this perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent discoveries
on Cyprus demonstrated an initial occupation around &lt;br/&gt;10,000 B.C.,
which likely resulted in the extinction of native Pleistocene &lt;br/&gt;fauna
such as the pygmy hippopotamus. Other research has extended the
&lt;br/&gt;chronology and scope of the actual Neolithic colonization of the
island by &lt;br/&gt;about 1,000 years. This newly defined phase, the Cypro-
PPNB, presently &lt;br/&gt;consists of a handful of sites, of which Ais Yiorkis
is one. Research at the &lt;br/&gt;settlement is oriented towards understanding
why it is atypical from other &lt;br/&gt;Neolithic sites. First, it is located
in the uplands rather the coastal area, &lt;br/&gt;where nearly all other sites
are situated. Second, it contains a &lt;br/&gt;technologically and typologically
sophisticated artifact assemblage, including &lt;br/&gt;imported obsidian
artifacts. Third, although it does not appear to be a &lt;br/&gt;village, it
contains a large circular stone structure unlike anything &lt;br/&gt;previously
found in the Cypriot Neolithic. Finally, economic data suggest a &lt;br/&gt;far
more wide ranging subsistence base that previously suspected. This
&lt;br/&gt;included the limited presence of cattle, which had not been
documented until &lt;br/&gt;the much later Bronze Age. Cattle also have recently
been reported from &lt;br/&gt;another Cypro-PPNB site, thus these animals appear
to have been part of &lt;br/&gt;the "Neolithic Package" that accompanied the
island's first colonists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will establish
base-line data for the newly defined Cypro-PPNB period. The project will test
models related to variability in the early permanent occupation of Cyprus
&lt;br/&gt;which is now known to be far more complex than initially believed. In
&lt;br/&gt;particular, the research examines both the nature of an upland
occupation and &lt;br/&gt;the economic, and possible ritual, impact of cattle in
the early Neolithic of &lt;br/&gt;the island. The work contributes to a better
understanding of the trajectory of how early food producing societies spread
throughout the Mediterranean area during the tumultuous "Neolithic
&lt;br/&gt;Revolution." It is now clear that Cyprus was an active participant in
this event much earlier than believed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Neolithic
resulted in both the establishment of the Mediterranean agro-pastoral economic
pattern and the ecological degradation associated with food production and high
population &lt;br/&gt;densities that is still being felt in the region today. It
is, therefore, a &lt;br/&gt;relevant research issue with contemporary
significance. Both Cypriot and U.S. &lt;br/&gt;students will join the project,
thereby gaining valuable research &lt;br/&gt;experience. Archaeology students
from the fledging University of Cyprus will &lt;br/&gt;be encouraged to
participate, enhancing joint participation between the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;and
Cyprus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;