* 0352103
* International Conference on Systemic Reform of Science & Mathematics Education: Spring of 2004: Paris, France 2004
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Shirley Malcom, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 10/31/2004
* USD 150,010.00

The proposed conference is aimed at developing an international dialogue on
systemic educational reform. The dialogue will advance discovery and
understanding of educational reform, while promoting teaching, training and
learning. The initiative will be used to analyze and compare various learning
models and pedagogic approaches to science and mathematics teaching, with the
long-term aim of improving mathematics and science achievement at the K-12
level.

The conference will develop new research strategies and partners at the national
and international level, who will link the systemic reform efforts in the US in
context with similar efforts around the world. The dialogue between UNESCO
representatives and staff from education and science divisions and the US
science and mathematics communities will be renewed and strengthened.

Results of the conference will be published both in print form and on the AAS
website. Alliances developed through the conference among university-based
academics, policy-makers in development agencies and school-based science and
math educators will help bridge the gap between the research produced by
development agencies and that produced for academic audiences. The conference
would be an important step towards establishing closer dialogue, identifying
potential collaborative efforts, and promoting internal reforms to improve
science and math education around the world.