* 0352511
* Collaborative Research:      A Unique Opportunity for In-Situ Measurements of Seasonally-Varying Firn Densification at Summit, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 03/31/2008
* USD 31,737.00

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the University of
Washington and the Desert Research Institute. They will make detailed
measurements of the temporal and spatial variations of firn compaction to
advance knowledge and understanding of ice deformation and across different
fields, including remote sensing, snow morphology, and paleoclimatology. They
will make detailed measurements through two winter and three summer seasons at
Summit Greenland using the concept of Borehole Optical Stratigraphy, which will
use a borehole camera to record details of the wall. These details can be
tracked over time to determine vertical motion and strain, which in the shallow
depth is dominated by firn compaction. Quantitative understanding of firn
compaction is important for remote-sensing mass-balance studies, which seek to
measure and interpret the changing height of the ice sheet; the surface can rise
due to snow accumulation, and fall due to ice flow and increased densification
rates. Quantitative knowledge of all three processes is essential. Evidence
suggests that the rate of densification undergoes a seasonal cycle, related to
the seasonal cycle of temperature. When interpreting ice core trapped-gas data
for paleoclimate, it is important to know at what point the gas was actually
trapped in the ice. The pores do not close off until deep in the firn, leading
to a difference between the age of the ice and the age of the trapped gas. If
summer high temperatures have more impact on compaction than mean annual
temperatures, the gas-age/ice-age offset might be incorrectly calculated.
Greater understanding of firn densification physics will help the interpretation
of these records.

Broader Impacts- This project will: Enhance infrastructure for research and
education in the glaciology, paleo-climatology, and remote-sensing community: 1)
investigators working on large-scale mass-balance studies using ice-surface
altimetry will have a new source of actual measurements of firn compaction; 2)
modelers will be able to validate and improve existing models of firn compaction
with detailed compaction measurements; 3) new thermo-mechanical models will
allow remote-sensing studies to estimate seasonally-varying firn compaction
based on accumulation and surface temperature measurements; and 4) investigators
studying trapped bubble-gas for paleoclimate interpretation will have new
information about the physics of firn densification and gas-occlusion. Integrate
research and education to promote teaching, training, and learning through the
support of a graduate student, Robert L. Hawley. This work will contribute to a
PhD dissertation topic for Hawley, who will carry out this project under the
direction of the Principal Investigator. Enhance K-12 education through ongoing
collaboration with Rolf Tremblay, a middle school science and math teacher in
Gig Harbor, Washington, and Lars Long, a middle school science teacher in
Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin. This project gives us the opportunity to involve
middle school students with the complete life cycle of a scientific endeavor-
from idea to hypothesis, to experimentation, formulating conclusions and
reporting results. Encourage broad dissemination of results through a project
website for the informed layperson", supplementing our peer-reviewed journal
articles.