* 0352863
* The Bugs of Winter: Microbial Control of Soil Biogeochemistry During the Arctic Cold Season
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Joshua Schimel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/28/2007
* USD 505,833.00

The real Arctic year is dominated by the 9 month long "cold season", which
includes the period when the active layer is at its maximum depth and an
extended period while soils are freezing and held at 0 degrees C. Cold-season
CO2 fluxes are a substantial component of the annual carbon budget and cold-
season nitrogen mineralization appears to dominate annual nitrogen
mineralization. There are major shifts in microbial processes that occur between
the growing and cold seasons, and they appear to occur above 0 degrees C. Cold-
season processes are different from growing season processes. However, we don't
understand cold season soil processes sufficiently to incorporate them into
models of Arctic ecosystem functioning. Funds have been provided to analyze
changing substrate use patterns in soils under Arctic cold season conditions.
Specifically, the PI proposes: &lt;br/&gt;1. to evaluate the size of the
"winter-labile" substrate pool in each major soil layer, &lt;br/&gt;2. to
evaluate specific substrates that are used under thawed and cold conditions,
and&lt;br/&gt;3. to evaluate the relative importance of the different processes
regulating substrate use. These likely include physics (temperature profiles),
physical chemistry (recalcitrance-temperature responsiveness relationships),
biophysics (microbial interactions with unfrozen water films), biochemistry
(shifts in extracellular enzyme activities with temperature), and biology
(changing microbial communities and physiological capacities).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will include field measurements of CO2 flux
from different soil horizons (organic, mineral) coupled to laboratory analysis
of pools and controlling factors. Long-term lab bioassays will be used to
evaluate the size of the "winter-labile" pool, 13C tracer studies to evaluate
the processing of specific substrates (monomers and polymers) and how they
change with temperature, enzyme potential assays to evaluate changing enzyme
kinetics with temperature, NMR to measure unfrozen water curves and electron
microscopy to evaluate how microbes (bacteria and fungi) interact with water
films, 13C phospholipid fatty acid analyses to evaluate carbon flow into
different components of the microbial community, and DNA and RNA fingerprinting
to evaluate whether and how microbial communities change between the growing and
cold seasons.&lt;br/&gt;