* 0352716
* Long Term History of the Mt. Wrangell Caldera Glaciation
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Carl Benson, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2005
* USD 7,520.00

Ice cores from ice sheets and high altitude locations provide some of the most
detailed records of past climate. To reconstruct the climate history of the
North Pacific, a collaborative Japanese-Alaskan ice core drilling project has
been started. Japanese researchers from Hokkaido University drilled a shallow
(50 m) core in the Wrangell caldera and plan to drill a 300m core in 2004. In
addition, flow modeling will be done which is instrumental to help date the
core, establish the origin of the ice, and calculate historic accumulation
rates. Seismic and radio echo sounding methods will be used to define the
geometry of the caldera. The ice flow velocity will be measured with the GPS
method at a stake network, and the same stakes will be used to establish the
spatial distribution of accumulation rates. These measurements allow a
calculation of the caldera's mass balance and, therefore, the basal melt rates
due to volcanic heat fluxes. The rheological properties of the firn will be
constrained by borehole closure and firn compaction measurements. Temperatures
in the borehole will also be monitored. This information will serve as input or
test data of a thermo-mechanical finite element model that will be used to
interpret the ice core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT; The Principal
Investigators will use field measurements of geometry, present-day flow and
accumulation distribution, and rheological firn properties to constrain a time-
dependent thermo-mechanical flow model of the Wrangell caldera. This model will
be used to interpret the 300m core and deduce the accumulation history. The
accumulation data will be compared to those from Ushkovsky volcano in Kamchatka.
The setting is similar to Mt. Wrangell, and the Ushkovsky caldera is located at
a similar latitude and altitude on the eastern side of the Pacific Ocean. There,
accumulation rates have been observed to be anti-correlated to the Pacific
Decadal Oscillation (PDO). This study will fill a gap in the study of the
climate history of the North Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:
Mount Wrangell is an excellent study area for interdisciplinary sciences. The
study will be of interest to meteorologists, because the Wrangell Mountains form
a major barrier to Pacific storm tracks, sheltering Alaska's interior.
Climatologists will be interested in the accumulation history, its relation to
that of Kamchatka and to the PDO. The use of the caldera ice as a calorimeter to
deduce geothermal heat flow will be of interest to volcanologists, and the
results will be compared to a funded project of measuring melt in the North
Crater. The study will take place within the boundaries of Wrangell St. Elias
National Park. The research will form the basis of a PhD thesis. This project
establishes a collaboration with researchers of the Low Temperature Institute in
Sapporo, Japan, who will drill and analyze the ice core. For the study and
modeling of the firn rheology, a collaboration exists with VAW, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland. Results of the study will be published in peer-reviewed journals
and reported at national and international meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;