* 0352061
* Program in Nonlinear Waves, Kinetic Theory and Hamiltonian Partial Differential Equations-Fields Institute, Spg 04
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Nicholas Ercolani, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2005
* USD 45,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0352061&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Nicholas M. Ercolani&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for
support of junior US based mathematicians to&lt;br/&gt;participate in scientific
activities at the Fields Institute&lt;br/&gt;during the thematic program
semester in Nonlinear Waves, Kinetic&lt;br/&gt;Theory and Hamiltonian Partial
Differential Equations (PDE) that&lt;br/&gt;will take place during the Spring
semester of 2004. The focus of&lt;br/&gt;the semester will concern areas of
research on PDE that are&lt;br/&gt;motivated by nonlinear wave theory, kinetic
theory, and&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian systems. Hamiltonian PDE form a class of
linear and&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear partial differential equations which share the
property&lt;br/&gt;that they can be written in the form of a Hamiltonian system
with&lt;br/&gt;infinitely many degrees of freedom, using various and
sometimes&lt;br/&gt;nonclassical symplectic structures. Principal examples
include&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear wave equations, nonlinear Schroedinger equations
and&lt;br/&gt;Euler's equations for water waves. The analogy with
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems raises a number of basic questions, which form a
part of&lt;br/&gt;the motivation for this semester of focus on Hamiltonian PDE.
Of&lt;br/&gt;particular note is the connection that has been
established&lt;br/&gt;between the theory of kinetic equations coming from
statistical&lt;br/&gt;mechanics, and the nonlinear systems of PDE which arise in
their&lt;br/&gt;macroscopic limits. The paradigm is the fluid dynamical
scaling&lt;br/&gt;limit of the Boltzmann equation, but there are numerous
emerging&lt;br/&gt;areas of relevance for this analysis, including the
beginnings of&lt;br/&gt;a mathematically rigorous foundation for the theory of
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;wave turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizers are
expecting this thematic program to be a very&lt;br/&gt;dynamic focus of research
on Partial Differential Equations that&lt;br/&gt;model a variety of physical
phenomena, such as planetary motions,&lt;br/&gt;lasers and optical fiber
systems, ocean waves and fluid&lt;br/&gt;turbulence. The character of the
program is broadly&lt;br/&gt;international, and it represents an opportunity for
exposure for&lt;br/&gt;young mathematicians. The short course series, the four
workshops&lt;br/&gt;and the symposia are especially appropriate for
participation by&lt;br/&gt;developing research mathematicians or physicists
early in their&lt;br/&gt;career. The organizing committee believes that the
program will&lt;br/&gt;engender further interaction and lasting collaboration
among&lt;br/&gt;participants from various disciplines. Additionally,
the&lt;br/&gt;participation of women and under-represented minorities will
be&lt;br/&gt;actively encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;