* 0352754
* Collaborative Research: North Pole Station: A Distributed Long-Term Environmental Observatory
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Knut Aagaard, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2010
* USD 5,934,139.00

The purpose of the North Pole Environmental Observatory (NPEO) is to help track
and understand ongoing changes in the arctic environment, and to increase the
availability of long-term environmental data in the Arctic by providing a data
and infrastructure resource for other polar science and climate investigations.
NPEO was first established in 2000 and includes an automated drifting station of
buoys fixed to the sea ice, an ocean mooring, and airborne hydrographic surveys.
The North Pole is an excellent location for long-term measurements. Near the
flank of the Lomonosov Ridge, it has proven to be a sensitive site for changes
in upper ocean frontal structure and changes in the Atlantic water flowing along
the ridge. A history of expeditions to the North Pole provides a benchmark of
ocean and sea ice observations. The drifting station deployment at the North
Pole fills a geographic gap in drifting buoy coverage of the International
Arctic Buoy Program's (IABP). Time series observations of ice thickness there
provide a unique measure of sea ice in the Transpolar Drift. The airborne
hydrographic surveys reach critical areas that are difficult to reach by other
means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NPEO observations are necessary to understand the
impacts of a changing Arctic environment on ecosystems, indigenous communities
and society at large. NPEO enhances the infrastructure for research by providing
basic infrastructure and data for research activities in the central
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;