* 0352537
* RUI: Overall Rate Constant and Nitrate Branching Ratio Measurements for the Reactions of Alkene-Derived Peroxy Radicals with Nitric Oxide
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Matthew Elrod, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/2008
* USD 187,442.00

The tropospheric chemistry of ozone formation and destruction depends on many
factors. One of the key gas-phase chemical reactions is the oxidation of nitric
oxide by hydroperoxyl and organic peroxyl radicals. For hydroperoxyl and smaller
organic peroxyl radicals, the reactions proceed almost exclusively by conversion
of nitric oxide to nitrogen dioxide accompanied by formation of alkoxy radicals.
The latter usually react with oxygen to form hydroperoxyl radicals. Larger and
more complex, multiply substituted organic peroxyl radicals exhibit a second
reaction pathway, leading to the formation of organic nitrates. The rate
coefficients for this second reaction channel have been studied for some simple,
straight-chained alkylperoxy radicals, but data are sparse and inconsistent for
more complex radicals, such as those derived from the reaction of hydroxyl
radicals with alkenes (double bond containing hydrocarbons). This study involves
the systematic examination of the organic peroxyl radical plus nitric oxide
reaction kinetics and branching ratios to form organic nitrates for radicals
derived from a number of alkenes containing two to five carbon atoms. The peroxy
radicals derived from hydroxyl radical-alkene reactions are called beta-hydroxy
peroxy radicals, and have been studied relatively little. The technique of
turbulent flow chemical ionization mass spectroscopy will be used to control the
experimental conditions and quantify the yields of reaction products. Studies
will be performed as a function of temperature. These data will be extremely
useful for atmospheric chemical modeling, but can also be used to build
structure-reactivity relationships that may allow prediction of yields from
other, unmeasured species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be carried
out at an undergraduate institution with significant utilization of
undergraduate research assistants in the project.