* 0352988
* Observations and Modeling of Orographic Cumulus Development Using Digital Imaging and Data Cataloguing
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Anshuman Razdan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/2007
* USD 431,012.00

This project will focus on the development of orographic cumulus, and in
particular, the transition from shallow to deep convection and the accompanying
modification of the thermodynamic profile. The formation of orographic cumulus
over in the desert southwest offers an ideal test environment to explore these
issues. The convection develops over the tops of the mountains in generally
clear air, so the initial location is well defined. One can sample the pre-cloud
environment and characterize modifications due to the convection. The surface
forcing (latent and sensible heat) is sufficiently strong so that even in
marginally unstable conditions, modification of the vertical profile may result
in eventual deep convection. These factors result in a wide variety of time
scales associated with onset of the initial, shallow convection, transition from
shallow to deep convection and recovery time between deep convective events.
This project will rely on refinement of existing image analysis techniques and
data cataloguing tools developed at Arizona State University to automatically
identify cloud boundaries and track volumetric changes over time. This project
approaches the problem by using pixel segmentation based on hue to transform,
segment, and model the cloud volume using triangular mesh, iteratively
identifying and automatically morphing the underlying 3D model to represent
volumetric changes over time, and using iterative feedback to refine the
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal is to extend
understanding of fundamental aspects of cumulus development. In particular, the
Principal Investigators will focus on the behavior of individual turrets, plumes
and thermals in the context of similarity theory, classical conceptual models
and those emerging from high resolution numerical simulations. They will examine
the mechanics of cumulus entrainment/detrainment, timing of the transition from
shallow to deep convection and interaction of cumulus with the environment under
varying shear, stability and moisture profiles. By extracting quantitative
information from the images automatically, they will be able to process large
numbers of cases and extend and generalize the results of previous work on this
subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The collected information will be
of use to operational forecasters in the desert southwest, and to those in
southern Arizona in particular. The evolution of the convective boundary layer
over the elevated terrain is largely unexplored. A compilation of convective
development under different environmental conditions will allow forecasters to
relate conditions in the valley to those in the regions where storms are
triggered. The data collected during this project will be useful in designing
and tuning cloud parameterizations for numerical weather prediction, meso- and
cloud resolving process model studies and large-scale, general circulation and
climate models. Finally, the tools and techniques to be developed should be
generalizable to other dynamic volume characterization and tracking problems.