* 0352977
* ITR/IM: A National Earth Science Knowledge Node for Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Dogan Seber, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 256,902.00

0112655&lt;br/&gt;Seber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this Information
Technology Research project, the PIs will design and develop a US Earth Science
Knowledge Node that is composed of diversified, regional scale, reviewed, high
quality earth science data sets, and related web-accessible information
retrieval and knowledge extraction tools. This system will assist (1) earth
scientists in their research, (2) educators in their classrooms and curriculum
development, (3) students in their learning and self discovery process, (4) the
public at large in their curiosity driven life-long learning efforts related to
earth science phenomena that affect their daily lives, and (5) decision makers
in their case evaluations and assessments. The organized knowledge node will
grow to become a persistent node to larger scale, information technology driven
research efforts undertaken to build distributed, interoperable,
multidisciplinary data and information networking by various groups, such as the
NSF's National Science Digital Library (NSDL), Digital Library for Earth System
Education (DLESE), the earth science research initiative of Geoinformatics, and
the broader efforts of building a Digital Earth. Data and information management
has always been a major obstacle in sharing and accessing data. High quality,
organized, and ready-to-be-used data sets in the planned knowledge node will
eliminate problems and help researchers save time and to effectively communicate
generated and available knowledge. However, the maximum benefit of this
knowledge system will come from its ability to enable multidisciplinary earth
science research by providing data sets and data manipulation/analysis tools
that will be used to understand complex earth system dynamics. The repository
will include data sets from those researchers who do not wish to manage their
data for longer terms. In addition, the PIs will develop a web-based mapping and
analysis interface that will allow seamless access to data sets of interest and
help users retrieve information fast and efficiently.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;