* 0352588
* High Temperature and Flammability Behavior of Nanocomposites and Polymer Blends
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Menachem Lewin, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 01/31/2008
* USD 426,000.00

The primary objective of this project is to elucidate the behavior of
nanocomposites and polymer blends at elevated temperatures and the mode of
action of clay polymer nanocomposites in flame retardancy. Clay-polymer
nanocomposites were recently found to improve the flame retarding
characteristics of polymers, e.g., to decrease the rate of heat release. The
mode of action of these nanocomposites is not clearly understood. It relies
primarily on the formation, during pyrolysis and combustion, of a surface
barrier that prevents the passage of molten polymer combustible fluids, air, and
heat. The principles by which the accumulation of clay on the surface occurs by
precipitation of the clay following gasification of the polymer during
combustion or, as suggested in this proposal, due to the migration of the clay
to the surface at the elevated temperatures before and during combustion will be
studied. A similar phenomenon in regard to polymer-polymer blends and of
mixtures of polymers with flame retardants additives is proposed. The change in
the distribution of the additive in the bulk of the sample, depending on the
distance from the surface as well as on the surface will be important. The
accumulation of the lower free energy components on the surface should affect
the chemical homogeneity and surface of the samples, influencing the ignition
behavior, the rate of heat release and other flammability characteristics.

Understanding of this phenomenon using a broad array of characterization
techniques will lead to the development of new systems and approaches for flame
retarding polymer systems. The primary objective to elucidate the behavior of
nanocomposites and polymer blends at elevated temperatures and the mode of
action of clay polymer nanocomposites in flame retardancy will expand our
knowledge on the mechanisms operating in the flame retardancy of polymers and
lay the foundation for the development of new systems for flame retarding of
polymers and polymer blends and for improved fire-safe and environmentally
friendly products.

Flame retardant materials are of special, broad importance in our society. The
area of urban security especially in light of the recent events in New York City
and elsewhere, with the additional needed protection against fires has increased
the need. Socially important science and technology is a significant attraction
for high school and college students, and presentation of information on flame
retarding effects of nanomaterials to these student populations will continue to
be part of the outreach program, which includes the interaction with minority
students through the high school research programs, in undergraduate research
activities, and in the special, industry-supported programs for doctoral
minority students. Presently, the co-PI's have three African American doctoral
students with the on-going support. The progress in the proposed research will
be reported in international publications, scientific meetings and symposia and
in future patents. The information will also be distributed through the high
school and other institutional collaborations, through the Polymer Research
Institute Newsletter, the educational courses at Polytechnic University with its
large industrial network and will feature a special symposium program dealing
with the progress in this area as well as a visitation program to these
constituents.

