* 0352241
* Collaborative Research:  The Effect of Iron Bioavailability on Synechococcus Diversity from a HNLC Regime to the Costa Rica Upwelling Dome
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Eric Webb, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 276,523.00

On Earth, photosynthetic fixation of CO2 from the oceans accounts for
approximately half of total global primary production. In the central oceanic
gyres the most numerous photosynthetic organisms are the picoplankton,
Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus. &lt;br/&gt;Recently it has been shown that
these populations consist of numerous closely related but genetically distinct
ecotypes. Of the more than ten clades of Synechococcus identified to date, only
a few have been associated with a phenotype, while the factors differentiating
the remaining &lt;br/&gt;clades are not yet understood. These investigators
hypothesize that the bioavailability of the trace metal iron (Fe) is an
important factor driving the differentiation in this genus. Understanding if and
when Fe is limiting Synechococcus productivity and how this limitation modulates
Synechococcus community structure will increase our understanding of how this
important trace element impacts oceanic biogeochemical cycles and the diversity
of the organisms mediating some of these cycles. This project: 1) is developing
a whole cell labeling Fe stress assay for marine Synechococcus,, 2) is probing
the Synechococcus community for Fe stress using whole cell labeling coupled with
flow cytometry to sort the stressed cells from the replete cells on a transect
in the Eastern Pacific through oligotrophic and high nutrient low chlorophyll
(HNLC) regimes to the Costa Rica upwelling dome, 3) is examining the genetic
diversity of Synechococcus along the transect using community fingerprinting
methods and determining the genetic clade of the cells that are Fe-stressed or
Fe replete and 4) isolating new strains of marine Synechococcus from
oligotrophic, HNLC, and Costa Rica upwelling regimes and characterize their
phylogeny and Fe physiology. &lt;br/&gt;This project is taking advantage of
existing cruise opportunities to the Costa Rica upwelling dome (CRD), where
remarkably high concentrations (106/ml) of Synechococcus have been reported.
Available ancillary data on both trace metal concentrations and speciation is
&lt;br/&gt;providing an unprecedented opportunity to examine how the interplay
of multiple trace metals (Fe, Co, Cu, Zn, Cd) is contributing to maintaining
genetic diversity in these picoplankters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
training two graduate students and several undergraduate research fellows. Funds
are allowing some of these students to attend national meetings. Priority is
being given to students from under-represented groups at small colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;