* 0352680
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Health Monitoring and Retrofitting of Infrastructure
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Tribikram Kundu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2010
* USD 28,780.00

0352680&lt;br/&gt;Kundu &lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the US-India
Cooperative Research: Health Monitoring and Retrofitting of Infrastructure. US
PIs Tribikram Kundu, University of Arizona (UA) and Thomas Boothby, Pennsylvania
State University (PSU) will collaborate with Abhijit Mukherjee, Indian Institute
of Technology Bombay (IITB) on sensor-based health monitoring of civil
infrastructure systems. Recent developments in the field of structural health
monitoring promise a paradigm shift in the evaluation and maintenance of
infrastructural systems. Advances in sensor technology and the use of fiber-
reinforced composites (FRC) are key factors in transforming traditional methods
of monitoring and maintaining facilities. This research addresses current and
developing issues in the selection and installation of sensors, the recording
and processing of their signals, and has the potential for infrastructure
application on a global scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This research is
interdisciplinary and requires cooperation from researchers in health
monitoring, structural retrofitting and structural mechanics. The collaborating
investigators and institutions offer excellent complimentary expertise. UA is
active in ultrasonic investigations and system identification techniques, PSU
has facilities for manufacturing and testing FRC, and the IITB has experience in
field applications of FRC techniques and development of micro-electrical-
mechanical sensors (MEMS). The international collaboration compliments the
domestic research of each of these institutions. The Division of Civil and
Mechanical Systems is cofunding this research. Also, the Government of India's
Department of Science and Technology (DST) is jointly funding this project under
the NSF/DST program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;