* 0352771
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Silicon Implementation of Computational Intelligence for Mechatronics
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2008
* Bogdan Wilamowski, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/2008
* USD 37,000.00

0352771 &lt;br/&gt;Wilamowski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research project between Dr. Bogdan Wilamowski,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn,
Alabama and Dr. Okyay Kaynak, Bogazici University in Istanbul, Turkey. They plan
to focus on hardware implementation of computationally intelligent systems, with
the aim to investigate real-time and on-chip implementation of computationally
intelligent architectures from the point of view of identification and control
of mechatronic systems. A second objective is to implement the control
strategies to be developed, using dedicated VLSI chips, which can be analog or
digital. As a likely result of the on-going development of computer technology
it is expected that massive parallel processing and soft computing will
significantly enhance traditional computation methods. A natural consequence of
this rapid growth is the emergence of the field of intelligent systems. The
machine-intelligent behavior is determined by the flexibility of the
architecture, the ability to realize machine incorporations of human expertise,
laws of inference procedure and the speed of learning. All these are the main
constituents of the research area named Computational Intelligence, while the
soft subdivisions of the area are artificial neural networks and fuzzy inference
systems. The mathematical power of machine intelligence is commonly attributed
to the neural-like system architecture used and the fault tolerance arising from
the massively interconnected structure. Another aspect of soft computing systems
is that instead of "zero" and "one" digital levels, they use fuzzy/continuous
levels and in this way much more information is passed through the system.
Conventional digital computers are not well suited for such signal processing.
Computationally intelligent methodologies are commonly used for identification
and/or control of nonlinear dynamic systems, the behavior of which can usually
be described by a set of nonlinear differential equations in state variable
form. Integrators can easily be implemented in silicon. The difficult task in
hardware realization is to implement arbitrary nonlinear terms. Fuzzy or neural
systems are the prime candidates for that purpose. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
The PIs propose to synergistically combine the practical, industrial and
theoretical experience at Bogazici University in the area of control and soft
computing with theoretical experience in neural and fuzzy systems at Auburn
University. The Turkish group has considerable amount of knowledge and
experience in the design of intelligent identifiers and controllers. On the
other hand, the U.S. side has the expertise in neural network architectures,
their comparative characteristics and VLSI design. The group from the USA, has
theoretical and actual implementation experience in designing VLSI chips. The
co-operation of these two groups is expected to result in physically realizable
and useful products and facilitate the procedure of real-time identification and
control of nonlinear systems by onchip realization. The project, with the
proposed visits and expected outcomes, will bring mutual benefits to both sides.
The Turkish side will benefit from the experience of the American side
developing on-chip realization of computationally intelligent architectures,
whereas the American side will benefit from the knowledge and experience that
has already been acquired at Bogazici University.&lt;br/&gt;