* 0352365
* 2004 Science &amp; Technology Policy Gordon Conference, August 16-20, 2004; Bozeman, MT.
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Jane Maienschein, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 06/30/2005
* USD 30,000.00

Science and technology grow ever more complex and specialized, and scholarship
exploring the various fields also grows more dispersed and fragmented. Not
surprisingly, science and technology policy has become widely separated from the
scholarship within science and about science, so that policy often follows the
piecemeal opportunism of funding opportunities. The result is loss of
consideration of the broader context and goals, and a failure to consider who
wins, who loses, and why that matters. There is a basic need to consider, in
particular, what should count as appropriate expertise, morality, and politics
relating to science and technology policy. &lt;br/&gt; The Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on Science and Technology Policy provides an opportunity to
develop that discussion, and to do so in a new community of scholars and
practitioners who do not normally interact. Therefore, this proposal seeks
funding for participants to attend the GRC on Science and Technology Policy in
August 2004. The Conference will follow the GRC tradition of providing an
international forum for presentation and discussion of frontier research in the
biological, chemical, and physical sciences, and their related technologies, in
this case focusing on policy. &lt;br/&gt; With this conference, there is the
opportunity to bring together academics in the social and behavioral science,
historians, philosophers, ethicists, and others whose research explores science
and technology policy in diverse ways, alongside professionals (including
scientists) involved in making, implementing, and promoting policy. Though
acknowledging the usual basic-applied or theoretical-activist distinctions as
problematic, the proposal seeks to bring together a full range of participants,
from the most basic or theoretical academic ends of a spectrum to those directly
engaged in advocacy and action in the policy community. It seeks to promote
systematic understanding of the character and development of science and
technology policy, including cultural, intellectual, material, and social
dimensions (much as NSF seeks to do with Criterion 2). &lt;br/&gt;Out of this
process should grow a multidisciplinary network of participants whose own
thinking, research, and actions are influenced by their participation. The goal
is therefore twofold: to enhance the perspectives of each participant, and also
to create a sustainable community of individuals with growing respect and
understanding of each others' languages, interests, and values. If successful,
the project will also be sowing seeds for a new kind of expertise among
academics in the sciences, social sciences, ethics, and/or history and
philosophy of science through their interactions with those setting, analyzing,
and promoting policy by creating a new network able to communicate and work
together to enhance everyone's thinking, research, and action into the future.
&lt;br/&gt; Success will depend on persuading a dynamic group of outstanding
thinkers to give up five full days of their precious summer research time and
share the intense interaction and resulting communication and network-building.
Getting the best people to attend requires funding. Therefore, on behalf of the
entire Gordon Conference, the proposal seeks funding for Conference
participants. All funds will be used for direct costs for those involved as
speakers, discussants, planners, and poster presenters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;