* 0352818
* U.S.-Taiwan Workshop on Nanotechnology
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Shing-Chung Max Yen, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 04/30/2004
* USD 24,750.00

U.S.-TAIWAN WORKSHOP ON NANOTECHNOLOGY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is to take place at National Cheng-Kung
University at Tainan, Taiwan during November 6 to 9, 2003. The objectives of
this workshop are (a) to bring together leading experts in nanotechnology in
United States and Taiwan to discuss research progress and their future
perspectives, (b) to serve as the catalyst for international collaboration and
partnership in the areas nanotechnology, and (c) to tour Taiwan's R&amp;D and
entrepreneurship infrastructure in nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;The technical
program of this workshop is to focus on the areas related to nanocomposites,
nanomechanics, and nano-biology. These areas will address the fundamental
theories relating quantum/nano phenomena to micro/macro characteristics, the
manufacturing science at nano/micro scale, and the characteristics of bio-
molecular mechanisms. An overview on the large research initiatives/programs at
U.S. and Taiwan will be included in the workshop agenda. A discussion session
regarding the mechanisms to promote bi-lateral collaboration through academic
institutions between researchers in Taiwan and the United States will be
developed. The collaboration is intended to begin at individual research teams
between two countries. A technical tour will be organized for the participants
to witness the success stories of the development of federally-assisted
industrial parks. Specifically, a tour to the Tainan Science Based Industrial
Park, the center of bio-technology research in Taiwan, is being organized. . It
is believed that the immediate impact of this workshop will (a) accelerate
dissimilation of emerging results on nanotechnology and (b) build partnership
toward international collaboration and entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;