* 0352838
* US-India Workshop on High Performance Cement Based Concrete Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Joseph Biernacki, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2005
* USD 24,000.00

0352838&lt;br/&gt;Biernacki&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award support travel for
ten participants to the US-India Workshop: High Performance Cement Based
Concrete Composites, Chennai, December 2004. The workshop will address the
urgency for developing new materials with improved properties to meet the needs
of developing countries for expanding their infrastructure and those of advanced
countries for maintaining the existing infrastructure. A committee of academics,
co-chaired by Professors Joseph Biernacki, Tennessee Technological University
and N. Lakshmanan, Structural Engineering Research Centre (SERC) is organizing
this workshop. Participants will endeavor to improve fundamental understanding
of the interactions between complex blends of cement and other cementitious
materials, their interactions with chemical admixtures, and the long-term
performance and durability of composite materials containing metal and organic
fibers. They will explore the state-of-the-art and establish research priorities
that could accelerate the advancement of next generation high-performance
composite concrete materials. &lt;br/&gt;Scope: SERC is a national laboratory
under the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and has been the leading
institution in pursuing advanced research and development activities in the
field of structural engineering for nearly four decades. Studies on structural
concrete and concrete composites are a major thrust area for SERC. The workshop
will enhance collaborative activities including joint proposals for research and
student and faculty exchange opportunities between the U.S. and India. NSF's
Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Civil and
Mechanical Systems are co-funding this activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;