* 0352706
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Electronic Detection of Biomolecular Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Vinayak Dravid, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2010
* USD 32,966.00

0352706&lt;br/&gt;Dravid&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the US-India
cooperative research entitled Electronic Detection of Biomolecular Interactions.
Professors Vinayak Dravid and Gajendra Shekhawat of Northwestern University will
collaborate with senior scientists C. R. Suri and Girish Varshney of the
Institute of Microbial Technology (IMTECH), Chandigarh on advanced sensor
systems able to detect biochemical nerve agents. The goal is to address critical
issues associated with smart sensor systems, with an integrated approach based
on novel functionalized multiplexed micro-cantilever arrays that are fully
integrated with an on-chip microelectronics platform. They expect to complete a
turnkey system consisting of fully integrated detection technologies that are
capable of monitoring hazardous environments and producing automated decision
output in the face of bio-chemical threats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The US
and Indian groups have diverse yet complementary expertise in materials science,
biology and engineering and have the potential to advance bio-chemical sensor
technology to new heights. IMTECH is one of the advanced institutes belonging to
the Government of India's Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
institutions. In addition to the significant educational benefits for students
and researchers in both countries, the investigators will do public outreach
with display modules of Integrated Nanosensors at the Chicago Museum of Science
and Industry. This research is also supported by India's Department of Science
&amp; Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;