* 0352742
* Investigations of Polar Disturbances in the Arctic Upper Atmosphere
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Gulamabas Sivjee, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 04/30/2009
* USD 360,000.00

ABSTRACT Sivjee OPP-0352742

Intellectual Merit. The Principal Investigator will continue his investigations
of solar-terrestrial disturbances in the Arctic atmosphere in which these
disturbances inject and transport energy throughout the Polar thermosphere,
mesosphere, and stratosphere. He will investigate the coupling and energetics of
various Arctic lower and upper atmospheric regions associated with the
generation and propagation of wave-like disturbances in these regions. One
phenomenon is the Stratospheric Warming Event, which couples the lower
atmosphere to the middle and upper atmospheric regions over the Arctic.
Stratospheric Warming Events (SWE) are associated with the dynamics of the polar
vortex and the generation of gravity waves, which transport energy from the
lower atmosphere to the middle and upper atmosphere in the Arctic. Observations
of the modulations of the Arctic mesosphere-lower-thermosphere (MLT)
composition, dynamics and thermodynamics at Longyearbyen, Spitsbergen,
Kangerlussuaq, Greenland, and Resolute Bay, Canada, provide the necessary data
for investigating the coupling and energetics of various atmospheric regions in
the Arctic. He will integrate Arctic ground-based electro-optical remote-sensing
data of the MLT regions with concurrent LIDAR and Radar data from these sites,
as well as with satellite data during the overpass at these sites. Facilities at
the three Arctic stations also record the optical signatures of auroral
phenomena. These measurements will be analyzed to investigate the effects of
solar electrons and protons precipitating in the Arctic thermosphere as well as
of the intense electro-magnetic field energy (derived from the mechanical energy
of the solar wind) on the composition, dynamics and thermodynamics of the Arctic
upper atmosphere and ionosphere. Four scientists and eight students will
participate to address the following questions: 1) can MLT cooling observations
provide a forewarning of SWE onset? 2) can they quantitatively relate the phase
lags in MLT signatures of SWE observed at different Arctic sites to polar vortex
movements? 3) how do gravity wave propagation and filtering during SWE lead to
quantitative association between SWE and MLT changes? 4) do F-region patches
form in and around the ionospheric projection of the magnetospheric cusp and
convect across the Polar Cap? 5) is the polar cap drizzle reduced, or
suppressed, in the F-region patches? 6) is there Joule heating associated with
the geomagnetic field aligned electric field of the F-region patches? what are
the resulting effects on F-region thermodynamics and composition? 7) what is the
particle source region for polar sun-aligned arcs? Is the topology different
from that generating theta auroras? 8) what solar wind and IMF features are
associated with polar cap auroral arcs formed when Bz < 0? Are the average
energy and energy flux of precipitating electrons with these relatively rare
events different from those observed when Bz > 0? 9) are the aurorally induced
changes in the E-region O/N2 ratio around the equator ward and pole ward
boundaries of the auroral oval significantly different from those in the central
region of the night sector of the auroral oval? Broader impacts: The Principal
Investigator will continue the long-standing tradition of participation of
undergraduates who will represent both genders and almost all ethnic groups,
graduate students and two post-docs. The research will provide a mechanism for
these undergraduate and graduate students to get involved in exciting new
research, encourage them to present their research work at scientific
meeABSTRACT Sivjee OPP-0352742

Intellectual Merit. The Principal Investigator will continue his investigations
of solar-terrestrial disturbances in the Arctic Atmosphere in which these
disturbances inject and transport energy throughout the Polar thermosphere,
mesosphere and stratosphere. He will investigate the coupling and energetics of
various Arctic lower and upper atmospheric regions associated with the
generation and propagation of wave-like disturbances in these regions. One
phenomenon is the Stratospheric Warming Event, which couples the lower
atmosphere to the middle and upper atmospheric regions over the Arctic.
Stratospheric Warming Events (SWE) are associated with the dynamics of the Polar
Vortex and the generation of gravity waves, which transport energy from the
lower atmosphere to the middle and upper atmosphere in the Arctic. Observations
of the modulations of the Arctic mesosphere-lower-thermosphere (MLT)
composition, dynamics and thermodynamics at Longyearbyen, Spitsbergen,
Kangerlussuaq, Greenland, and Resolute Bay, Canada, provide the necessary data
for investigating the coupling and energetics of various atmospheric regions in
the Arctic. He will integrate Arctic ground-based electro-optical remote-sensing
data of the MLT regions with concurrent LIDAR and Radar data from these sites,
as well as with satellite data during the overpass at these sites. Facilities at
the three Arctic stations also record the optical signatures of auroral
phenomena. These measurements will be analyzed to investigate the effects of
solar electrons and protons precipitating in the Arctic thermosphere as well as
of the intense electro-magnetic field energy (derived from the mechanical energy
of the solar wind) on the composition, dynamics and thermodynamics of the Arctic
upper atmosphere and ionosphere. Broader impacts: The Principal Investigator
will continue the long-standing tradition of participation of undergraduates who
will represent both genders and almost all ethnic groups, graduate students and
two post-docs. The research will provide a mechanism for these undergraduate and
graduate students to get involved in exciting new research, encourage them to
present their research work at scientific meetings and to continue their
training in technical fields. The projects entail development and application of
state-of-the-art very low-light-level (L3) technology. Results of the research
will make significant contributions to meteorology in the area of energetic
coupling of different atmospheric regions and will also quantify the effects of
Solar Magnetic Cloud/Coronal Mass Ejection events on various communication,
remote sensing, surveillance and other satellites that must traverse the Polar
thermosphere affected by these solar disturbances.

