* 0352564
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of a Forty Thousand Year Record of Genetic and Environmental Change in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2007
* USD 111,384.00

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the University of
California-Los Angles and Santa Cruz, University of Alaska-Fairbanks, and the
Smithsonian Institution. This award will be supported with funds from the
Population Ecology Program in the Division of Biology and Arctic Natural
Sciences Program. The effects of future climatic change on arctic species are a
source of great uncertainty and concern and the Arctic has experienced large
changes in climate since the last glacial cycle. Therefore, the study of biotic
responses to the previous perturbations may provide important evidence of how
the genetic diversity, diet, and geographic range of arctic species will be
altered by future global climate change. Using DNA analysis, the Principal
Investigators will examine the history of genetic diversity in the barren-ground
caribou and an extinct arctic horse based on samples from three localities in
Beringia. Bones recovered from the permafrost are an excellent source of ancient
DNA and can be 14C dated. Two recent genetic studies analyzed DNA sequences from
brown bear bones entombed in the arctic permafrost and found evidence of three
distinct genetic epochs over the past 40,000 years, each marked by population
turnover events. These previously unrecognized epochs are defined by DNA
sequences from specimens older than 35 thousand (ka) BP, from specimens 21 to 10
ka BP, and by sequences from modern populations. Paleoclimate studies provide
evidence that population turnover between these periods may be explained by
changing climate relating to the mid-Wisconsin interstadial, the last glacial
maximum, and the Holocene. However, paleoenvironmental data are sparse and
inconclusive and these genetic patterns have not been verified in other species.
As herbivores, caribou, and horses represent a different trophic level from
brown bears and both species specialize on consuming different types of
vegetation (tundra and grass-steppe, respectively). The Principal Investigators
predict that ecosystem-wide climate change unfavorable to large herbivores and
their predators would result in synchronous cycles of population turnover in
both species across all three localities. These changes should match those
previously observed in the brown bear and gray wolf. Similar regional or local
ecosystem change would be manifest as synchronous cycles in a subset of
localities. In contrast, differing patterns of genetic change in the two species
would imply a change in the tundra/forest dominance or the presence of new
species-specific competitors and/or predators. In either case, the study will
provide important evidence of the potential role of climate change on genetic
diversity in arctic mammals. The Principal Investigators will identify specific
agents of environmental change and reconstruct past arctic environments through
study of three independent classes of environmental surrogates in all three
locations. First, they will develop stable isotope profiles for the remains
analyzed in the DNA study. These profiles will serve as proxies for regional
climate change and allow changing animal diets to be inferred. Second, they will
use plant material imbedded in the teeth of herbivores to reconstruct the
changes in local flora utilized by the two herbivores. Third, they will utilize
existing pollen records and other paleoenvironmental data to reconstruct the
regional vegetation and general climate during periods of observed genetic
turnover. Importantly, they will 14C date 300 bones from the two herbivore
species across Beringia which will place their results in a temporal context
that will allow integration with existing climate data. Boarder Impact: All data
will be placed in the public domain for future studies as new techniques and
questions arise. Additionally, this research will train a group of students in
cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research that incorporates genetics, pollen
analysis, high-resolution radiocarbon dating, and stable isotope ecology.