* 0353692
* Birational geometry and spaces of rational curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Kiran Kedlaya, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2008
* USD 122,400.00

DMS-0353692&lt;br/&gt;Jason M. Starr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a research
project in the field of complex algebraic geometry around the following 2
problems: (i) proving there exists a Fano manifold that is not unirational, and
(ii) finding conditions on the geometric generic fiber of a surjective morphism
to a surface guaranteeing that the only obstruction to existence of a rational
section is the Brauer obstruction. Although these projects seem quite different,
they both involve the study of spaces of rational curves on varieties in a
crucial way. In the first problem, one can prove that a Fano manifold is not
unirational by proving there are "few" rational curves on the space of rational
curves on the manifold. In the second problem, conjecturally, the condition is
that the spaces of rational curves on the geometric generic fiber are themselves
rationally connected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In complex algebraic geometry, the
notion of a variety defined over a non-algebraically closed field is the common
situation of a sequence of polynomial equations in variables x,y,z,... that
depend on parameters s,t,u,... (which themselves may satisfy some polynomial
equations). A basic question is whether for each choice of parameters there is a
solution of the equation of the form: x,y,z,... are quotients of polynomials in
the parameters s,t,u,... This is the problem of rational points. Another
question, in the case where the polynomials don't depend on parameters, is
whether x,y,z,... can be written as polynomials in a set of free variables,
a,b,c,... such that every choice of a,b,c,... gives a solution of the
polynomials, and essentially every solution of the polynomials arises in this
way. This is the problem of unirationality. Both are old, difficult problems
with applications in algebraic geometry and number theory. This project applies
new results about spaces of rational curves to each of these
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;