* 0353601
* REU Site: Digital Mapping and Strain Analysis of Deformed Veins and Intrusions
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Mark Swanson, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2009
* USD 269,689.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The PI's work with 9
undergraduates/year using precision digital mapping instruments developing a
series of high-resolution analytical base maps of crystal deformation processes
visible in coastal Maine outcrops. This 5-year summer research program of
digital mapping and strain analysis will build on the results of our previous
2-year RUE-site effort. Detailed mapping of deformed veins and intrusions in
coastal &lt;br/&gt;exposures have helped to document the pattern of regional
strain accommodation associated with strike-slip shearing on the Nuremberg Fault
Zone. Geometries of deformed quartz veins and granite intrusions are mapped into
a geographic information system (GIS) using global positioning systems (GPS) and
electronic total stations in &lt;br/&gt;an integrated system of precision
digital mapping. Each project year will include a 6-week summer research session
that includes initial training (1 wk), field survey/computer lab work (4 wks)
and final analysis (1 wk). In initial training the students will learn
&lt;br/&gt;to recognize key structural features and kinematic indicators, and to
use digital and traditional survey techniques during a four-day sea kayak trip
across Casco Bay. In the field component students will use digital survey
instruments (GPS &amp; total station) to map the geometry of syntectonic
intrusions and veins, and collect GPS positioned structural data at targeted
sites in mid-coast Maine. Travel to selected island sites and reconnaissance
exploration of adjoining shoreline exposures will also be by sea kayak. During
the analysis phase in the GIS lab students will finalize GIS coverage's and
layouts from their survey data, compile other field observations, prepare
structural and topographic outcrop maps, plot structural orientation on data in
stereo nets, use georeferenced digital images, and generate digital terrain
models for the mapped exposures. Each year 3-student teams will develop a trio
of abstracts and posters for submission to the annual spring meeting of the
Northeast Section of the Geological Society of America (NEGSA).&lt;br/&gt;