* 0353210
* U.S.-New Zealand and Australia Cooperative Research: Studies in Reactive Oxygen Species in Aquatic Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2007
* William Cooper, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 02/28/2007
* USD 26,500.00

0353210 Cooper

This award supports three years of collaborative research interaction by Dr
William Cooper of the University of North Carolina at Wilmington with recently
established colleagues in New Zealand and Australia. It also enables a female
undergraduate student from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill to
partipate in the research in New Zealand. Professor Cooper's primary
collaborators are Dr. Barrie Peake, University of Otago, Department of
Chemistry, and Dr. T. David Waite, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering
and Centre for Water and Waste Technology, University of New South Wales (UNSW.)
Other project participants in New Zealand include a U.S. graduate student of Dr.
Cooper's who is funded from other sources.

The main focus of the research in New Zealand is the aquatic chemistry of two
reactive oxygen species (ROS), superoxide radical anion, O2- , and hydrogen
peroxide, H2O2, in several distinctly different environments. There are three
specific research objectives in New Zealand. 1) To study the effect of depleted
stratospheric ozone (i.e. increased UV-B) on surface water photochemistry (i.e.
the formation of ROS) in both fresh waters (impounded water reservoirs and
running streams) and coastal oceans and estuaries. 2) To continue a study of the
variability of H2O2 in rain collected at several sites that was initiated by Dr.
Robert Kieber during his sabbatical in New Zealand in early 1999 and to extend
these data on rainwater to the concentration of H2O2 in the troposphere in
regions of depleted stratospheric ozone. 3) To conduct studies to obtain a
better understanding of the relationship of ROS and the production of toxins by
phytoplankton during harmful algal bloom. The research in Australia will be a
continuation of studies begun by Dr. Cooper during his 2003 sabbatical at UNSW.
This work is in the area of kinetic modeling of an Advanced Oxidation Process,
"Fenton's chemistry."

Scientific Merit

The flux of atmospheric ozone is the focus of substantial attention because of
the role it plays in global change. This work will also focus on biologic and
non-biologic sources of hydrogen peroxide production; preliminary results
suggest that in some cases microbial and algal sources may outweigh
photochemical sources. Improved understanding and modeling of the sources and
behavior of reactive oxygen species in aquatic environments may therefore also
contribute to work in environmental engineering aimed at relevant pollution
abatement procedures.

Broader Impact

The collaborative research involves U.S. graduate students as well as a female
undergraduate student from the University of North Carolina at Wilmington. The
PI intends that the supported visits will firmly establish and advance several
lines of research that will involve long-term collaboration with his new
partners in New Zealand and Australian. The PI will prepare a series of lectures
on radiation chemistry, ballast water treatment with ozone, and the relationship
of ROS and harmful algal phytoplankton. Dr. Cooper and Drs. Peake and Waite have
planned an international symposium entitled "Free Radical Chemistry in the
Environment." It has been accepted for inclusion in the 2005 Chemical Congress
of the Pacific Rim (Pacifichem 2005). The initial visit supported by this award
will also be used for coordinating the planning of this meeting. The research
results of this project will be presented at this conference, some of them by
the U.S. students that are involved in the project.

