* 0353073
* Computational Topics in Variational Inequalities and Complementarity Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Jong-Shi Pang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 07/31/2005
* USD 127,121.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #0098013&lt;br/&gt;Johns Hopkins
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is concerned with three
contemporary topics in the area of variational inequalities and complementarity
problems. These topics are: (a) mathematical programs with equilibrium
constraints, (b) quasi-variational inequalities, and (c) differential
complementarity systems. In each case, our focus is on the design,
implementation, and analysis of robust and efficient numerical methods for
solving the problems under study. The proposed methods will be supported by a
strong theoretical foundation that serves to provide an in-depth undertanding of
the problems. Applications of the developed theory and computational algorithms
to important disciplinary problems in engineering design, parameter
identification, economic equilibria, electric power planning and pricing,
constrained mechanical systems, and derivative pricing in financial engineering
will also be carefully investigated. Overall, our research is built on the past
success we have had in this vast subarea of mathematical programming. The main
goal of the project is to expand this subarea in some new unchartered domains of
applications that urgently require the kind of computational research proposed
herein.&lt;br/&gt;