* 0353011
* SGER:  Rapid Research Repsonse to Determine the Impact of a Natural, Hot Wildfire at the Sky Oaks Biological Field Station on the Horizontal and Vertical Fluxes of Carbon
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark R.  Walbridge
* 01/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

In this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER), San Diego State
University's (SDSU) Global Change Research Group under the direction of Dr.
Walter Oechel, and in conjunction with collaborators from SDSU and other
universities, will explore the ecosystem effects of the wildfire that ravaged
the SDSU Sky Oaks Biological Field Station on July 16, 2003. The fire destroyed
several decades' worth of long-term global change, elevated atmospheric carbon
dioxide, and ecophysiological research, and burned the chaparral stands where
long-term carbon dioxide flux studies had been established. While insurance
funds have been instrumental in beginning to replace the equipment that was
lost, the research has still been drastically affected by the destruction of
site vegetation. The two eddy flux towers that were previously on the site have
been replaced, but to maintain a "control" tower in an unburned area of the
field station's mature (102-year-old) chaparral, one of the tower sites had to
be relocated. This SGER grant will allow SDSU to re-establish a tower at the
previous "old stand" site that was burned, and maintain site measurement
consistency. Together, the three eddy flux towers will provide information on
net carbon dioxide exchange, water vapor, and energy flux changes that result
from system recovery following a fire. Specific objectives of this SGER grant
are to quantify the effects of a natural summer wildfire (under hot, dry, windy,
Santa Ana conditions) on ecosystem function, reestablishment, and erosion and
determine the impacts of fire on lateral and downhill carbon transport and
carbon fate. The grant was sought to quickly establish new measurements and
reestablish previously existing research following the wildfire. The Sky Oaks
site is used by multiple researchers and the equipment and support requested
here will benefit Dr. David Lipson (SDSU), Dr. George Vourlitis (California
State University San Marcos), and Dr. John Gamon (California State University
Los Angeles), as well as collaborators in Mexico at Centro de Investigaciones
Biologicas del Noroeste (CIBNOR) and Centro de Investigacion Cientifica y de
Educacion Superior de Ensenada (CICESE). As part of this study, an erosion study
will be established to assess the lateral transport of carbon and nitrogen via
erosion. Physical measurements of erosional processes will be taken in
conjunction with chamber-based measurements of net ecosystem flux, soil
respiration, and photosynthetic activity. These measurements will help us
understand the effect of fire on the patterns of and controls on component
fluxes and their contributions to ecosystem fluxes as measured by eddy
covariance towers. Ultimately this knowledge will help us better understand
carbon balance and global change.