* 0353727
* U.S.-Mexico: Nuclear Physics Large and Small:Microscopic Studies of Collective Phenomena, Cocoyoc, Mexico, April 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2004,06/30/2004
* Richard Casten, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/2004
* USD 6,000.00

0353727&lt;br/&gt;Casten&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico workshop proposal
will enable U.S. scientists to participate in an International Conference
entitled, "Nuclear Physics Large and Small: Microscopic Studies of Collective
Phenomena," to be held in Cocoyoc, Mexico, April 19-22, 2004. Funding will be
used to support the attendance of graduate students and post-docs and one or two
invited speakers from the U.S. Organized by Dr. Richard Casten of Yale
University and Drs. Roelof Bijker and Alejandro Frank of the Instituto de
Ciencias Nucleares of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM), the
meeting aims to discuss and highlight a number of exciting recent developments
in nuclear structure. Many of these developments are intimately connected with
the work of Stuart Pittel of the Bartol Research Institute of the University of
Delaware and the conference will serve to celebrate his distinguished career and
his continuing and highly successful efforts to engage and collaborate with
scientists worldwide, many from developing countries. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
conference will cover a wide variety of active topics in nuclear structure
experiment and theory. Among these topics are microscopic models of nuclei,
exotic nuclei and loosely bound many-body quantal systems, residual p-n and
pairing interactions, and the robustness of magicity. The advanced many-body
aspects of such ideas have broad impact beyond nuclear physics into other areas
of many-body physics that link femtophysics (nuclei), nanophysics, and
mesoscopic physics. The conference will bring together both Latin American and
U.S. scientists and will encourage future collaborations among them, like the
highly successful examples fostered by Pittel over many years. Special efforts
to introduce topics to young scientists in attendance will be made and there
will be an opportunity for them (and others) to present their work in a poster
session. Short summaries of these posters will be included in the conference
proceedings to be published. This meeting is being jointly supported by the
Physics Division and the Office of International Science and Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;