* 0353952
* NSF-Europe:    Solidification Processing and Properties of Advanced Single Crystal Superalloys
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Reza Abbaschian, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 03/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

This NSF-Europe award to University of Florida is to develop and characterize
large superalloy single crystals based on nickel. With this collaborative
research with Imperial College (UK) and industry [Siemens Westinghouse Power
Corp. (Orlando FL); Solar Turbines (San Diego, CA); Pratt Whitney (East
Hartford)], the PIs will identify mechanisms that underlie the effect of
alloying additions of refractory elements such as tungsten, rhenium and
ruthenium for processing and properties. In addition, grain boundary modifiers
such as Boron and Hafnium, and Cobalt will be alloyed to increase
microstructural stability. Processing methods will be developed to produce large
single crystal superalloys for potential applications in turbine blades, which
would have technological and scientific relevance for power generation systems.
Future power generation systems will require large single crystal castings that
are defect free and capable of operating at higher temperatures for longer
periods of time than current alloys.

With this award, enhanced educational and research experience would be available
to high school, undergraduate and graduate students. Existing and effective
programs operating at University of Florida will be utilized to recruit and
train a diverse student body including minority students and women, and
activities of these students supported by this award would have a significant
positive impact on the materials science and other related disciplines. Getting
these students involved at an early age in science and technology, and educating
them for future employment in important technological sectors would be an
expected outcome of this award.