* 0353918
* REU Site:  Research Experience for Undergraduates in Intelligent and Autonomous Robotic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Zhihua Qu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Institution: University of Central Florida&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0353918&lt;br/&gt;PI: Zhihua Qu&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: REU for
Undergraduates in Intelligent and Autonomous Robotic
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes an REU site focusing on
research experiences for undergraduate students in intelligent, autonomous
robotic systems. This REU site will utilize the University of Central Florida's
expertise in simulation and training with applications for national security and
defense. Research areas will include trajectory planning and collision
avoidance, advanced kinematic and dynamic controls of mobile robots and unmanned
aerial vehicles, intelligent and cooperative controls, and performance-enabling
analysis and simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site involves 12
undergraduate students annually for 10 weeks in the summer. The site has
collaborating governmental and academic institutions, an ethics component, and a
detailed management plan. It will disseminate the research findings of the
students through journal publications and the web, and at professional
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;