* 0353826
* NSF-Europe:     Controlled Nanoscale Manipulation for Nanoelectronics and Exploratory Life-Science Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Robert Hull, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ulrich Strom
* 05/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

The collaborations between the NSF Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center (MRSEC) on Nanoscopic Materials Design at the University of Virginia and
the SSF-funded Nanometer Consortium at the University of Lund, Sweden combines
the leading expertise and facilities at two internationally recognized centers
for the development of new materials, methods and understanding for the
development of low dimensional semiconductor heterostuctures and nanostructured
electronic systems. Specific research include a) nanoscale localization of
electrons / holes in three dimensions using ordered semiconductor
superlattice.whisker.arrays, b) topology- and strain-induced periodic
decomposition in semiconductor alloys, and c) focuse ion beam delivery of
optically/magnetically active manganese atoms and clusters into III-V
heterostructures with nanoscale precision. A fourth project is concerned with
exploratory programs in the nanoscale integration of semiconductor and
biological systems with an initial emphasis on the fabrication and
characterization of interdigitated electrode arrays for use as redox-recycling
biosensors. This project will be primarily funded by the Lund group with some
experimental support from UVA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration provides a
new educational dimension for participating undergraduates, graduate students
and postdocs in the two centers by providing a greatly enhanced international
perspective through a set of innovative joint research and educational
activities. Formation of project teams, incorporating graduate students and
postdocs from both institutions, ensures extensive interdisciplinary and
international perspective, and the participants will spend extended periods
pursuing their research and education programs at the partner institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;