* 0353856
* Making, Modeling, or Measuring Molecules:  A Research Experience for Undergraduates
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Joseph Grabowski, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Wilfredo Colon
* 03/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

This award from the Chemistry Education Program continues a Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of Pittsburgh (UP). Joseph
Grabowski is the site's Program Director. During the award period (2004-2006),
ten students will participate in a ten-week program each summer. These students
will join the research groups of Pittsburgh Chemistry faculty and pursue an
independent research project. Students will be recruited nationally and special
linkages are being developed with several HBCUs. Tutorials designed to educate
these young scientists about important issues facing the research community will
be held throughout the summer. All REU participants will also contribute to a
cross-disciplinary Ethics Forum, a city-wide Research Poster Session and a
Chemistry Symposium in which each participant will give a 15-minute talk.
Project evaluation will include an exit interview, a detailed end-of-the-program
participant survey, and tracking as these students continue their professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities is
supporting a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) component of this site. A
science teacher from the Pittsburgh Public School District will participate in
all of the activities, including research with a University of Pittsburgh
mentor.