* 0353877
* An REU Site for Undergraduate Research Training in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Stephen Gramsch, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2008
* USD 401,513.00

Summary of Proposed Work &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During a ten week
summer program, 14 undergraduates will participate substantively in the research
of a scientist at the Broad Branch Road campus of the Carnegie Institution of
Washington, which includes both the Geophysical Laboratory and the Department of
Terrestrial Magnetism. Primary criteria for selection will be scholarship,
personal motivation, scientific potential as judged by student references, and a
good match of student interests with available research programs. At the
beginning of the program, students will be assigned an advisor and with that
advisor will decide on a research project related to some aspect of earth or
planetary geoscience research. Students will be instructed by advisors in the
methods utilized in the research, with the goal of completing a project that is
part of the larger research effort of the advisor by the end of the summer.
Students will then write a short research proposal after two &lt;br/&gt;weeks of
reading and preliminary work. The group will also meet each week for informal
lunchtime seminars and conversation with staff scientists at the Broad Branch
Road campus, giving students a personal introduction to the interests, research
programs, and career paths and choices of scientists that have led to their
current positions at Carnegie. Field trips to sites of geological interest in
the Washington area will complement the summer research experience, as will
trips to other sites where undergraduates are also working on summer research
projects. &lt;br/&gt;Students will prepare a research paper describing the
results of their research, and will present the results to their peers and the
research staff at a special symposium held during the last week of the program.
Students will be encouraged to submit the results for presentation at a
professional meeting, or use the results as part of a senior project. The
success of our program will be measured by the quality of student papers and
presentations, as well as the responses to a survey given to students at the
completion of the summer. We have also tracked the progress of students since
our initial year in 1999, and have begun to accumulate data on the career paths
of our interns; we will include an analysis of this data in our
evaluations&lt;br/&gt;