* 0353589
* REU Site Investigation: Paleoenvironmental characterization of a dinosaur site in the Morrison Formation of the Bighorn Basin, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Brian Bodenbender, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2008
* USD 232,513.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this project, students
will conduct fieldwork to characterize the pale environmental setting of an
Upper Jurassic dinosaur site in the Bighorn Basin of Wyoming. The primary goals
of the site analysis are to understand the stratigraphic setting of the site,
the environments hosting fossils, and the pale ecology of the organisms
preserved there. Students will work under the auspices of Hope College, in
cooperation with personnel from the University of Minnesota Duluth, the
Cranbrook Institute of Science, and the Cincinnati Museum of Natural History.
Intellectual merit. Dinosaurs in the Morrison Formation occur in several
scattered clusters of sites that represent a wide variety of depositional
settings. The project site is part of an understudied cluster in the Bighorn
Basin, at the northern reaches of the Morrison Formation. Although the site has
yielded unusual dinosaur fossils including theropod teeth and articulated
sauropod remains its paleoenvironmental setting has not been examined.
Understanding the project site's pale environmental setting, dinosaur fauna, and
relationship to other sites in the Bighorn Basin cluster will improve knowledge
of the region and allow more equable comparisons between the Bighorn Basin and
better-known regions across the Morrison Formation. These comparisons will
provide a firmer basis for recognizing temporal and spatial heterogeneity in
pale environments as well as pale ecological and taphonomic variation across the
formation. &lt;br/&gt;