* 0353285
* ThEMaTe:  Thought Experiments in Mathematics Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2011
* Daniel Chazan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2011
* USD 4,376,477.00

This five-year research project focuses on secondary mathematics teachers of
algebra and geometry. The basic premise is to examine what constitutes viable
mathematics instruction from the perspective of the customary work of
mathematics teachers. The PIs seek to understand the practical rationality that
undergirds teachers' actions as they meet subject-specific goals of the teaching
of algebra and geometry. A central aspect of the study is the development of a
digital exploratorium for alternatives in teaching, using animations of real and
possible episodes. The digital exploratorium will allow the researchers to
examine the interplay between conceivable possibilities for instruction and what
practitioners view as viable in mathematics teaching. This exploratorium will be
used in study groups and summer academies for teachers. Teachers' conversations
as they work with the Exploratorium examining alternative ways in which a
practitioner could conceivably respond to a particular instructional situation
in algebra or geometry, will provide data for the study. The methodology is
based on the assumption that a relatively homogenous group (high school
mathematics teachers) will examine a relatively diverse set of competing
instances of a specific aspect of their job that can be used to elicit data that
informs the construct of practical rationality, the practical decision-making of
teachers. There will be four case studies focusing on equations, theorems,
modeling and proving. These topics will be the focus of the animations.