* 0353406
* Problem-based Learning Designed for Science and Mathematics Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Matthew Koehler, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2010
* USD 4,143,022.00

The goals of this five-year project are to (1) develop, implement and study the
impact of a subject matter-focused, Problem-based Learning professional
development model; and to (2) design ways of incorporating Problem-based
Learning (PBL) into key subject matter and teacher preparation courses taken by
pre-service teachers, and study the impact on pre-service teachers' learning.
The in-service component of this project will be designed with and for teams of
K-12 science and mathematics teachers from school districts of mid-Michigan and
will be developed over a five-year period. The pre-service component will work
with faculty and students in the teacher preparation programs at Michigan State
University and Lansing Community College. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate the applicability of using PBL to assist (1) teachers in
analyzing and changing their instructional practice; (2) faculty in
incorporating PBL into pre-service and in-service courses; and 2) professional
developers in the design of effective professional development. This project
will contribute to the knowledge base on factors critical to effective
professional development and examine essential elements of PBL that develop
teachers' content knowledge and subject-matter knowledge for teaching.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This model of incorporating PBL into subject-matter-based
professional development for teachers to examine their practice has not been
used in this way to date. The framework, diagnostic processes, feedback system
and teaching cases will be made available nationally to teachers of science and
mathematics to use in their schools and to faculty in institutions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;