* 0353315
* Curriculum Topic Study -- A Systematic Approach to Utilizing National Standards and Cognitive Research [TPC Category III]
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2010
* Page Keeley, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 10/31/2010
* USD 1,410,885.00

This project will develop a series of print and web resource guides in science
and mathematics based on curriculum topic study (CTS), an approach developed and
tested successfully by one of the PI's. CTS is used to provide a systematic way
of intellectually engaging K-12 mathematics and science teachers with national
standards and cognitive research. It is used to engage teachers in thought and
discussion about both content and appropriate ways of teaching that content.
Three books will result from this project, "A Science Curriculum Topic Study
Resource Guide," "A Mathematics Curriculum Topic Study Resource Guide" and "A
Facilitator's Guide to Using Curriculum Topic Study." In addition, the project
will result in professional development, follow-up evaluation studies, and a web
site developed over four years. A total of 955 teachers will participate in the
project. WestEd's Science and Mathematics Division will actively collaborate and
TERC is providing the external evaluation. Dissemination is anticipated through
many professional associations, a publishing partner, Math-Science Partnerships,
and national conferences.

The CTS approach guides teachers through a systematic study of a curricular
topic by using a core set of resources to clarify learning goals, examine
instructional and developmental implications, identify potential misconceptions,
examine K-12 concepts and their interconnections and reflect back on their own
state or local standards. With these three guides this project aims to increase
the understanding and implementation of content standards throughout a teacher's
career and to elevate the content and pedagogical content knowledge and skills
of teacher leaders and professional developers. The guides will improve the
consistency in how teachers and teacher educators interpret and implement
standards and research findings nationally; hone the ability to envision
substantive improvement in curricular content, instruction and assessment; and
provide increased science and mathematics focus in professional development.