* 0353642
* REU Site:  Pipeline for Undergraduate Student Horizons (PUSH)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Anthony Sena, Northern New Mexico College
* Continuing grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 07/31/2008
* USD 384,912.00

The REU Pipeline for Undergraduate Student Horizons (PUSH) program at Northern
New Mexico Community College (NNMCC) provides unparalleled research experiences
in biotechnology and biological sciences for NNMCC students at the Los Alamos
National Laboratory (LANL). NNMCC students are selected for the PUSH program
following a competitive application and interview process and then matched with
Bioscientists at LANL based on compatible interests and requisite skills.
Through the PUSH program, students become active participants in yearlong
specific research projects designed to expose participants to a wide variety of
concepts and research approaches. Students are engaged in research and
scientific activities at LANL for up to 20 hours per week during the academic
year and full time during the summer. Program participants are provided with
stipend, travel and research support.

In addition to the laboratory activities, students participate in weekly journal
club meetings and monthly research-in-progress meetings. Participants are also
afforded the opportunity to attend weekly seminars by invited researchers and
resident Bioscience staff. Near the end of each semester PUSH students make
formal presentations at sponsored research colloquia held at the NNMCC campus.
At the end of the year, PUSH students present their research at the LANL-
sponsored Student Symposium. Such activities foster development of student
cohorts at both the LANL and campus site and help to promote PUSH students as
examples for peer undergraduates and other community students.

The PUSH program allows NNMCC students to gain the experience and confidence
needed to pursue technical jobs and pursue baccalaureate and advanced degrees
for potential careers in science. For further information contact Anthony Sena
(apsena@nnmcc.edu) or Tracy Ruscetti (Ruscetti@lanl.gov).