* 0354056
* Astronomy Research for Undergraduates at the Maria Mitchell Observatory (REU Site)
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Vladimir Strelnitski, Nantucket Maria Mitchell Association
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 02/28/2009
* USD 315,350.00

Proposal ID: AST-0354056&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Nantucket Maria Mitchell
Association&lt;br/&gt;PI: Strelnitski, Vladimir&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site will be continued at the Maria
Mitchell Observatory, on Nantucket Island (Massachusetts), under the direction
of Dr. Vladimir Strelnitski. The objective of the Nantucket REU program is to
provide for high-level, professionally guided, 12-week summer research
experiences in astronomy and astrophysics. Every year, for five years, six
students will undertake supervised research projects, participate in a team trip
to major observatories in the American southwest, present the results of their
progress on a weekly basis, and participate in public outreach activities on the
island. Implementation of a few successful research themes from previous years,
as well as several new themes, will result in new scientific information on
variable stars, multiple stars, interstellar and circumstellar matter, and
extragalactic astronomy. Throughout the summer, seminars by visiting astronomers
will give students exposure to a broad range of modern astrophysical research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will be recruited from universities
across the United States. A special emphasis will be placed on reaching
underrepresented groups, and students at institutions with limited research
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;