* 0354937
* Noise Induced Phenomena
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Katja Lindenberg, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 04/30/2008
* USD 370,200.00

Many modern technologies are based on synchronization properties of small
spatially or hierarchically extended systems in which complex nonlinear
interactions play a crucial role. Of central interest is the observation that on
the nano-scale the effects of noise become significant and even crucial. More
importantly, far from being a disturbing side effect, it has become clear that
noise may actually play an essential role in the mode of operation of small-
scale devices. Indeed, some of these devices would not operate at all in the
absence of noise. &lt;br/&gt;STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES. This proposal covers a
range of interconnected problems involving noise-induced and noise-sustained
phenomena in extended nonlinear systems away from equilibrium. The principal
foci are: &lt;br/&gt;The study of the effects of noise and dimensionality on
phase coherence in spatially coupled systems. Issues of interest include the
constructive and destructive effects of noise on phase coherence, noise-induced
globally chaotic behavior, and noise-induced phase transitions between
oscillatory and excitable regimes. &lt;br/&gt;The search for coherence resonance
properties in coupled excitable units with the possibility of a noise-induced
phase transition to a limit cycle behavior at an optimal value of the noise
intensity. &lt;br/&gt;The design of adaptable coupling mechanisms between
excitable units that would lead to a novel information processing system with
the ability to store and retrieve spatio-temporal patterns. &lt;br/&gt;The
further exploration of purely noise-induced spatio-temporal pattern formation
and of the newly discovered multistability properties of these patterns that may
allow selection based on initial conditions. &lt;br/&gt;The study of
hypersensitivity in the presence of unstable fixed points and its effects on
synchronization and stochastic resonance. This will allow the determination of
optimization conditions for coherence resonance as well as the design of new
particle separation devices. Furthermore, hypersensitivity in systems that
exhibit stochastic resonance and/or noise-induced phase transitions may lead to
enormous enhancements in the response of the system to very small external
forces, thus laying the groundwork for new extremely sensitive detection
devices. &lt;br/&gt;The formulation of a model to offer some insight into the
long-standing problem of evolutionary biology of the breaking of left-right
symmetry and the associated emergence of order. The proposed stochastic model
involves a cooperative symmetry-breaking transition. &lt;br/&gt;METHODS. A
number of analytic methods will be developed, including mean field and modified
mean field approaches, discretization-based approaches, and moment hierarchy
truncation approaches. Numerical simulations are also essential tools for this
research. &lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT. Solution of the problems posed in this
proposal will elucidate the constructive and sometimes destructive role of noise
in synchronization, coherence, pattern formation and retrieval, and signal
detection, and will allow the development of generic rules for the operation of
small-scale physical and biophysical systems. &lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT. The
broader impact of this work will primarily be evident in two directions. One
lies in the close and extensive involvement of members of underrepresented
groups. The participants in this effort have extensive track records in
mentoring undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate research of members of
underrepresented groups, in designing and participating in a variety of
institutional initiatives that enhance the participation of underrepresented
groups, and a strong commitment to continue and increase these efforts. Another
direction lies in the establishment of a large-scale collaboration involving
about 50 scientific groups in the European scientific community. This is made
possible by the essential role of one of the senior investigators as one of
three conveners of a major European Science Foundation effort in statics and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;