* 0354738
* Research Starter Grant
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Scott Miller, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

A research starter grant has been awarded to Dr. Scott R. Miller of The
University of Montana to assist the PI's establishment of an independent
research program in microbial ecology and evolution. This award will enable the
PI to procure materials and supplies required to build upon previously supported
investigations that address key issues regarding the origins and distribution of
microbial diversity in nature. Population genetic, physiological and field
ecological approaches will be integrated in order to test ideas about how
genetic and physiological variation is distributed within and among isolated
microbial populations, using the cyanobacterium Mastigocladus, found worldwide
in geographically disparate hot spring "island" habitats, as a natural
experimental system. Three specific projects will be completed: (1) DNA sequence
data collected for several metabolic genes from Mastigocladus laboratory
isolates collected from around the world will be analyzed by recently developed
genealogical methods in order to evaluate the respective roles of localized
natural selection on specific metabolic pathways, geographic barriers to
migration, and genetic recombination in shaping Mastigocladus diversity; (2)
physiological experiments will be used to determine the ecological differences
that distinguish the six major evolutionary "tribes" of Mastigocladus identified
in previous studies; (3) the hypothesized association between environmental
temperature and genetic variation of Mastigocladus within a population will be
tested along a well-studied hot spring thermal gradient by analyzing patterns of
DNA sequence data collected from cells growing at different
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolutionary, demographic
and geographical factors that shape the distribution of microbial diversity on
the planet is a key goal of microbial ecology. By taking a combination of
approaches to explicitly address the contributions of natural selection, chance
and geography to the global patterns of genetic and ecological diversity in
Mastigocladus, this study will provide new insights into the origins of the
diversity of microorganisms and how that diversity moves from one place to
another.&lt;br/&gt;