* 0354736
* Investigating Fundamental Quantum Limits of Nonlinear Susceptibilities and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mark Kuzyk, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 217,000.00

0354736&lt;br/&gt;Kuzyk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of the limits of
the nonlinear-optical response of device materials will be developed at the most
fundamental level. A combination of theory, experiments, and literature surveys
will be used to tackle the problem. As a result, new paradigms will be developed
that will provide researchers with recipes for making better device
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical approach is to use sum rules to
understand in very general terms those issues that are most important in making
an optimized optical material. While details of the system are not important,
certain key parameters such as the first two excited state energies and two or
three transition moments are needed to test the validity of the approach. These
will be determined with various linear and nonlinear spectroscopy experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past studies by the PI show that there is a theoretical
limit to the nonlinear susceptibility; and, that all molecules ever measured
fall below this limit. Part of this proposal seeks to extend these calculations
using sum rules of higher moments and using a non-truncated series to learn if
there are perhaps higher limits for different kinds of systems that may be
exploited. For example, previous work considered mostly the diagonal tensor
components of the nonlinear susceptibilities. A large part of the theoretical
aspects of this work will be to develop a full set of non-diagonal sum rules and
apply them to three dimensional systems to determine if this may be a fruitful
avenue for larger nonlinearities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central theme of the
theoretical studies will be to understand systems in which the nonlinear
response can be amplified by using novel composite structures, such as metal
intensifiers, quantum local field models, and symmetries in three dimensional
molecules. While there is a separate large body of literature on each of these
material concepts, the sum rules will provide guiding principles in putting
together the pieces in the most optimal manner. Furthermore, for each
technology, the sum rules will be used to calculate the limits of the
appropriate device figure of merit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments such as
linear absorption spectroscopy, electroabsorption spectroscopy, and excited
state fluorescence will be used to characterize the quantum states of the
molecules, which will serve as a test of the validity of the calculations on the
microscopic level. In addition to new molecules produced in collaboration with
other researchers, known molecules will be characterized with our measurement
techniques and theory. This set of results will be applied to determine which
molecule attributes have the largest impact on the nonlinear
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Intellectual Merit: Using a mix of
experiments and theory, this proposal applies very fundamental concepts of
quantum mechanics to understand the performance limit of optical device
materials. The proposed studies will guide chemists in designing new materials,
provide new paradigms for physicists/materials scientists in making new
structures, and engineers to develop novel devices. It should be stressed that
the sum rules apply to all materials. While the focus is on organics because of
the vast number of materials that can be engineered, this research will also
impact inorganic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Broader impact: Washington
State University is located at the border of Eastern Washington and Western
Idaho. This is a rural area with economically disadvantaged residents, Indian
Reservations (the nearest two are the Nez Perce and the Coeur D'Alene
reservations), as well as children of migrant farm laborers with a large
proportion of Latinos, Native Americans, and other under-represented groups.
These will be the groups targeted by the outreach program. Students and teachers
will be exposed to this research; and, software will be provided to the schools
so that they can participate in data analysis. As far as technical breadth, the
fundamental science proposed underlies a broad range of optical technologies and
all material classes. Areas impacted include telecommunications, computing,
displays, memory, and sensors - any applications that operate based on light
interacting with a material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly
supported by the Division of Electrical and Communications Systems and the
Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;