* 0354915
* Nucleon Structure and Nuclear Force Studies
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Bryon Anderson, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2008
* USD 540,000.00

The general objective of this project is to study the structure of nucleons,
i.e., neutrons and protons, and to investigate certain interesting aspects of
the nuclear force. It is recognized now that nucleons are not fundamental
particles. They are comprised of smaller particles, called quarks. The quarks
are held together inside the nucleon by the exchange of particles called gluons.
It is generally believed that the quarks and gluons are fundamental particles
and are not comprised of even smaller particles. The quarks move inside the
nucleon and, by the nature of the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics,
other quark-antiquark pairs are continually being created and destroyed inside
the nucleon. The net result is that the nucleon is a fairly complicated
collection of various kinds of quarks and the gluons. In order to understand
exactly which quarks are there and how they are moving, it is necessary to
measure detailed characteristics of the nucleons. One of the goals of this
project is to extend earlier measurements of the charge distribution inside the
neutron. The neutron is overall electrically neutral, but has a core of positive
charge surrounded by an outer region of negative charge. Precise measurement of
this charge distribution provides one of the most sensitive tests of what quarks
are present in the neutron and how they are moving. This experiment will be
performed at the Jefferson National Accelerator Facility in Virginia. Another
goal of this project is to try to further our understanding of the source of the
intrinsic angular momentum, or spin, of the proton. In a very simple model of
the proton, it can be considered to be comprised of just three, so-called,
valence quarks, and it is possible to see how these three quarks, with their own
intrinsic spins, can combine to give the known spin of the proton; however, a
series of experiments performed at electron accelerators in the U.S.A. and
Europe have shown that the quark spins actually provide only about 1/3 of the
total spin of the proton. The remaining 2/3 must come from the motions of the
quarks and from the gluons that are being exchanged between the quarks. This
group is involved in a series of experiments to be performed with colliding
proton beams at the relativistic heavy-ion accelerator (RHIC) at Brookhaven
National Laboratory on Long Island, New York to try to measure the contribution
of the gluons to the spin of the proton. Even though the overall spin of the
proton is well known, these measurements will, similar to the measurements of
the charge distribution of the neutron, enable us to better understand what is
happening inside the nucleon. Finally, it is also a goal of this project to
perform an experiment to study the short-range nature of the nuclear force
inside nuclei. This experiment will be performed at the Jefferson Laboratory and
is a follow-up to a similar experiment performed at Brookhaven. That earlier
experiment pioneered a technique for taking "snapshots" of two nucleons
interacting at very small separation distances, and reconstructing their
relative motions. The Jefferson Laboratory experiment will allow us to do this
type of reconstruction with much greater precision.