* 0354060
* NSF Europe:    Synthesis and Characterization of Nanostructured Alloys with Enhanced Mechanical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Pascal Bellon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 03/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

This NSF-Europe award to University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign is to carry out
synthesis and characterization of nanostructured diborides of Zirconium,
Titanium and Chromium for super-hard coatings with low friction coefficients and
low wear rates. This collaborative research with Centre d'Etudes Chimie-
Metallurgie, CNRS, Vitry Cedex, France will be in the following areas: (1) novel
synthesis techniques for nanophase transition metal diboride, in particular by
chemical vapor deposition of mixed phase materials; (2) characterization of
structure and defects in amorphous and nanocrystalline films through the
advanced TEM techniques of fluctuation electron microscopy and the geometric
phase image method; and (3) analysis of the friction and wear behavior in terms
of driven systems as a theoretical framework. Synthesis and characterization of
biborides carried out by this study are likely to produce an improved
understanding of how microstructure varies with stoichiometry of diborides with
transition metals, CVD conditions used to prepare them, and wear parameters such
as sliding speed and contact load.

Development of energy efficient tools and devices with hard coatings for wear
resistance and low friction will have significant technological and societal
benefit. This collaboration with the French scientists will take advantage of
the complementary knowledge and experience between the two teams. Training and
teaching of graduate and undergraduate students, and outreach programs including
recruitment of women and under-represented groups using existing programs at the
University campus are parts of this award.