* 0354281
* EMSW21-MCTP: Nebraska Mentoring through Critical Transition Points
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Thomas Marley, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2010
* USD 2,500,000.00

The Nebraska Mentoring through Critical Transition Points (MCTP) project, hosted
by the University of Nebraska -- Lincoln Department of Mathematics, targets two
critical transition periods in the preparation of mathematicians: the transition
from the undergraduate to the graduate level, and the transition from the
advanced graduate level to the early years of an academic position. At both of
these transition periods, the proposal focuses on the relationship between PhD-
granting research universities and institutions which are not doctoral-granting.
This project includes several programs which provide significant mentoring to
mathematicians as they navigate through these transitions. The centerpiece,
Nebraska Intensive Mathematics: a Mentoring, Education, and Research Summer
Experience (IMMERSE), is a summer program which simultaneously provides
mentoring for students about to enter graduate school, students who have just
finished their first year of graduate school, graduate students in the latter
stages of obtaining their doctorates, and faculty at predominantly undergraduate
institutions in the first few years beyond the PhD. Other programs include
Undergraduate MCTP Scholars, First-Year MCTP Graduate Traineeships, Advanced
MCTP Graduate Traineeships, Regional Workshop in the Mathematical Sciences, the
Nebraska Conference for Undergraduate Women in Mathematics (NCUWM), and a
Keeping Research Alive workshop for early career faculty at predominantly
undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition from the
undergraduate level to the graduate level is a time when many potential
mathematicians are lost from the pipeline, in part due to insufficient
mentoring. Many early career faculty in non-doctoral departments have difficulty
keeping engaged in the research enterprise, and adequate mentoring could help to
prevent this. The Nebraska MCTP program provides outstanding mentoring to
developing mathematicians at several stages in their training. Further, the
Nebraska MCTP program benefits the mathematical sciences workforce in several
ways. Several of the components will result in an increase in students applying
to graduate school (both at Nebraska and nationally), particularly students from
non-PhD granting institutions. The Undergraduate MCTP Scholars program, the
First-Year Graduate MCTP Traineeships program and NCUWM help with recruitment
into graduate school and retention through the first few years of graduate
study. The Advanced MCTP Graduate Traineeships and the KRA Workshops ease the
transition from graduate student to faculty member. Nebraska IMMERSE and the
Regional Workshop help developing mathematicians navigate through both of these
transition periods. While the Undergraduate MCTP Scholars program, both Graduate
MCTP Traineeship programs, and the KRA Workshops are for UNL undergraduates,
graduate students, and alumni, the Regional Workshop has a significant positive
impact on students and faculty at small colleges and universities in Nebraska
and much of the surrounding region. Moreover, Nebraska IMMERSE benefits students
and early-career faculty from around the country, and NCUWM is the premier
national conference for undergraduate women mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;