* 0354517
* Quanum Phases in Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Ramamurti Shankar, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

This award supports theoretical research in condensed matter physics. An
outstanding problem in this field is the simultaneous treatment of strong
interactions between electrons and a disordered environment. Recently, the
principal investigator and collaborators have found a way to handle these twin
problems exactly in quantum dots in the limit of large g, where g is the dot
conductance. The trick is to use techniques from random matrix theory that apply
to states near the Fermi energy. In the proposed research this opportunity for
advancement will be fully explored, fully exploiting numerous exciting
possibilities that have just opened up. It is also proposed that these
techniques be extended to bulk systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quite often our
ability to solve a difficult problem is predicated on the identification of a
small parameter that tames the difficulties. The proposed small parameter, 1/g,
would be the first of its kind to help in the exact solution of the disorder-
interaction problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle investigator will
continue his work on dissemination of knowledge via public lectures, outreach
programs, review articles and textbook writing. The proposed work is expected to
further our understanding of quantum dots, which are at the center of
nanotechnology, as well as clarify very basic scientific issues in many-body
physics. The outreach activities will benefit future generations of physics
students at all levels, from elementary school to graduate school. Postdoctoral
associates will also be trained.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research in condensed matter physics. An outstanding problem in this
field is the simultaneous treatment of strong interactions between electrons
when they are in a disordered environment. The interplay between electrons under
these circumstances is at the heart of fundamental condensed matter physics.
Combining mathematics developed to describe states in the atomic nucleus with
quantum dots, "artificial atoms" at the core of nanotechnology, the principal
investigator has developed a way to deal with such electrons in an exact way.
This has great potential to advance this core problem in physics and, at the
same time, provide new methods to deal with similar problems. The principal
investigator is active in writing textbooks, review articles and giving public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;