* 0354218
* SGER:  A Portable Three-Dimensional (3-D) Mapping System for Lightning Studies and Possible New Applications
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Paul Krehbiel, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 10/31/2005
* USD 69,956.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research to assist in the development of a
portable, lightweight version of the New Mexico Tech Lightning Mapping Array
(LMA). The LMA is a network of twelve VHF receivers employing GPS timing to
measure the time of arrival of signals from lightning flashes with high
precision. Triangulation enables the 3-D mapping of the flashes in the vicinity
of the network with extremely high resolution in space and time - information
not otherwise available. LMA data, especially in combination with radar storm
patterns and in-situ measurements of the electric field with airborne
instruments, have greatly advanced the understanding of thunderstorm
electrification in the past few years. This grant supports the development of a
smaller version of the LMA that will be easily portable and quickly deployable
for storm studies. The portable version is feasible because of continued
improvements and miniaturization of the individual receiving stations. It will
be small enough to enable lightning measurements in locations and situations
that would not be possible otherwise because of logistics or other
considerations. Examples of the potential uses of the system are mobile
deployment ahead of storms or from moving vehicles or aircraft, using battery-
operated arrays with wireless communications for real-time lightning
observations at sporting events or other situations where lightning hazards are
a concern, or responding to unexpected opportunities, such as studying the
lightning associated with volcanic eruptions. Accurate triangulation of VHF
signals, which is the operating principle of the LMA, opens the door to
innovative and exploratory applications apart from lightning mapping. These
include locating faults on power transmission lines by the electrical discharges
they produce, locating personnel carrying small "pulser" units, tracking
balloons or airplanes carrying pulsers, and locating and characterizing radio
frequency noise emissions from buildings.