* 0354400
* SLC Center: Center for Cognitive and Educational Neuroscience (C-CEN)
* SBE,SBE
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Scott Grafton, Dartmouth College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 03/31/2007
* USD 3,939,238.00

The Center for Cognitive and Educational Neuroscience (C-CEN) at Dartmouth,
under the direction of Michael Gazzaniga and funded under the NSF Science of
Learning Program, will bring together the fields of cognitive neuroscience and
education. Education changes the brain, and understanding this complex process
will be fundamental to creating a science of learning. Based on our
understanding of how the brain encodes, stores, and activates knowledge, what
are the barriers to learning, and how can ways around those barriers be
implemented? What is the brain-basis of core content areas of learning,
including language, math, science, and literacy? How do social/cultural cues
impact the ability to learn? And how is learning regulated by genetic factors?
To explore these and related questions, C-CEN will advance basic discovery in
cognitive and educational neuroscience, foster a dialogue between researchers
and educators, and create learning deliverables that will enhance and transform
education for diverse participants.

The research core of C-CEN will advance basic discovery of the brain basis of
human learning by conducting research on (a) core content areas of learning:
language, reading, science, and math; and (b) fundamental aspects of learning:
transfer of learning , brain lateralization, social aspects of learning, and
brain development. This research will be conducted by (a) using multiple
techniques including functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Near Infra-Red
Spectrography, Evoked Response Potentials, genetic and behavioral measures; (b)
across several ages, infants, children, adolescents, and young adults, and (c)
using multiple contexts including the laboratory, formal classrooms, and
informal learning environments.