* 0354572
* RUI:  Probing the Equation of State of Dense Neutron-Rich Matter with High Energy Radioactive Beams at Rare Isotope Accelerator (RIA)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Bao-An Li, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 08/31/2006
* USD 46,695.00

This proposal is to investigate several critical issues concerning the equation
of state (EOS) of dense neutron-rich matter relevant to the reactions expected
with the high energy radioactive beams at the planned Rare Isotope Accelerator
(RIA). The ultimate goal is to determine accurately the isospin dependence of
the nuclear EOS. The latter is among the most important topics identified in the
latest long-range plan for U.S. nuclear physics. It is also a foundamental
property that governs many aspects of neutron stars and the explosion mechanisms
of supernove. Among the important theoretical issues to be addressed in the
proposed work are: Momentum-dependence of the symmetry potential and its effects
on nuclear reactions induced by neutron-rich nuclei at RIA; Effective masses of
neutrons and protons and their scattering cross sections in dense neutron-rich
matter; Incompressibility of dense neutron-rich matter; Isospin-separation and
chemical instabilities of neutron-rich matter; Charge-symmetry-breaking (CSB)
and rho-omega meson mixing in dense neutron- rich matter. In addition, it is
also proposed to develop a transport theory with Bose-Einstein statistics for
relativistic heavy-ion collisions. Several undergraduate students will fully
participate directly in the proposed research. Their involvement in research
provides a broad and solid basis for their choice of where to take their career
beyond the undergraduate degree. The funding of this proposal will thus allow
the PI to better prepare students in a research non-intensive institution to
become next generation scientists and engineers. Funding of this proposal will
also further improve the environment and infrastructure for research in nuclear
physics at Arkansas State University in particular and the State of Arkansas in
general.