* 0354616
* Analyzing the Structure and Evolution of Southern Hemisphere Synoptic Variability Using a New Reanalysis Observations Database
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Edmund Chang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/2008
* USD 261,106.00

Weather and climate in the mid-latitudes are dominated by synoptic scale storms,
i.e. cyclones and anticyclones. Associated with baroclinic waves that constitute
the tropospheric extension of these storms, they are responsible for heat,
momentum and moisture exchanges that make up important parts of the general
circulation. Historically, the three-dimensional structure of baroclinic waves
was only appreciated when upper air soundings became available. More recently,
global datasets derived from the operational databases of weather services using
data assimilation techniques (40 years of re-analyses) have attempted to
describe the four-dimensional aspects of the general circulation. As the
coverage of in-situ data is far less than in the Northern Hemisphere, the
representation of the statistics of baroclinic waves in the Southern Hemisphere
in those re-analyses differ considerably between products from different weather
services. The PI will study these statistics using the original observations
database that has just become available. The PI will investigate the true
amplitude of the Southern Hemisphere storm track, and the structure and
evolution of synoptic scale perturbations. The work will have implications
beyond the immediate goal of understanding temporally and vertically correlated
features at individual Southern Hemisphere observing sites. The most important
features will be the calibration of re-analyses that are often used to study
large-scale atmospheric variability, and possible implications of the results
for future data assimilation products.