* 0354279
* Dynamics and Chemical - Mechanical Coupling in PEM Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Jay Benziger, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2009
* USD 380,741.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuel cells have been identified by the
US government as an essential element of the hydrogen economy to reduce demand
for fossil fuels and improve the environment. Polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM)
fuel cells operate at low temperatures and are best suited for automotive
applications. PEM fuel cells must have a rapid dynamic response over a broad
range of environmental and load conditions reflecting driving conditions. The
fundamentals of fuel cell dynamics and control addressed in this project are
necessary to make PEM fuel an economically viable technology for automotive
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An "idealized" PEM fuel cell was developed by
the PI to examine fuel cell dynamics. The model fuel cell is a one-dimensional
differential reactor with uniform, independently controllable, well-defined gas
phase compositions at the anode and cathode. The model fuel cell can be thought
of as two stirred tank reactors (STR) coupled by a membrane, hence the name the
STR PEM fuel cell. The one-dimensional structure of the STR PEM fuel cell
greatly simplifies the dynamic response to changes in system parameters, and is
the basic differential element for scaling and modeling the performance of
larger complex fuel cell reactor systems. Preliminary studies with the STR PEM
fuel cell have shown the polymer electrolyte membrane is a reservoir for water,
and the membrane resistance and mechanical properties depends on the water
inventory in the membrane. Changes in the operating parameters of the PEM fuel
cell, such as the external load resistance or the fuel cell temperature, alter
the balance between water production and water removal changing the membrane
water activity in the membrane. Extensive parametric studies of PEM fuel cell
dynamics over a broad range of operating conditions will be pursued. Dynamic
measurements of the chemical and mechanical properties of polymer electrolyte
membranes will complement the fuel cell studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuel
cells are of great interest as one of the most promising technologies for the
commercial development of the "hydrogen economy," which is of high priority for
environmental and political reasons. The research outlined in this project could
advance the efficient and robust operability and control of PEM fuel cells. The
program addresses fundamental issues associated with the dynamics of water
management and changes in operating conditions including variable load. The
dynamics of PEM fuel cells have not been previously addressed. The data and
models developed from the work outlined here will serve as a basis for systems
engineering of PEM fuel cell systems.&lt;br/&gt;