* 0354044
* REU Site: Preparing Resource and Environmental Managers with International Understandings and Merits, or PREMIUM
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Runsheng Yin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 01/31/2007
* USD 290,529.00

This REU Site engages undergraduate students in primary research of natural
resource and environmental management in a unique international setting. Twelve
undergraduates will be selected to participate in an eight-week summer research
program in China. The students will work on an array of important topics, such
as climate change, biodiversity protection, community-based resource management,
and poverty alleviation. As the world's largest developing country with rapid
growth, profound institutional change, and serious environmental problems, China
offers a "living textbook" for the study of economic development and resource
management. By examining China's experiences and lessons, this project will
benefit students in several concrete ways. Among other things, they will acquire
the fundamental methodology and hands-on experience of executing a research
agenda, master the principles and techniques in social and environmental
sciences and apply them to solving real-world problems. REU participants will
gather at Michigan State University for the first week of the Site, spend the
next five weeks in China conducting research, and return to MSU for the final
two weeks to complete papers and presentations. While in China, they will spend
time in Beijing as well as Sichuan, the location of the Wolong Panda
Reserve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award contributes to the Foundation's
continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
active undergraduate research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;