* 0354589
* Regional Model Studies of African Wave Disturbances and Sahel Climate Variability, Part II
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Leonard Druyan, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/2008
* USD 372,000.00

This grant supports research that will produce a new set of climate analyses by
downscaling NCEP reanalyzes to a 0.5 grid over West Africa with the latest
version of the PI's Regional Climate Model (RM). Twenty seasons of the RM
product will be systematically validated and evaluated and differences between
rainy and drought composites will be documented. African Wave Disturbances (AWD)
characteristics, periodicities, amplitudes, frequency of occurrence and
associated precipitation patterns will be analyzed for each simulated summer and
differences between rainy and dry conditions noted. Relevant climate mechanisms,
from planetary to regional scales will be identified to increase our
understanding of how they influence the interannual variability of Sahel
seasonal rainfall. An experiment has been designed to evaluate the improvements
in the spatial definition of climate features achieved by the downscaling
technique. The relative advantages of nudging and periodic reinitialization will
be tested.

The project will provide the first 3-D climatology of the West African summer
climate at such a high horizontal resolution and will offer new insights into
the characteristics of AWDs, and other important synoptic features. The
potential to mitigate the negative social impacts of adverse climate events will
be pursued by validating experimental seasonal hindcasts, made by driving the RM
with GISS GCM seasonal predictions.

Broader Impacts: The PIs are scientist mentor candidates in a New York City
Metropolitan Area Research Initiative (NYCRI) outreach program supported by the
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The project will provide research enrichment
experiences for teams of college and high school students and teachers from
institutions in the Greater New York Region. The NYCRI Summer Research Institute
is scheduled to begin in June 2003. The PIs will help introduce students to
cutting edge research, giving them a hands-on opportunity to experience
professional scientific research. The teachers would formulate learning units,
based on their summer research, which will be implemented in their courses
during the academic year, thereby multiplying the number of students who
eventually benefit from the outreach effort connected with the sponsored
research.