* 0354052
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates:     Integrated Computational and Experimental REU Site at Duquesne University
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Jeffry Madura, Duquesne University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 03/31/2007
* USD 176,397.00

This award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at
Duquesne University for the summers of 2004-2006. The program director is
Jeffrey D. Evanseck assisted by co-PI, Jeffry D. Madura. Ten students will
participate in a ten-week program. Sophomore and junior students, under-
represented and women students will be recruited. Faculty from the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Duquesne University, Carlow College, Chatham
College and Florida Memorial College will serve as mentors. The research program
is designed to integrate computational and experimental research into broad
scientific themes such as nanotechnology, homeland security, advanced
instrumentation, pharmaceuticals, forensic sciences and chemical biology. Each
student will work with an experimental faculty mentor in the laboratory and
consult with a theoretical faculty liaison to integrate a computational
component into their study. Workshop meetings on computational methods and
weekly seminars will be incorporated. An ethics component will conclude with a
regional ethics forum. The students will participate in a regional undergraduate
research symposium. The effectiveness of the program will be assessed by student
participation, student and faculty evaluations and the career progress of the
participants. This award is supported by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program.