* 0355304
* GOALI:  Understanding the Role of Interfacial Structure in Controlling Oil-Resistant Properties of Elastomeric Rubbers
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Ali Dhinojwala, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2007
* USD 109,000.00

Dhinojwala, Ali - University of Akron&lt;br/&gt;Mohsen Yeganeh and Dennis
Peiffer - ExxonMobil Research and Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; "GOALI:
Understanding the Role of Interfacial Structure in Controlling Oil-
Resistant&lt;br/&gt;Properties of Elastomeric Rubbers"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to study the surface interaction of two important
commercial elastomers, EXXPRO and nitrile rubbers, with oil and water. EXXPRO
and nitrile rubbers are based on brominated methylstyrene and polyacrylonitrile
(PAN), respectively. In the U.S. alone, the production of copolymers based on
PAN and EXXPRO is 1 billion lbs./year. The oil-resistance and good
weatherability properties of these substances are inherently dependent on
understanding the interaction of these polymers with hydrophobic and hydrophilic
liquids (oil and water). The PIs propose to study the molecular structure at
polymer/liquid interface using a surface-sensitive infrared-visible sum
frequency generation spectroscopy (SFG). The content of PAN in nitrile rubber
and brominated methylstyrene in EXXPRO will be varied systematically, and the
influence of these polar substitutions on the surface structure will be studied
at air, water, and n-alkane interfaces. Selectively deuterated polymers and
liquids will be used to independently study the orientation of both the polymer
and water (or alkanes) groups at the interface. This information will allow
development of a fundamental understanding of the relationship between the
structures at the interface and their oil-resistant and weatheribility
properties. The research focuses on applying this new surface characterization
technique on industrially important copolymers that contain both hydrophobic and
hydrophilic groups. Hydrophilic and hydrophobic segments are also the main
ingredients of copolymers for biomedical applications, coatings and surface-
active additives. This study will help in understanding these systems as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The surface interaction of polymers
with liquids is important in many industrial and biomedical applications. The
interaction of acrylonitrile in acrylic fibers or gasoline pipelines with water
or oil is important in understanding the mechanism behind these applications.
This work will provide a direct measurement of the structure of both the polymer
molecules and hydrophobic or hydrophilic liquids at the polymer/liquid
interfaces. This information will be important to ExxonMobil and other
industries involved in designing polymers that are often exposed to water or
other fluids. The long- term goal of this research is to aid scientists in
designing engineered copolymers using mettalocene chemistry to produce better
oil and water resistant properties. This study will also provide important
insight into the development of biocompatible (bio-invisible) polymers for
biomaterial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also provide
valuable training to the post-doctoral and graduate students because of their
collaboration in an industrial laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;