* 0355471
* The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) Local Educational Outreach Partnership
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Ivory Toldson, Southern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2010
* USD 2,010,049.00

This collaborative award to the California Institute of Technology and to
Southern University Baton Rouge. It enables the development of a Visitor Center
at the Livingston, LA site of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave
Observatory (LIGO). The Center will contain hands-on exhibits depicting aspects
of physical science underlying the functioning of LIGO, its target sources of
gravitational waves, and the analysis and interpretation of its data. The
exhibits will be provided in collaboration with the Exploratorium of San
Francisco. The Center and its exhibits will then provide the focus for revamped
pre-service and in-service science teacher training at Southern University Baton
Rouge (SUBR). The Louisiana Board of Regents, through existing programs LaSIP
and LA GEARUP, will coordinate transportation of teachers and students to the
Center and to SUBR to maximize the exposure of Center-related activities to
underserved groups. In addition, SUBR physics and education students and
postdocs will be trained to serve as docents at the Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LIGO's goal is the direct detection of gravitational waves
and the initiation of gravitational wave astronomy. LIGO is operated by Caltech
(with subcontract to MIT) through a cooperative agreement with NSF. The LIGO
Scientific Collaboration comprises approximately 450 scientists in over 40
institutions in 8 countries. LIGO is already operating and taking data while
continuing to refine its instrumentation to reach its design sensitivity. The
LIGO instruments work by measuring exquisitely tiny changes in the distances
between the mirrors of the instruments' interferometers caused by the passage of
gravitational waves. LIGO can already measure changes smaller than one one-
hundredth the diameter of the atomic nucleus---within a factor of ten of the
design goal. Gravitational waves are expected to be produced by the universe's
most violent events including the formation and mergers of black holes and
neutron stars, supernovae, and the Big Bang itself. LIGO's science, involving
many of those aspects of physics already known to the general public---Einstein,
black holes, exploding stars, the big bang---has already captured the public's
interest. Leveraging LIGO science and SUBR's science education programs to
motivate teaching and learning of physical science, especially in an underserved
area like Louisana, could provide an important model for the outreach and
educational activities of similar large projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by the Physics Division and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.