* 0355234
* NSF-Europe:  High Velocity Forming of Nano/Submicron Grain Size Austenitic Stainless Steels
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Paulo Ferreira, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 03/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

This NSF-Europe award to University of Texas Austin is to the study poor and
inhomogeneous ductility during forming of stainless steels by investigating the
effect of carbon content, high velocity forming, and providing a laser treatment
that would initiate the formation of a refined austenitic structure from stress-
induced martensite. Effects of alloy composition (specifically Carbon, Nitrogen,
Chromium, and Nickel content), amount of cold working, and annealing history on
the microstructural development of three austenitic stainless steels will be
studied by this collaborative effort with academic and industrial scientists
from Finland (University of Oulu; AvestaPolarit; Stainless Steel Oy; Laserplus
Oy, and Sanmina-SCI). In addition, laser-annealing treatments will be developed
to tailor microstructures for further metallographic forming; and the influence
of high velocity forming on the mechanical properties of laser annealed
stainless steels to achieve higher elongations and lower variations in yield
strength will be studied. The research studies should yield information that
will contribute towards the development of better steels that exhibit better
formability and more uniform microstructures. In-situ Transmission Electron
Microscopy use during the annealing cycle of nano/submicron stainless steels
would provide real time events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will make it
possible to systematically correlate chemical composition, microstructure,
amount of cold-rolling, annealing profile, average grain size, distribution and
texture on the deformation mechanisms operating in nano/submicron stainless
steels during high speed formability. Exchange of graduate students, research
staff and faculty between USA and Finland would enhance knowledge base and
research experiences of these scientists. The planned central facility at the
University of Texas at Austin for Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
experiments will benefit both undergraduate and graduate students, and would
increase exposure to other potential users of TEM.