* 0355356
* Laboratory Analysis of the Oldowan Artifact and Zooarcheological Samples from Kanjera South, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Thomas Plummer, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2006
* USD 86,688.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Thomas Plummer and an
international team of colleagues will conduct laboratory analyses on materials
recovered from the Oldowan site of Kanjera South, Kenya. The team brings
together American, English, Italian and Kenyan specialists in paleontology,
archeology, geology, geochemistry and material science to examine hominin
activities within their paleoecological context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
appearance of Oldowan archeological sites at c. 2.5 million years ago reflects
one of the most important adaptive shifts in human evolution. However, our
understanding of Oldowan hominin behavior continues to be dominated by
interpretations from a small sample of sites, particularly those from Bed I
Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. Excavations in 1996-2001 recovered rich concentrations
of Oldowan artifacts and fossils in c. 2.0 Ma deposits in the Southern Exposures
at Kanjera, Kenya. Approximately 3000 fossils and 4500 artifacts were lifted
with three dimensional coordinates and thousands of additional fossils and
artifacts were collected in spit bags and sieving, providing the first major
Oldowan assemblage with both artifacts and fauna outside of Bed I/lower Bed II
Olduvai. The analysis of these materials provides a significant opportunity to
expand our knowledge of the paleoecology, technology and subsistence behavior of
hominins using Oldowan tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct
laboratory analyses and a related lithic survey to elucidate the paleoecological
context at Kanjera, hominin ranging behavior including the transport of lithic
raw materials, faunal acquisition strategies, including the strong possibility
of small mammal hunting, the relationship between technology and raw material
availability and quality, and artifact function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleoecological information will be derived from isotopic
analysis of tooth enamel and bovid mandibular ecomorphology (to reconstruct
diet), from isotopic analysis of multiple enamel samples taken along the axial
lengths of developing teeth (to reconstruct dry season intensity and frequency),
from taxon-based paleocommunity analyses and from antelope postcranial
ecomorphology (to reconstruct habitat structure). This data will augment the
isotopic analysis of palesol carbonates already completed by the project.
Zooarcheological analysis will assist in reconstructing site formation processes
and elucidate the timing of hominin access to carcasses and the degree of on-
site competition with carnivores. A final lithic survey will allow us to
complete our census of primary and secondary sources of lithic raw material.
Analysis of reference sample and artifact geochemistry as well as lithic thin
sections should allow us to source a substantial proportion of the artifact raw
materials. Material science analysis of lithic raw materials will allow us to
quantify aspects of raw material fracture predictability and edge durability and
in combination with sourcing data illuminate the relationship between
technological attributes and raw material availability and quality. Edgewear
analysis will provide the oldest direct documentation of Oldowan artifact
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In totality, this project will substantially
expand our knowledge of Oldowan hominin behavioral variation and of the adaptive
significance of the first lithic technology. Methodologically, it represents the
broadest array of analytical and theoretical approaches yet applied to an
archeological occurrence of this antiquity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
broadening our knowledge of the first lithic technology, this project will
advance the careers of two American doctoral students and strengthen scientific
ties between researchers in the U.S., England, Italy and three Kenyan
organizations (National Museums of Kenya, Institute of Nuclear Science and the
Ministry of Works).&lt;br/&gt;