* 0355227
* Control Issues in Cancer Therapy
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* S. Bhattacharyya, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2009
* USD 246,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the esea ch outlined in this proposal a e two
fold.First,we intend to explo e the&lt;br/&gt;possibility of applying existing
cont ol theo etic knowledge to advance the cause of cancer
therapy;and&lt;br/&gt;second,we intend to develop fundamental esults in control
theo y to address some of the unique p oblems&lt;br/&gt;that arise in cancer
related esearch.The proposed esearch is motivated by the P.I.'s didactic and
esearch&lt;br/&gt;experiences du ing his two-year stint as a Bioinformatics T
ainee supported by a National Cancer Institute&lt;br/&gt;T aining Grant.In the
course of this training,the P.I.has ealized that the disease Cancer is
caused&lt;br/&gt;by a b eakdown in the control system that egulates the cell
numbe s in a multicellula o ganism&lt;br/&gt;and p events undesirable g owths
such as tumo s from developing.Furthermo e,the P.I.and the co-&lt;br/&gt;P.I.'s
strongly believe that the time-tested cont ol techniques from the engineering
literature could be&lt;br/&gt;ha nessed,and further developed fo obtaining
useful guidelines in cancer therapy.&lt;br/&gt;P omising p elimina y esults
indicating a clea esea ch direction have already been
obtained.Specif-&lt;br/&gt;ically,in collabo ation with ou molecula biologist
colleague,Michael Bittner (fo merly with the Na-&lt;br/&gt;tional Human Genome
Resea ch Institute (NHGRI),cur ently with the T anslational Genomics
Institute&lt;br/&gt;(TGEN)),we developed a f amework for modeling genetic
regulatory networks subject to external in-&lt;br/&gt;terventions and used it to
apply optimal control st ategies to slow down the p ogression of
metastatic&lt;br/&gt;melanoma.The pa ticula modeling f amewo k used was the P
obabilistic Boolean Netwo k (PBN)model&lt;br/&gt;with external controls,which we
showed to be a special case of a Cont olled Markov Chain.This made&lt;br/&gt;it
possible to apply standa d optimal control techniques such as Dynamic P og
amming and enabled us&lt;br/&gt;to carry out this proof of concept
study.&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by this success and our extensive experience in
Control Theory,we have embarked on an&lt;br/&gt;expanded study aimed at modeling
the behaviour of cancer cell lines when they are subjected to
various&lt;br/&gt;doses of ionizing adiation.This study is being carried out in
collaboration with Albert Fornace 's labo-&lt;br/&gt;ato y at the National
Cancer Institute (NCI),which is our prima y data sou ce.Using gene exp
ession&lt;br/&gt;data from these adiation studies,we intend to build PBN models
that we hope will enable us to look fo&lt;br/&gt;ways to increase the capacity
of cells to die upon adiation when they are de .cient in a gene called
p53.&lt;br/&gt;This is a easonable control objective that also makes biological
sense since (i)cells subjected to radiation&lt;br/&gt;undergo DNA damage;(ii)if
the cell with DNA damage is allowed to eplicate,cancer can
esult;and&lt;br/&gt;(iii)one of the functions of the gene p53 is to ensure that
the DNA eplication stage of cell division does&lt;br/&gt;not occu unless the
damaged DNA of the parent cell is .rst epaired.Ou initial assessment of
gene&lt;br/&gt;expression data f om radiation experiments has evealed marked di
.erences between the cell lines with&lt;br/&gt;functional p53 versus those with
de .cient p53.Consequently,the line of esea ch that we a e planning&lt;br/&gt;to
pursue appea s to be a very p omising one.One of the co-P.I.'s of this proposal
was instrumental in&lt;br/&gt;pioneering the application of signal p ocessing
techniques from the engineering literature to the .eld of&lt;br/&gt;genomics
while the other co-P.I.has had a long histo y of o iginal contributions to the
Controls .eld.&lt;br/&gt;Optimism about the success of the proposed research
partially stems from the fact that the P.I.has had&lt;br/&gt;successful esea ch
collabo ations with both the co-P.I.'s in the past.In addition,keeping our
molecula&lt;br/&gt;biologist collabo ato s Michael Bittner and Albert Fo nace
fully involved in the esea ch will go a long&lt;br/&gt;way towards ensuring that
the esults developed emain biologically meaningful.&lt;br/&gt;Any advance that
we make in pursuing cancer therapy,even fo cell lines,is bound to have a
profound&lt;br/&gt;impact on society.Successful intervention studies using cell
lines are the precursors that lead to subsequent&lt;br/&gt;animal studies and
ultimately clinical trials,befo e the pa ticula cancer treatment is approved fo
use&lt;br/&gt;on the general population.Thus,any signi .cant ground that we b
eak in the cou se of this research will&lt;br/&gt;impact cancer treatment not
only fo the present time,but also fo years to come.The bene .t will be
in&lt;br/&gt;terms of human lives that are saved down the oad.&lt;br/&gt;2