* 0355071
* Constrained Power and Performance Optimization for Embedded Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Rajesh Gupta, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2007
* USD 156,831.00

Constrained Power and Performance Optimization for Embedded
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to explore techniques
for power management of&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems with provable bounds on power
efficiency as well as adverse&lt;br/&gt;effects on latency due to power
management. The current state of the art in&lt;br/&gt;system-level power
management is limited to shutting parts of a system after&lt;br/&gt;a certain
period of idle time, thus ignoring the application timing&lt;br/&gt;constraints,
runtime traffic and application usage information. This work&lt;br/&gt;will
develop power-performance control "knobs" that will allow us to
make&lt;br/&gt;effective online decisions. Specific applications will include
power-aware&lt;br/&gt;resource scheduling in RTOS, timing-aware power
optimizations and tradeoffs&lt;br/&gt;between power savings and application
quality of service (e.g., missed&lt;br/&gt;deadlines).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
technical focus is on solving two key problems: (a) latency-
constrained&lt;br/&gt;power optimization, i.e., minimization of system-level
power consumption&lt;br/&gt;with constrains on the effect of system latency due
to power management; and&lt;br/&gt;(b) power-constrained performance
optimization, e.g., system-level task&lt;br/&gt;implementation and scheduling
within a given power budget. As a first step,&lt;br/&gt;we focus on analytic
bounds on the effectiveness of online power management&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and
their efficiency by developing bounds on latency increases&lt;br/&gt;due to
power management. We introduce the notion of a competitive ratio as&lt;br/&gt;a
quantitative measure of how well a given power management
algorithm&lt;br/&gt;performs against an optimum power consumption profile. Next,
we incorporate&lt;br/&gt;these analytic bounds in a broader system-level timing
and power simulation&lt;br/&gt;engine which enables an accurate performance
simulation while minimizing the&lt;br/&gt;details related to actual system
functionality. Our experimental evaluation&lt;br/&gt;is through RTOS
implementation of new power management services through&lt;br/&gt;coordinated
scheduling and resource shutdown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;