* 0355048
* Ultra-Short Electron and Radiation Pulses in Self-Amplified Spontaneous Emission Free Electron Lasers
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2006
* James Rosenzweig, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Morris Pripstein
* 06/30/2006
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal requests support for a university-based Physics Accelerator
Research and Development (R&D) program designed to address several opportunities
in experimental free-electron lasers and high brightness beam physics. These
opportunities have arisen from two sources: (1) the completion and upcoming
commissioning of a magnetic chicane compressor built at UCLA for the Accelerator
Test Facility (ATF) at BNL; and (2) the restart of the Visible to Infrared SASE
Amplifier (VISA) self-amplified spontaneous emission free electron laser (SASE
FEL) at the ATF. The proposed experimental program will allow this collaboration
to investigate the physics of ultra-short electron beam production using chicane
compression, and the generation of sub-picosecond (ps) radiation pulses from the
SASE FEL process. These topics are at the frontier of beam physics today, and
provide a rich context for university-based scholarly research.

The proposed investigations are critical to the current development of 4th
generation X-ray light sources which utilize SASE FELs, such as those at
Stanford and DESY (Hamburg). In addition, they also impact high average power
FELs, energy recovery linac (ERL) based light source systems, high energy
physics linear colliders, and advanced (laser and plasma based) accelerators.

These investigations are of critical importance to the development of the X-ray
SASE FEL as the physical systems under test are shared: high brightness electron
injector, sub-ps compressor, dogleg transport, and highly optimized undulator.
The development of this comprehensive approach to address more sophisticated
issues in high brightness beam-based radiation production will significantly aid
in laying the scientific basis for the X-ray SASE FEL and other cutting edge
accelerator systems.