* 0355273
* C*-Algebras and Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Huaxin Lin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 105,000.00

Abstract Lin

The main goal of this project is to classify nuclear simple C*-algebras by their
K-theoretical data. The principal investigator introduced a notion of tracial
topological rank for C*-algebras. It has been established that this new rank is
quite useful in classification of nuclear simple C*-algebras. The investigator
proposes to classify unital simple nuclear C*-algebras with tracial topological
rank no more than one by their K-theoretical data. These C*-algebras include
most known nuclear simple C*-algebras. The investigator also proposes to
determine tracial topological ranks for many naturally occurred simple
C*-algebras.

The simplest examples of noncommutative C*-algebras are collections of matrices.
In general, C*-algebras could be thought as collections of infinite matrices. In
quantum mechanics physical quantities are represented by operators on a Hilbert
space i.e. by infinite matrices. C*-algebras appeared as an outgrowth of quantum
physics. But C*-algebras also provide the natural framework for generalizing
geometry, topology and measure theory in a fundamental noncommutative way of
wide applicability. Simple C*-algebras can be viewed as the key to understanding
quantum variables. They are the fundamental building blocks of more general
C*-algebras as well as the typical noncommutative C*-algebras. This research
project is to study how to describe these C*-algebras via a few data which is
topological in nature. Immediate applications can be established in the study of
dynamical systems.