* 0355122
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Research on Local-Moment Ferromagnets: Spin-Dependent Electronic States of the Bulk and Surface and Within Ultrathin Films
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Juliet Correa, Correa                  Juliet         S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 10/31/2007
* USD 134,500.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will provide twenty-four months of support for research by Dr. Juliet S.
Correa to work with Dr. Markus Donath at the Westfalische Wilhelms-Universitat
Munster in Germany. Support for this project is from the Math and Physical
Sciences Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activites.

Dr. Correa is researching local-moment ferromagnets, looking specifically at the
spin-dependent electronic states of the bulk and surface and within ultrathin
films. The first of two projects involves researching the spin polarization of
the surface of NiMnSb (Nickel Manganese Antimonide) thin films and bulk single
crystals. The second is determining the sort of magnetism that occurs at the
surface of the rare earth magnet Gadolinium. Experiments are carried out using a
state of the art ultra-high-vacuum system wherein the thin films can be prepared
(by epitaxial growth, sputtering and annealing) and studied in a wide variety of
ways (crystal quality, surface chemistry, occupied/unoccupied states, and STM)
without breaking vacuum. Such constant environmental conditions will likely
yield clear and reliable results, and eliminate some of the confusion that
currently exists in the field of surface-magnetic measurements. Dr. Correa's
first work has involved making angle resolved and spin-polarized occupied states
measurements, a first of their kind on single crystal NiMnSb thin films. Dr.
Donath is a professor at the Westfalische Wilhelms-Universitat Munster and a
recognized international expert in the field of surface magnetism.