* 0355141
* SGER: Experimental Investigation of Stress Rotation Effects in Soils
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Poul Lade, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 68,023.00

Modeling soil behavior during large stress reversals and modeling cross-
anisotropic soil behavior have been done in the past by models formulated in
terms of stress invariants and incorporating combinations of isotropic and
rotational kinematic hardening. This technique seems to capture the soil
behavior observed in triaxial compression and cubical triaxial tests with good
accuracy. However, incorporation of measured behavior during large stress
reversals in torsion shear tests into the kinematic hardening model has proved
to be problematic. In fact, the attempt to include effects of stress rotation in
the rotational kinematic model has illuminated why this type of model does not
capture all aspects of soil behavior, and why the concepts behind the kinematic
hardening models, whether translational or rotational, will not be able to
correctly predict soil behavior under general stress conditions, as required in
a finite element or finite difference setting.

In the experimental investigation, the behavior of granular materials during
pure stress rotation will be studied. This condition will highlight the
shortcomings of existing isotropic and kinematic hardening models. The research
will primarily be performed to (a) demonstrate the shortcoming of existing
constitutive models, (b) evaluate the magnitude of the missing plastic strains
and consequently the severity of the limitations of the constitutive models, (c)
initiate data collection that will indicate the direction of new modeling
efforts required to capture the missing capability of predicting effects of
stress rotation correctly, and (d) formulate a plan for a more extensive
experimental program on the basis of the findings from the exploratory
experiments proposed here.

Experimental results from torsion shear tests with stress rotation will
demonstrate and highlight the extent of the limitations of currently existing
isotropic, as well as kinematic hardening constitutive models. These limitations
consist of their failure to predict soil behavior correctly in most situations
that occur in realistic boundary value problems, and for which they purportedly
were developed.

This work will have the broader impact that renewed efforts will be forthcoming
to update or reformulate constitutive models that will be able to include the
effects of stress rotation. The proposed research will therefore have major
impact on the future of constitutive modeling and it will impact the FEM and the
FDM calculations of boundary value problems involving engineering materials.