* 0355255
* Smart Antenna Analysis, Design, and Beamforming Using Curvilinear Array Configurations
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Constantine Balanis, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 04/30/2008
* USD 210,000.00

0355255&lt;br/&gt;Balanis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to investigate the
use of adaptive array antennas (i.e., smart antennas) to improve channel
capacity and range in government and commercial wireless communication networks.
This is accomplished by introducing an additional degree of freedom that of
spatial diversity such as in SDMA, where multiple beams are formed in the same
system, using antenna array theory, and direction of arrival and adaptive
beamforming algorithms. &lt;br/&gt; While in the past rectilinear geometries of
antenna array have been examined for integration in smart antenna systems,
innovative designs of antenna arrays using curvilinear configurations, such as
circular arrays, planar circular arrays and spherical arrays, will be
investigated. These types of array configurations will allow, compared to
rectilinear and planar geometries, wider field-of-view, as is usually required
for wireless cellular and surveillance systems. In addition, curvilinear array
designs offer a greater ability to compensate for mutual coupling effects by
subdividing the array excitation into a series of symmetrical spatial
components, and give the curvilinear geometries powerful advantages over those
of rectilinear shapes.&lt;br/&gt; From a networking point of view, smart
antennas may improve the performance of current channel access techniques for
wireless communication networks, whose node configurations may be continuously
changing in an ad-hoc manner, and may allow for the development of new
protocols. By employing an appropriate array of antennas, it may be possible to
develop protocols to control the multiple access interference in the spatial
dimension, as opposed to time or frequency. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits.
Smart antenna designs for wireless communication is a fairly new, exciting and
revolutionary technology that has added extra dimensions and versatility in the
improvement of capacity and range of communication systems. This is a very
important and exciting new technology that will revolutionize, advance and
expand wireless communication. The proposed research will introduce unique,
creative and original antenna designs that will be used, in conjunction with
adaptive beamforming algorithms, to synthesize antenna patterns with desired
characteristics for smart antenna technology. The PI has already participated in
research of smart antenna technology, and he, along with some of his colleagues,
has published a number of refereed paper in archival journals. In addition, the
PI has incorporated smart antenna technology in the curriculum of electrical
engineering at Arizona State University and in short courses of antennas that he
is teaching and training students, academics, and engineers and scientists from
industry and government. In addition, the PI has written a new chapter on Smart
Antennas that will be included in the third edition of his preeminent book on
Antenna Theory that has national and international audience and adoption as a
textbook and reference book. The PI is also presently serving as a Distinguished
Lecturer of the IEEE Antennas Propagation Society and will be invited to visit
and make presentations to national and international IEEE chapters. One of the
topics of the PI's presentation is on Smart Antenna Technology. The results of
this research project will also be incorporated in all of the
above.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. There is already an intense interest in smart
antenna technology for wireless communication. Although the smart antenna
technology is basically in its infancy stages, it has not yet been integrated in
many commercial systems. There have been few that were developed and deployed,
i.e., by Metawave, Array Comm and Ascom AR&amp;T. These communication systems,
that integrated smart antenna technology, have introduced network system
capacity gains from 50% to 94%. These are major improvements in network system
efficiency. It is therefore essential that research in the advancement of this
technology not only be continued but be accelerated. &lt;br/&gt;The development
of unique smart antenna technology at academic institutions will also provide a
linkage and technology transfer between academic research and industry. It will
also educate and train future communication engineers who will be responsible
for the development of third and future generation of advanced and higher
capacity wireless communication systems which is very important in the continual
advancement of the country's international
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;