* 0355180
* Applications of Dynamical Systems to Statistical Physics, Geometry, and Population Biology/Demography
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Howard Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 10/31/2006
* USD 119,481.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Weiss&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to study several
applications of dynamical systems to&lt;br/&gt;statistical physics, geometry,
and population biology/ecology. (i) The pressure and free energy are the two
fundamental objects of study in the statistical physics of lattice spin systems.
However, even for the simplest lattice spin systems, the information about the
microscopic potential that the free energy captures is subtle and poorly
understood. The PI has started a program to study whether, or to what extent,
natural classes of Holder continuous potentials for certain one-dimensional
lattice spin systems are determined by their free energy. We also plan to
investigate striking similarities between the rigidity of free energy and
fascinating rigidity problems in spectral geometry and number theory. (ii)
Little is known about the&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of the geodesic flow on positively
curved manifolds. The PI&lt;br/&gt;plans to continue studying the relations
between positive curvature and&lt;br/&gt;complicated dynamics of the geodesic
flow. (iii) The PI has started a&lt;br/&gt;program to systematically study the
global dynamics and bifurcations for&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear Leslie models where the
fertility rates and survival&lt;br/&gt;probabilities have various natural
functional forms as functions of the&lt;br/&gt;population
size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) The pressure and free energy are the two
fundamental objects of study in the statistical physics of lattice spin systems.
Lattice spin systems provide an important and illuminating family of models in
statistical physics, condensed matter physics, and chemistry. For instance,
phase transitions correspond to non-differentiability for some derivative of
free energy. However, even for the simplest lattice spin systems, the
information about the microscopic potential that the free energy captures is
subtle and poorly understood. The PI has started a program to study whether, or
to what extent, potentials for&lt;br/&gt;one-dimensional lattice systems are
determined by their free energy. We&lt;br/&gt;hope this work will provide new
insights into this important, yet&lt;br/&gt;mysterious, quantity. (ii)
Essentially all demographic and animal&lt;br/&gt;population models in current
use are based on the linear Leslie model. &lt;br/&gt;Many population biologists,
ecologists, and demographers are now looking&lt;br/&gt;to nonlinear population
models for more accurate population forecasting. &lt;br/&gt;The PI has started a
program to systematically study the global dynamics&lt;br/&gt;and bifurcations
for nonlinear Leslie models where the fertility rates and&lt;br/&gt;survival
probabilities have various natural functional forms as functions&lt;br/&gt;of
the population size. One of our ultimate goals is to create
a&lt;br/&gt;``population modeling toolbox'' which could be used by a wide range
of&lt;br/&gt;population modelers to more accurately predict animal
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;