* 0355007
* Relativistic Heavy Ion Collision Studies at RHIC and the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Thomas Humanic, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,330,000.00

This is a three-year program funded by the NSF primarily to carry out
experiments with relativistic heavy ion-collisions, i.e. head-on collisions of
heavy nuclei such as gold near the speed of light. The principal investigators
are T. J. Humanic and M. A. Lisa of the Department of Physics at The Ohio State
University. The main goal of these experiments is to obtain evidence that
collisions of this type produce a phase transition from normal nuclear matter
into a new phase of matter made up of a large volume of free quarks and gluons
(the constituents of protons and neutrons) called Quark Matter. This phase
transition has been predicted by quantum chromodynamics (QCD), which is the
theory that describes the behaviour of quarks and gluons in nature. Thus far,
there have been no disagreements between the predictions of QCD and experiment,
so finding Quark Matter would be a major test of this theory. Quark matter is of
additional interest since it is thought to have been the state of the universe
several microseconds after the Big Bang and may exist today in nature at the
centers of neutron stars. Relativistic heavy ion collisions could provide a
method to produce Quark Matter in the laboratory since it is necessary to create
a very dense and hot region within nuclear matter in order for the initiation of
this phase transition. In addition, because heavy ions are relatively large
compared with the size of a proton the collision is extended in time, hopefully
allowing the system enough time to reach equilibrium so that the Quark Matter
state is well developed. Thus, to study this phenomenon one prefers heavy ion
collisions at the highest possible energies and with the heaviest ions
available. In the present proposal heavy ion collisions will be studied with
gold on gold collisions at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) and lead on lead collisions at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva. RHIC, which started delivering beams in
Summer 2000, is the highest energy heavy ion accelerator now in operation. In
order to look for signatures that a phase transition to Quark Matter has taken
place, one must study the properties of the particles produced in the
collisions, such as particle momenta and multiplicities of each type that can be
detected (e.g. pions, kaons, protons, and more exotic particles). This will be
done at RHIC using the large acceptance detectors of the STAR experiment, which
can sample most of the interesting particles per collision. The information
obtained in this way can be used to determine, for example, the physical size of
the interaction region (using two-particle interferometry), the temperatures
reached in the collisions (from particle momentum distributions) and exotic
particle production such as strange baryons. In addition, preparations will be
made to study Pb+Pb collisions at even higher energies at the LHC with the ALICE
experiment. The LHC will provide beams 30 times higher in center-of-mass energy
than RHIC, i.e. cosmic ray energies, starting in 2007. Thus, the energy
dependence of Quark Matter production can be studies and the search for as yet
unpredicted phenomena can also be pursued.

Besides the intellectual merit described above, there are broader impacts to
society of this proposal in the areas of education, technology and computing.
Since undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
will play key roles in this project, training will be provided to these groups
in how to carry out research in large collaborations and in general problem
solving skills. Participation in particle detector development and testing will
enhance new technologies which can be adapted to both commercial and government
use. Since this research requires large-scale computing in order to acquire and
analyze data on the teraflop an terabyte scale, new methods in information
science, such as computing grid systems, will be developed which can enhance the
computing power of society as a whole.

