* 0300488
* A Novel Laser Micro-machining Technique using Synthesized Femtosecond Pulse Bursts
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Andrew Weiner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2007
* USD 356,075.00

The objective of this research is to investigate novel femtosecond laser
machining techniques for manufacturing a variety of microstructures and
components. The approach is to optimize all laser operation parameters; in
particular, the temporal shape of laser pulses by synthesizing femtosecond pulse
bursts (1 femtosecond = 1/1,000,000,000,000,000 second), which are not available
in commercial laser machining systems. In these femtosecond pulse bursts, the
energy of each laser pulse will be individually controlled, and the pulse-to-
pulse separation time will be adjusted from femtoseconds to nanoseconds. This
will allow high quality microstructures to be machined in almost any materials.
Fundamental physical phenomena during femtosecond laser-matter interaction will
be investigated to assist the design of the pulse bursts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work, if successful, will greatly advance the laser
machining technology. Despite many advantages of using femtosecond pulse lasers
for micro-machining, clean and desirable structures are often not obtained due
to melt ejection by laser irradiation and re-deposition of melt droplets. This
work is aimed at solving common problems associated with laser micro-machining
to achieve cleaner and higher precision machining results. The success of this
work will impact many industries, including aerospace, automobile,
microelectronics, and biotechnology where laser micro-machining is already
widely used. The project will also contribute to education of the next
generation high tech workforce. It will provide the students involved with
cross-disciplinary trainings. The results of this research will be integrated
into undergraduate and graduate curricula and disseminated to both academic and
industrial laser processing communities.