* 0300345
* Experimental Tests of Non-Classical (Squeezed) Light in Advanced Gravitational-wave Interferometers
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Stanley Whitcomb, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 07/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

Gravitational-wave interferometers measure optical signals generated by motion
of the interferometer mirrors due to a passing gravitational wave (GW). Since
the GW-induced motion is extremely small, quantum mechanical noise on the laser
light can pose a serious limitation to the detector sensitivity. This quantum
noise arises from two effects: (ii) uncertainty in the number of photons at the
interferometer output due to quantum mechanical fluctuations (known as shot
noise); and (ii) light pressure which exerts forces that move the mirrors of the
interferometer (known as radiation pressure noise or back action noise). The
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle sets a minimum for the product of the shot
noise and back action noise, but it also allows the minimum shot noise to be
lowered below the standard level, provided the back action noise is increased,
or vice versa. This process is sometimes called "squeezing" because the noise
from one process is "squeezed" into the other. For example, previous experiments
have shown how laser light can be squeezed by making its amplitude fluctuations
small, but giving greater uncertainty in its phase.

Experiments will be carried out to generate and study squeezed states of light
that are suitable for injection into a gravitational-wave interferometer. The
effort will concentrate on the aspects of squeezed light most important for
improving the sensitivity of future GW interferometers: vacuum squeezing at much
lower frequencies than have previously been explored. Previous experiments with
squeezed light have all been confined to frequencies above 200 kHz; the goal
with this experiment is to yield up to 6 dB of vacuum squeezing at 10 kHz. In
addition to improved sensitivity for gravitational wave detectors, the long-term
technical advances necessary to achieve this goal will have applications in
quantum optics, quantum information, (sub-)nanoscale mechanical systems and
precision measurement.