* 0300599
* Dynamic Resource Allocation in Stochastic Processing Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Jiangang Dai, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 10/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Complex systems like semiconductor wafer fabrication facilities (fabs), networks
of data switches, and large scale call centers all demand efficient resource
allocation. Deterministic models like linear programs (LP) have been used for
capacity planning at both the design and expansion stages of such a system. LP-
based planning is critical in setting a medium range or long term goal for many
systems. But it does not translate into a day-to-day operational policy that
must deal with discreteness of jobs and the randomness of the processing
environment. This research project will investigate a general class of
stochastic processing networks. A processing network is a system that takes
inputs of materials of various kinds and uses various processing resources to
produce outputs of materials of various kinds. These processing networks provide
high-fidelity stochastic models in diverse economic sectors including
manufacturing, service and information technology. The key goal of this research
is to devise dynamic, operational policies that can achieve long term objectives
for networks. These objectives include (i) achieving maximum throughput
predicted by LPs, and furthermore, (ii) minimizing work-in-process or delays in
networks. The research team will make fundamental understanding of these
stochastic processing networks by building mathematical frameworks at all three
time and space scales. More importantly, the team will use the frameworks to (i)
devise operational policies that require minimal state information; (ii) prove
that these policies are throughput optimal; (iii) identify and prove that
policies are asymptotically optimal in terms of some second order performance
measures when the system has a unique pooled bottleneck station; (iv) adapt the
theoretically proven policies so that they can be readily implemented in a
number of application areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project attempts to solve
dynamic resource allocation problems that are challenging in different economic
sectors including manufacturing, service and information technology. The results
discovered from this research can directly be applied to wafer fab scheduling,
input-queued data switch design and control, Internet Border Gateway routing,
congestion based road traffic pricing/control, and call center scheduling. These
applications intersect with many disciplines including electrical engineering,
computer science, civil engineering, industrial engineering, and management. The
Ph.D. students who conduct research on the project will have excellent
interdisciplinary training. These interdisciplinary skills are essential for
future academic leaders. Building on proven track record, the PI will turn
cutting edge research results into course materials to be used for both graduate
and undergraduate students at Georgia Tech and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;