* 0300415
* Fabrication of Open-cell Biodegradable Polymer Foams using Ultrasonic Implosion for Tissue Engineering Scaffolds
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Vipin Kumar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,997.00

This research proposes to exploit a special physical phenomenon, ultrasonic
cavitation and implosion, to fabricate open cell biodegradable polymer foams
with controlled size and structure for tissue engineering scaffolds. Existing
scaffold fabrication methods involve the use of either organic solvents or a
leaching step, both of which are undesirable for tissue engineering
applications. Conventional gas foaming techniques have limitations in creating
open cell polymer foams. The study explores gas-polymer-ultrasound interactions,
gas solubility and diffusivity, ultrasonic cavitation and implosion, bubble
dynamics and disruption, The research will first explore the effects of foaming
temperature and time on the structures of closed cell PLGA (poly(DL-lactic-co-
glycolic acid)) foams. Then, the cell rupture behavior under ultrasonic energy
will be studied for different frequencies and amplitudes. The created open cell
structures will be characterized in terms of their morphology, density,
porosity, and mechanical properties. Using CO2 as a blowing agent and the
ultrasonic vibration to create open cell structures, the proposed process is
biocompatible, environmentally benign, and easy to scale up. The new processing
technology will result in not only a family of novel biomaterials that will find
wide applications in tissue engineering, but also other open-cell polymeric
materials that can be used in many applications such as micro filtration.
Collaboration with medical researchers from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center (U. Washington) and the Integra Lifesciences Corporation, which
specializes in medical devices, implants, and biomaterials should lead to a
faster technology transfer and an education interdisciplinary experience for the
students involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address the
feasibility of a solvent and leach free open-cell polymer foaming process that
represents a quantum leap forward from the capability of the current technology.
It could change the way the tissue engineering community processes synthetic
degradables into scaffolds and revolutionize the field of ex vivo expanded cell
therapy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;