* 0300086
* Non-Contacting Sampled - Line Reflectometers for In-Situ Measurement of Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Circuit Modules
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Robert Weikle, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 04/30/2007
* USD 203,100.00

0300086&lt;br/&gt;Weikle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to investigate and develop a new approach for the non-invasive measurement and
characterization of integrated microwave and millimeter-wave circuit modules.
This work, in particular, aims to address present-day difficulties and
challenges associated with measuring and characterizing high-frequency
subsystems that are integrated with other components on a single circuit board
or chip. The ultimate goal of this program is the development of a non-
contacting network analyzer for the direct, in-situ measurement of scattering
parameters of integrated or on-chip microwave and millimeter-wave
subsystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities to be undertaken during
this project will include the refinement and application of device and IC
processing technologies to the development of fully-integrated network analyzer
sampling circuits, the establishment of calibration standards and procedures for
non-contacting measurement schemes, and the investigation, design, and
demonstration of non-contacting reflectometers for s-parameter measurements.
These activities will directly address and impact the merit review criteria set
forth by the National Science Foundation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)The
intellectual merit of this project lies in its potential to significantly
expand&lt;br/&gt;and improve the measurement and diagnostic capabilities
currently employed&lt;br/&gt;for high-frequency integrated circuits. This will
not only benefit the microwave&lt;br/&gt;measurements community but will
significantly impact all fields that rely on&lt;br/&gt;millimeter and
submillimeter-wave instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2)The broad impact of
this proposed work will be felt by researchers working on&lt;br/&gt;high-
frequency integrated systems as well as students, researchers, and
faculty&lt;br/&gt;at the University of Virginia and other institutions. The
instrumentation de-&lt;br/&gt;veloped through this program will enhance and
complement the capabilities of&lt;br/&gt;the PI's research and teaching
laboratories while the close involvement and partici-&lt;br/&gt;pation of
graduate and undergraduate students will be crucial to supporting
the&lt;br/&gt;educational mission of the university and provide an avenue for
incorporating&lt;br/&gt;this work into the existing curriculum. In addition,
through current collabora-&lt;br/&gt;tive work with other institutions, the
technical achievements developed from this&lt;br/&gt;program will be shared and
disseminated directly to the communities that rely&lt;br/&gt;on millimeter and
submillimeter-wave systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will culminate with
the demonstration of a fully-integrated non-contacting&lt;br/&gt;s-parameter
measurement system operating in the millimeter-wave range and scalable to
frequencies reaching into the submillimeter spectrum&lt;br/&gt;