* 0300784
* Heights, Capacity, and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Matthew Baker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2006
* USD 189,000.00

DMS-0300784&lt;br/&gt;Rumely, Robert
S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Heights,
Capacity, and Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Principal
Investigators study various aspects of&lt;br/&gt;analysis on p-adic spaces,
especially those arising in connection with&lt;br/&gt;canonical heights,
capacity theory, and algebraic dynamical systems. &lt;br/&gt;The project
involves the development of both theory and applications, &lt;br/&gt;and
comprises three main topics: adelic equidistribution theorems for
points&lt;br/&gt;of small height; arithmetic aspects of the dynamics of iterated
rational&lt;br/&gt;functions; and analysis on Berkovich spaces with applications
to dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems, arithmetic intersection theory, and higher-
dimensional capacity&lt;br/&gt;theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for
this work is to understand and generalize certain&lt;br/&gt;recently discovered
properties of "height functions". Height functions&lt;br/&gt;first arose in
connection with elliptic curves, and are ubiquitous in&lt;br/&gt;modern number
theory. One of the goals of the project is to establish&lt;br/&gt;properties of
heights for arbitrary curves and arbitrary dynamical systems&lt;br/&gt;which are
similar to those for elliptic curves. This will be approached by&lt;br/&gt;using
methods from potential theory. Another goal is to establish&lt;br/&gt;"p-adic"
analogues of results which are known to hold in the theory
of&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. When completed, the project will reveal new
connections&lt;br/&gt;between number theory, dynamical systems, and potential
theory. Funding&lt;br/&gt;for this project will support the infrastructure of
the University of&lt;br/&gt;Georgia's number theory group, which has
historically been very strong. &lt;br/&gt;The project will impact both the
graduate and undergraduate programs at&lt;br/&gt;UGA: some of the questions
raised by this research will lead to PhD&lt;br/&gt;dissertation topics for
graduate students, and others will provide an&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to involve
undergraduate students in cutting edge mathematical&lt;br/&gt;research.
&lt;br/&gt;