* 0300081
* Harmonic Analysis with Applications to Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Wilhelm Schlag, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 03/31/2006
* USD 238,761.00

PI: Wilhelm Schlag, California Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0300081&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;---------------------------------------------------
-&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;---------------------------------------------
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal deals with several problems on the interface between
mathematical physics and harmonic analysis. The author intends to pursue his
work on Schroedinger equations with both deterministic and random potentials.
Some questions remain on discrete Schroedinger operators on the line with quasi-
periodic potentials, whereas the case of potentials given by non-independent but
more strongly mixing dynamics than quasi-periodic presents many serious
challenges and more needs to be done in this area. For time-dependent equations
questions remain concerning dispersive estimates, both for time-dependent and
time-independent potentials. For the latter, it is unknown whether or not the
usual dispersive estimate holds for potentials that decay faster than an inverse
square power, at least for dimensions two and larger. The author recently
established this in one dimension, but in two dimensions dispersive
estimates&lt;br/&gt;under the assumption of strong polynomial decay are unknown.
He believes, however, that dispersive estimates in the two-dimensional case
under the assumption of sufficiently fast decaying potentials is an accessible
problem. The main interest in linear estimates lies with nonlinear applications.
One example is given by the proof of asymptotic stability of weakly interacting
multi-soliton solutions, which was recently established by Rodnianski, Soffer,
and the author. It relied heavily on dispersive estimates for charge transfer
models. Much remains to be done in this area, both in terms of nonlinear
Schroedinger equations in general (global solutions for the critical defocusing
three-dimensional equation), as well as questions concerning the dynamics of
nonlinear bound states (solitons). In addition, the author intends to work on
problems in harmonic analysis or applications thereof to problems outside of
mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the success of science and
engineering lies with its effective use of mathematical tools, both in terms of
modeling and numerical studies on computers. Mathematicians play an important
role in developing those methods and making them available to scientist and
engineers. This proposal aims at addressing mathematical problems that for the
most part originate in mathematical physics. The aforementioned nonlinear
Schroedinger equations arise in various&lt;br/&gt;applications, e.g., optics. A
bound state (soliton) for such a nonlinear equation represents a particle or
beam that travels without disintegrating. An important issue is to understand
the stability or instability of such an object. I.e., do they persist under
small perturbations or not?&lt;br/&gt;Clearly, any commercial application of a
soliton in optical media will require stability of the soliton. It turns out
that the theoretical understanding of these issues is very difficult, often
requiring new insights into mathematical problems. This proposal aims at
addressing such problems.&lt;br/&gt;