* 0300065
* Lattice Field Theory and Hadronic Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* H. Rudolf Fiebig, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2007
* USD 275,306.00

Considerable theoretical progress combined with enormous advances in
computer&lt;br/&gt;technology has made lattice .eld theory a powerful tool in
the study of&lt;br/&gt;nuclear and sub-nuclear structure. The proposed activity
has the following intellectual&lt;br/&gt;merits: i) proposal of new ideas and
exploration of new theoretical&lt;br/&gt;approaches to compute interesting novel
physical quantities; ii) use of existing&lt;br/&gt;techniques along with state-
of-the-art computers to obtain results of
experimental&lt;br/&gt;interest.&lt;br/&gt;Calculations in lattice QCD are often
performed in the quenched approximation.&lt;br/&gt;Quenching e.ects will be
studied in detail using lattice fermions that&lt;br/&gt;have exact chiral
symmetry. Calculations beyond the quenched approximation&lt;br/&gt;are
computationally intensive and planar QCD will be studied to see if it is
a&lt;br/&gt;physically viable alternative.&lt;br/&gt;Exotic hybrid mesons
contain valence gluons and can only be studied properly&lt;br/&gt;in the
framework of QCD. Experiments scheduled in Hall D at JLab plan&lt;br/&gt;to look
for such exotic hybrid mesons. Computations of their decay widths
will&lt;br/&gt;be performed to provide some guidance for the experimental
searches of these&lt;br/&gt;exotic hybrids.&lt;br/&gt;Lattice QCD will be used
to study nuclear forces present in a two hadron&lt;br/&gt;system. It will also
be used to study the electric and magnetic polarizabilities
of&lt;br/&gt;hadrons. These computations are technically involved and results
would considerably&lt;br/&gt;increase our understanding of nuclear interactions
from .rst principles.&lt;br/&gt;Chiral symmetry in QCD is spontaneously broken
at low temperatures but&lt;br/&gt;it is expected to get restored at high
temperatures. QCD at high temperatures&lt;br/&gt;is described by a quark-gluon
plasma. The physics around the chiral phase&lt;br/&gt;transition will be
investigated using lattice QCD with chiral fermions. The role&lt;br/&gt;of
instantons at .nite temperature will be carefully studied.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will greatly bene.t from the participation of a
fulltime&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student. The graduate
student working&lt;br/&gt;in close association with the PIs and the postdoctoral
fellow will become familiar&lt;br/&gt;with the research done at the forefront of
nuclear theory and also get a good&lt;br/&gt;training in the use of state-of-
the-art parallel computing resources. As part of&lt;br/&gt;the outreach program,
a senior physics student will be employed to set up a&lt;br/&gt;website
describing the projects at a level that is accessible to high school
students,&lt;br/&gt;teachers and the local community at large. By focusing on
high pro.le&lt;br/&gt;topics currently of great interest at national
laboratories, the proposal hopes to&lt;br/&gt;assist in the e.orts of the local
university to attract new students from underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;groups.