* 0300457
* Modeling of Size-Effect in Micro-Cutting Process Using Strain Gradient Plasticity
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Shreyes Melkote, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2007
* USD 237,964.00

The primary purpose of this research grant is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the mechanics of micro-cutting processes with a focus on the
size-effect phenomenon. A secondary objective of the grant is to develop an
understanding of chip formation and surface integrity in micro-cutting of
important engineering materials such as ferrous and titanium alloys. The
research approach for achieving these objectives involves the following tasks:
1) Development of analytical models based on strain gradient plasticity for the
size-effect arising from the primary, secondary and tertiary deformation zones
in orthogonal micro-cutting, 2) Verification of the size-effect models through
orthogonal micro-cutting experiments on ferrous or titanium alloys, and 3)
Experimental study of the effects of cutting conditions on chip formation and
surface integrity in orthogonal micro-cutting process for ferrous or titanium
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this project include
advancement of fundamental understanding of chip formation, mechanics, and
surface integrity in micro-cutting processes. This understanding will in turn
benefit micro-cutting tool design, micro-lathe/mill design, and micro-cutting
process optimization. Broader impact of the research will be realized through
development of international partnerships with researchers at the National
university of Singapore, international educational experience for the graduate
students working on the project, and through the participation of middle/high
school science and math teachers in some aspect of the project.