* 0300273
* Multi-scale Microstructure Prediction in Thermo-mechanical Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Sven Esche, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 04/30/2009
* USD 257,884.00

This research project aims at (i) establishing a systematic methodology for
predicting the microstructure evolution during thermo-mechanical processing in
metals by modeling at multiple length scales, (ii) developing and implementing
the method in the form of efficient numerical algorithms, and (iii) applying the
algorithms to study the fundamental microstructural phenomena of grain growth
and recrystallization. This approach is superior to the empirical modeling
techniques prevalent in current industrial practice.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
multi-scale methodology will be implemented into a simulation system
that&lt;br/&gt;consists of continuum-based coupled thermo-mechanical models, a
multi-scale modeling&lt;br/&gt;interface and mesoscopic microstructural models.
The simulation input includes the processing conditions, macroscopic and
mesoscopic material properties and initial microstructure features. The final
output of the simulation sequence is the resulting
microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed three-year project will
comprise three major phases:&lt;br/&gt;Phase I, involves (i) the development of
a model for computing the stored energy as a function of strain and stress, (ii)
the development of two- and three-dimensional Monte Carlo (MC) models for
simulating static recrystallization and normal grain growth, and (iii) the
application of these models to study the fundamental physics of various
microstructural phenomena. In Phase II of this project, the length and time
scale conversions between the physical and MC domains will be performed by
conducting grain growth experiments with a pure material. In Phase III, cold
upsetting and subsequent annealing tests of a pure material will be carried out.
The grain sizes measured in these experiments will be used to validate the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;methodology of microstructure prediction through multi-scale
modeling. Through the development, implementation and validation of a multi-
scale approach for modeling microstructure phenomena in metals, this project
will advance the state of the art in microstructure prediction in an
industrially relevant way. An industry collaborator (McWilliams Forge Co.) will
participate in the project. Furthermore, both undergraduate and graduate
students at Stevens Institute of Technology (SIT) will be involved in the
research, with an strong effort made towards including female and
underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;