* 0300557
* Pushing Dielectrophoresis to the Single Molecule Limit for Applications in Molecular Electronics, Electronically Assisted Chemical Self-Assembly, Nano-manufacturing,  Nano-biotech
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* James Brody, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2006
* USD 209,998.00

The objectives of this proposal are two-fold: First, to investigate the
electrical polarizability of macromolecules of DNA and proteins at frequencies
from D.C. to 100 MHz and second, to investigate whether di-electrophoretic
forces based on local non-uniform electric fields generated by micro- and nano-
fabricated electrodes can be used to manipulate individual bio-molecules on a
chip. This will be an extension of similar electronic manipulations of living
cells to nanometer scale "objects". An important and as yet unexplored research
challenge will be to investigate the following questions: Are the di-
electrophoretic forces sufficiently strong to overcome thermally induced motion
of the DNA and protein molecules in solution? What is the spatial resolution of
the ability to control the positions of macromolecules through the use of these
"electronic tweezers", and what physical processes set that limit?&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to lithographically define arbitrary electrode geometries and apply an
arbitrary sequence of voltages to the different electrodes can ultimately be
exploited to manipulate individual macromolecules of biological significance,
control chemical reactions one molecule at a time in solution, and construct new
materials and electronic circuits one molecule at a time with custom designed
electronic, optical, magnetic, and mechanical properties, including but not
limited to large scale integrated molecular electronics
("LIME").&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are multi-fold: First, to
enhance the nation's health and health care system-using nano-biotechnology. The
integration of nanoscale electronic and mechanical devices such as carbon
nanotubes chemically functionalized with specificity for biologically and
chemically interesting measurements on single molecules such as DNA, proteins,
and viruses could have applications such as genetic sequencing and gene chips,
proteomics and protein folding science, nano-medicine for site-specific and
organ-specific drug delivery within a patient, lab-on-a-chip devices for fast
candidate drug screening, biological and chemical hazard detection for counter
terrorism, as well as low-cost deployment of point-of-care medical service and
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the area of education, the impact will be
to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups at the high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate level through integrated, interdisciplinary research
and training programs in micro and nanofabrication as well as modern DNA
chemistry. Furthermore, the broader impact will be to establish long-term
relationships between high-school students, teachers, and administrators with
educationally disadvantaged students from neighborhoods with predominantly
ethnic-minority student populations and University of California scientists and
engineers from the undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, and faculty
levels.&lt;br/&gt;