* 0300549
* GOALI:  Development of Comprehensive Drilling Simulation Tool
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* David Dornfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 399,998.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) research project is to develop a more fundamental understanding of drill
performance, behavior of cutting tools and materials on burr and chip formation,
and hole surface finish quality and diameter. This understanding will be used to
develop manufacturing engineering tools for designing and implementing efficient
drilling processes in precision components, such as aerospace and automotive
parts. The approach used will rely on joint collaboration between the University
of California at Berkeley and Boeing. A detailed study of the process variables
will be made and analytical tools (finite element, primarily) developed to aid
engineers in designing optimal drill methods for application in the precision
manufacturing. Specific elements of this study are: 1) develop a finite element
model of single layer drilling, 2) evaluate and model drill bit-geometry and
materials, 3) develop a finite element model and simulation analysis of multi-
layered drilling, and 4) development of an experimental database on burrs/chips
formation in drilling.

If successful, this research will result in a methodology for process modeling
and optimization of hole quality and an associated database of verification that
will be the basis for engineers from design to process planning to factory floor
trouble-shooting for effective drilling method optimization. The benefits will
include: 1) streamline and standardize drilling methods for similar application,
2) standardize drill hardware and significant inventory reduction, 3) reduce
cycle time (60 - 80%) from process design to production transition, and 4)
create opportunity for existing and new process improvement. This will result in
better yield, higher quality and reduced costs. Student participation at
Berkeley will result in an excellent training experience and preparation for
industry careers or additional study.