* 0300256
* Innovative Technique for Micro and Nano Materials Testing and International Collaboration
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Fu-Pen Chiang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 59,881.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop collaborative research in the
testing of MEMS&lt;br/&gt;materials with the colleagues in South Africa at
University of Witwatersrand (Wits) and&lt;br/&gt;University of Cape Town. The
focus of this research is on working jointly in the design
and&lt;br/&gt;manufacture of a testing jig which features the integration of a
load cell, high resolution&lt;br/&gt;displacement device, mounting and loading
of test specimen, and data acquisition with analysis.&lt;br/&gt;The completion
of the proposed collaborative research will result in the design and fabrication
of&lt;br/&gt;the jig for conducting collaborative research at both the US and
South Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential technical application of this
project is the jig for material testing for MEMS&lt;br/&gt;materials. In broader
impact, the teaching and research collaboration with the colleagues
in&lt;br/&gt;South Africa will enable us to work together and to utilize
expertise and resources on both sides&lt;br/&gt;to use this jig setup as the
basis for further research expansion in MEMS material testing.
The&lt;br/&gt;colleagues in South Africa can also use this testing jig to
investigate the fracture properties of&lt;br/&gt;MEMS test specimen (their
expertise). Such research collaboration will benefit us, and also
will&lt;br/&gt;benefit research program of our colleagues in South Africa. More
importantly, this will lead to&lt;br/&gt;the introduction of MEMS technology to
the universities and industries in South Africa. The&lt;br/&gt;expected outcomes
of the research and teaching collaboration also include the development
of&lt;br/&gt;MEMS courses and curriculum in South Africa which will be the first
of its kind at the&lt;br/&gt;universities in South Africa.