* 0301201
* Wavelets Based Response of Structural / Mechanical Systems to Evolutionary Earthquake & Wind
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Pol Spanos, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 04/30/2008
* USD 242,056.00

Wavelets Based Response of Structural / Mechanical Systems to Evolutionary
Earthquake & Wind, CMS proposal 0301201

PI: Spanos, Rice University

The proposed program will use the wavelet transform in deriving the stochastic
characteristics of the response of structural systems to non-stationary models
related to seismic and wind excitations. The wavelet transform has been employed
in a variety of applications. Its combined time-scale representation as well as
its localization properties have been used in the analysis of various systems.
The present program focuses on the application of the wavelet transform to
nonlinear structural system response due to non-stationary models of natural
hazards, and its implementation to real systems. The time-scale localization
properties of the wavelets will be utilized to capture the variation of the
spectral characteristics of the non-stationary seismic and wind models across
time, and to assess the time dependent dynamic behavior of structural systems. A
time-dependent wavelet transfer tensor will be derived and a theoretical
framework will be introduced to derive wavelet input/output relationships for
linear multi-degree of freedom systems under non-stationary excitations. This
will be pursued by using wavelet families with characteristics appropriate for
the specific objective. New approaches will be introduced for structural system
modeling in the time-scale domain by employing the wavelet transform. The
findings will be applied to parameter identification, diagnostic procedures and
reliability studies. Structural systems under seismic and wind loads will be
examined. The work will be extended to diagnosis and monitoring procedures of
such systems.

The research program will be pursued in conjunction with a concerted effort of
maximizing the broader impact of the proposed work by continuing to provide
mentorship to students from underrepresented groups, to engage undergraduate
students in research, and to interact with teachers of K-12 grades.