* 0301927
* Evolutionary Loss of the Heat Shock Response in Antarctic Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/2005
* USD 338,618.00

The heat-shock response (HSR), the enhanced expression of one or more classes of
molecular chaperones termed heat-shock proteins (Hsps) in response to stress
induced by high temperatures, is commonly viewed as a "universal" characteristic
of organisms. This project will examine the occurrence of the heat-shock
response in a highly cold-adapted, stenothermal Antarctic teleost fish,
Trematomus bernacchii, to determine whether this response has persisted in a
lineage of fish that has encountered very low and stable temperatures for at
least the past 14 - 25 million years. The principal investigator has
demonstrated that the HSR has been lost in T. bernacchaa and the current
proposal is designed to extend this initial and evolutionary significant
observation. The proposed studies have two primary objectives. First, to
establish how widespread the loss of the HSR might be in the suborder
Notothenoioidei, including Antarctic and non-Antarctic members of the group. The
second primary objective is to determine the nature of the lesion in gene
expression that accounts for the loss of the expression of stress-inducible
genes in Antarctic species. For both objectives, experiments will be conducted
on closely related cold temperate species from New Zealand waters in order to
gain phylogenetic and comparative insight into the nature of this profound
change in enviro nmental regulation of gene expression. The results from this
proposal will contribute to knowledge of the environmental physiology and
evolutionary biology of the Antarctic notothenioid fishes and will extend an
understanding of the extreme stenothermality in these fish. If evolution at
subzero temperatures has indeed altered the gene expression patterns for
molecular chaperones in Antarctic fish, this opens up an entire area of study
into how cells respond to temperature at a molecular level. The heat shock
response is the quintessential example of the environmental regulation of gene
expression and, although the HSR is a well-described cellular phenomenon, there
is not a great deal of information regarding how the response is regulated in
ectothermic animals in nature. The lesions in the Hsp gene expression in
Antarctic notothenioids may serve to highlight aspects of the "cellular
thermostat" and provide key information about the mechanism by which
environmental stress is transduced into a molecular response.

