* 0301383
* Search for Second Generation Leptoquarks using Advanced Data Analysis Methods
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Pushpalatha Bhat, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Morris Pripstein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 40,000.00

This proposal is a request to support a PI from Northern Illinois University who
proposes to search for second-generation leptoquarks at the D-Zero experiment at
the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory's Tevatron. The PI will work closely
with graduate and undergraduate students, and explore the further development
and application of sophisticated approaches to data analysis. Leptoquarks are
fractionally charged particles that carry both lepton and quark quantum numbers
and arise naturally in several well motivated theoretical models that go beyond
the Standard Model of particle physics. The PI is an active member of the D-Zero
collaboration and played a major role, using advanced multivariate methods, in
establishing the world's best limits on the existence of first generation scalar
leptoquarks. Subsequent searches for second and third generation leptoquarks at
the Tevatron have revealed no signals. However, it is important to continue the
search. Should the search for leptoquarks prove successful the impact of their
discovery would be immediate and profound. Were they to be discovered,
leptoquarks would be the first fundamentally new states of matter to be
uncovered since the discovery of quarks. Detailed measurements of leptoquark
properties would impose severe constraints on theoretical models. Run II, which
is in progress at Fermilab, promises a substantial increase in the quantity of
data relative to that obtained during Run I. This presents a tremendous
opportunity to mount a concerted effort to find leptoquarks, assuming that they
exist with masses within reach of the Tevatron, using analysis techniques that
make optimal use of data. Whether or not the leptoquarks are found, the project
has a broader significance in that it would provide a valuable education in
experimental physics and training for the students involved. The data analysis
methods to be used are fairly new, extraordinarily versatile and powerful. The
PI's younger colleagues would receive not only a thorough grounding in current
physics but also practical training in advanced methods that find important
applications in a diverse range of fields.