* 0301516
* Collaborative Research:      Structured Control Design and Application to Microcantilever Based Imaging
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Murti Salapaka, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,830.00

In large, complex and distributed systems of current and emerging control
applications, there is a need of considering a specific structure for the
overall control scheme. Such a structure is motivated by a number of practical
reasons, among which are cost and reliability, that constrain how an individual
local station interacts with the overall system, what part of information it has
access to and what communication mechanism is in place.&lt;br/&gt;The control
system design for optimal performance when structural constraints are resent,
remains an open challenge to the control community. Recent preliminary work by
the principal investigators has exposed a rich array of such classes of
problems. The proposed research will investigate the nature and limitations of
the control system performance in the presence of various interaction and
information transmission constraints and develop effective and systematic
control analysis and synthesis methodologies. In addition to the theoretical and
algorithmic developments, a major objective of the proposed research is to
utilize the structured control design methodologies for imaging technologies
that utilize micro-cantilevers; particularly in the context of Atomic Force
Microscopy. Apart from the theoretical impact, the practical aspects of the
proposed research are relevant to the two hundred million dollar scanning probe
industry. The experimental facilities available to the investigators will be
used to demonstrate to the related industry the effectiveness of the proposed
research. This aspect together with the close ties of the investigators to the
scanning probe industry will spur the transfer of know how and technology to the
industry.&lt;br/&gt;