* 0301635
* A Methodology for Designing Fatigue Resistant Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Matthew Miller, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2006
* USD 275,000.00

This research project is centered around novel sets of in-situ mechanical
loading / synchrotron x-ray diffraction experiments aimed at understanding
evolving micromechanical states associated with microcrack initiation in
multiphase metallic alloys. In these tests, lattice strains will be measured
during cyclic loading and a methodology will be developed for attaining strains
over a vast expanse of x-ray scattering directions for many different families
of lattice planes. These data are crucial to the development of a simulation
environment referred to as the Digital Material Through a collaboration with
researchers working at the forefront of x-ray detection technology (Professor
Sol Gruner's group at Cornell), a unique set of highly time resolved in-situ
experiments will be conducted that will have exposures on the order of
microseconds. By taking exposures over several cycles out of several thousand
cycles, it will be possible to produce lattice strain "snapshots" during cyclic
loading, which will create a "real time" link to the evolving mechanical state
on the size scale of a metallic grain - exactly what we need to begin to
understand microcrack initiation. The project will begin by examining model iron
/ copper alloys - ideal for this study due to their mutual insolubility and
distinct property differences, but will eventually center on several
Aluminum/Beryllium alloys - which are also virtually insoluble. In addition, the
attenuation lengths for these materials are much smaller than the Fe/Cu so a
thicker specimen - crucial for cyclic experiments - and lower x-ray energies
will be possible. The educational goals of this project are based on enabling
mechanical engineers to employ their design training within the materials
engineering arena. This project will also greatly expand the conventional
experimental repertoire that most engineering students possess. The students
working on this project will learn to think of facilities like synchrotron beam
lines as a place to conduct standard characterization experiments. The Brush
Wellman company and Los Alamos National labs will partner with Cornell in the
fabrication of the Al/Be specimens. Alloys at several phase fractions will be
produced. The experimental program is one aspect of the material representation
system referred to as the Cornell Digital Material. This project will initiate
the creation of a Digital Material representation aimed at accelerating the
design and implementation of fatigue resistant
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;