* 0301172
* Automorphic Distributions, Summation Formulas, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Stephen Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 105,000.00

DMS-0301172&lt;br/&gt;Miller, Stephen
D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Automorphic
Distributions, Summation Formulas, and Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research of the PI (Miller) focuses on the analytic theory
of&lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms. The proposed research concentrates on
automorphic&lt;br/&gt;distributions, a technique he has been investigating with
Wilfried Schmid&lt;br/&gt;(Harvard University). They hope to use these
distributions to develop&lt;br/&gt;summation formulas, similar to Poisson's and
Voronoi's, whereby arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;sums weighted by modular form
coefficients and additive twists can be&lt;br/&gt;dualized. The PI plans to
investigate various applications of the&lt;br/&gt;distributions and these
summation formulas. Many concern developing new&lt;br/&gt;constructions for
automorphic L-functions, in particular approaches for&lt;br/&gt;which
archimedean and ramified computations are possible. Another is
to&lt;br/&gt;problems in analytic number theory, such as the subconvexity
problem for&lt;br/&gt;cusp forms on GL(n). The PI also plans to refine a
numerical algorithm&lt;br/&gt;which identifies modular forms, by reversing
summation formulas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of automorphic
forms slices across many important areas of&lt;br/&gt;modern mathematical
research, including number theory, representation&lt;br/&gt;theory, geometry,
analysis, and mathematical physics. Through L-functions,&lt;br/&gt;Langlands has
conjectured many deep and interesting structural&lt;br/&gt;relationships between
automorphic forms which have implications in the&lt;br/&gt;above areas. As an
example, the work of Wiles et al demonstrates the link&lt;br/&gt;between certain
automorphic forms and the ancient problem of solving&lt;br/&gt;equations between
squares and cubes. The proposed research aims to apply&lt;br/&gt;and develop new
tools for automorphic forms and L-functions from analysis,&lt;br/&gt;which is
the branch of mathematics expanding calculus, and
representation&lt;br/&gt;theory, the concrete study of symmetry. Current
applications of&lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms and L-functions are manifest in
constructing the&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated codes which enable high-speed and
secure transactions over&lt;br/&gt;the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;