* 0301392
* Toward Improved Understanding Of Warnings For Short-Fuse Weather Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Eve Gruntfest, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2008
* USD 434,951.00

INPUT-OUTPUT RISK MODEL OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is no higher priority for the nation today than
assuring the security, continuity, and availability of our critical
infrastructures. Modern critical infrastructures are marked by immense
complexity, and characterized by strong intra- and interdependencies, as well as
multiple hierarchies. The higher degree of interdependencies exhibited by our
critical infrastructures-attributable in part to their increased reliance on
modern technology-make them more vulnerable to human-caused disasters such as
acts of terrorism. In assessing the vulnerability of a critical infrastructure,
it is important to analyze not only an infrastructure per se but also its
interconnectedness and influences on other infrastructures. Understanding this
interconnectedness can be achieved by modeling the way inoperability propagates
and proliferates throughout a critical system of infrastructures. Inoperability
is defined as the inability of the system to perform its intended natural or
engineered functions. Risk of inoperability is defined as a measure of the
probability and the consequence expressed as a degree of the inoperability of
the system. The research goal to develop a model capable of describing the risks
inherent to our Nation's critical infrastructures will be realized primarily
through extensions of an existing Leontief-based infrastructure inoperability
model. Following are the components of the research effort: (1) Establish the
theoretical bases underlying the concept of risk of inoperability, namely the
mechanics by which inoperability can propagate through a system of
interconnected infrastructures; (2) Develop a hierarchical implementation of the
inoperability input-output risk model to address geographical and functional
decomposition of the system of infrastructures; (3) Study the dynamics of
inoperability due to an initial perturbation, addressing cascading effects of an
attack in various temporal regimes (e.g., short-term, intermediate-term, or
long-term); and (4) Provide a prototype application of the proposed
inoperability I-O risk model to the electric power infrastructure. The
inoperability I-O risk model developed here is an initial attempt to contribute
to the incredible efforts needed to better our understanding of these
dependencies, and subsequently to manage more cost-effectively the threats and
risks that critical infrastructures encounter today. Thus, the proposed model is
best viewed as a first step in an ambitious attempt to develop a more
comprehensive risk assessment and management framework for ensuring the
integrity and continued operability of the Nation's complex critical
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;