* 0301081
* Collaborative Research:     Generation Mechanisms of Near-and-Far Field Tsunamis
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Costas Synolakis, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2007
* USD 227,882.00

This action is to support a collaborative research project to study the
generation and propagation of tsunamis in both the near and far fields, as
generated by earthquakes or underwater landslides. The principal goal is to
define features ("observables") that can be used to discriminate between an
earthquake or a landslide as the origin of a tsunami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the near field, hydrodynamic simulations are used to examine the influence of
various source parameters on the expected maximum runup on a nearby beach, and
on the lateral distribution along the beach. The strategy is to identify
combinations of observables that would be largely invariant for one type of
source, and thus could serve as source discriminants. In addition, this approach
will be applied to the existing databases collected during the post- tsunami
surveys conducted in the past decade, in order to determine in detail the source
mechanisms that controlled the amplitude and extent of devastation. This
research will result in a better understanding of the association between source
parameters (for both types of sources) and the resulting runup at nearby
beaches, and will improve the models used in estimating and mitigating the
impact of future tsunamis on a regional scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the far
field, the project considers the frequency dispersion and its effect on the
evolution of tsunami waveshapes under a variety of source scenarios, again
including both earthquakes and landslides. Comparing simulations performed with
dispersive and non-dispersive codes should identify those source conditions that
may enhance the effect of dispersion in the far field, and generalize to a full
two-dimensional ocean earlier results obtained for one-dimensional propagation.
The influence of source type on directivity will be addressed systematically.
This is well understood for earthquake sources, but remains debatable for
landslides. This research will establish the possible contribution of landslide
sources to tsunami hazard in the far field, and clarify the question of the
suitability of various approximations in hydrodynamic theories under a number of
source scenarios. The results will be applied to the case of the 1946 Aleutian
earthquake, which inflicted the greatest devastation by a tsunami on the United
States in the past 100 years, but whose exact generating mechanism is still
elusive. A number of historical tsunamis will also be studies, for which no
exact description of source mechanism is available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will significantly improve the capability to predict inundation and
runup during future tsunamis, and thus for mitigation of their effects. The
principal investigators will continue their tradition of graduate and
undergraduate student involvement in all aspects of the research, and active
interaction with the news media. They will also compile and permanently archive
the large dataset of videotaped interviews obtained during previous tsunami
field surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;