* 0301661
* Decision Technologies for Managing Critical Infrastructure Interdependencies
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2007
* John Mitchell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 01/31/2007
* USD 414,742.00

Critical infrastructure systems provide services that are essential to both the
economy and well-being of nations and their citizens. As documented in a recent
report to the U.S. Congress, it is of vital importance that these services not
be degraded, whether by willful acts such as terrorism or by natural or random
events such as earthquakes, design flaws or human error. Yet infrastructure
systems and the organizations that manage them are now recognized as components
of highly-coupled systems that increasingly rely on one another in order to
deliver key services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is to
improve understanding of and support for the management of interdependent
critical infrastructure systems. Infrastructure interdependence occurs when, due
to either geographical proximity or shared operations, an impact on one
infrastructure system is also an impact on one or more other infrastructure
systems. The particular focus of the research is on developing techniques that
can be used either to mitigate against or respond to events that have the
capability if impacting interdependent critical infrastructure systems and to
provide decision makers with means of manipulating these models for purposes of
mitigation or response. The models developed in the research will be embedded in
computer-based decision aids. Such computer-based decision support is intended
to assist decision makers in reducing expected loss of service due to disruption
and in restoring service more quickly if loss of service actually
occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research will improve
society's ability to withstand the impact of and respond to events that can
disrupt the provision of services that are required for the health, safety and
economic well being of the citizenry. Managers of critical infrastructures and
emergency response officials will be able to model different event scenarios and
assess their impact on the services provided by critical infrastructure systems.
With this knowledge, mitigation and preparedness strategies can be formulated
and evaluated for their ability to prevent an emergency from escalating into a
disaster and, if a disaster does occur, ensure a rapid restoration of critical
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;