* 0301278
* Gas Embolotherapy for the Treatment of Cancer
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Joseph Bull, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 06/30/2007
* USD 251,702.00

0301278&lt;br/&gt;Bull&lt;br/&gt;The delivery of emboli to arterial blood flow
with the goal of flow occlusion, or embolotherapy, is a potential means to treat
a variety of cancers, particularly heptatocellular carcinoma (HCC). A major
difficulty in embolotherapy is restricting delivery of the emboli to the tumor,
i.e. minimizing ischemia of healthy tissue, without extremely invasive
procedures. The proposal focused on the potential of a novel gas embolotherapy.
Liquid droplets, which are small enough to pass through capillaries, are
introduced into the vascular flow, and are subsequently vaporized via ultrasound
near the tumor allowing gas bubbles, which are considerably larger than the
liquid drops from which they originated, to occlude flow in the tumor. This
minimally invasive technique will allow selective delivery of gas emboli to the
tumor and is well suited to repeated doses and long term use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research uses computational and experimental
studies to provide fundamental understanding of the physical phenomena of vessel
occlusion by gas emboli. The research will use advanced computational methods,
animal experiments, and benchtop experiments to show proof of concept of this
novel gas embolotherapy technique, and will provide optimized strategies for
maximum occlusion of flow in tumors. Animal experiments will provide information
on the temporal evolution of flow occlusion in VX2 carcinoma following a dose of
gas emboli and on the effects of a second dose on flow occlusion. A
computational model will be developed for single bifurcations and a branching
network of bifurcations. Flow occlusion will be investigated for macro-scale
(arteries) and micro-scale (capillaries) bifurcations. The effects of
bifurcation orientation, geometry, and size; driving pressure; bubble size; and
the presence of surfactants will be investigated to optimize treatment plans and
to elucidate the competition between transport mechanisms. Detailed temporal and
spatial information on the dynamics of bubbles sticking in tubes and tube
networks will be obtained and applied to gas embolotherapy. These predictions
will be compared directly to bench top experiments, at both size scales, for
validation and refinement of the model.