* 0301273
*  Collaborative Research: Enhancing the Fracture Strength of Advanced Ceramics by Process Control at the Microstructural Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Alice Smith, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 07/31/2005
* USD 106,000.00

The wide application of advanced structural ceramics is limited by the problems
related to structural reliability that are common to all brittle materials.
Ceramics do not yield before fracture and therefore fracture strength is often
the basis for the prediction of a design limit. Unfortunately, the strength of
ceramics is found to be very sensitive to processing variables in ways that are
difficult to predict. In recent years much effort has gone into toughening
ceramics using mechanisms that result in the need for complex microstructures.
Such work is usually isolated from studies in process control resulting in
relatively few systematic and quantitative evaluations of the relationships
between processing conditions and fracture behavior. This project uses a closely
integrated interdisciplinary approach to determine the relationships between
ceramics processing variables and fracture behavior of alumina. For this first
year effort, correlations will be made between the distribution of
microstructural heterogeneities and the structure of both polished and ground
surfaces along with a limited number of fracture strength measurements. Ceramics
processing, microstructural evolution, hardness distributions and fracture
behavior will be linked through quantitative neural network based process models
at the microstructural level combined with image analysis. The end result will
be an improved quantitative understanding of the effects of processing variables
on the fracture of advanced ceramics -- an understanding based on sound
statistical analysis of microstructure evolution, and one which can be used to
properly manufacture these ceramics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be
a timely application of image analysis and computational intelligence in the
processing of advanced materials and will contribute to the emerging paradigm of
studying materials as complex systems. Furthermore, the successful demonstration
of process modeling of high strength ceramics will motivate a shift of the
emphasis in ceramics processing to a quantitative understanding of
microstructural control. Finally, the educational outcomes will provide
resources to teach materials processing as an interdisciplinary subject to
university students, and engage young middle school students in the realms of
material science and image processing.