* 0301962
* ESP: Enhancing Secondary Mathematics Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Beverly Michael, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 06/30/2009
* USD 998,635.00

The "Enhancing Secondary Mathematics Teacher Preparation" (ESP) project
addresses the challenges currently facing mathematics teacher education through
a three-pronged approach: i) by creating two additional mathematics courses that
are specifically targeted at making connections between the formal mathematics
courses that currently comprise an undergraduate degree in mathematics and the
mathematics that is at the heart of the secondary mathematics curriculum, ii) by
revising existing methods courses that are grounded in the practice of teaching
and based on current research on effective teaching and learning of mathematics,
and iii) by developing a cadre of mentor teachers who enact, support, and
promote mathematics education reform efforts in the school environments in which
they work and who provide support to pre-service teachers during their field
experiences and to beginning teachers within their schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESP project creates new learning opportunities for
pre-service and practicing teachers that are grounded in research. Specifically,
through the creation of capstone mathematics courses, the ESP project identifies
a body of core mathematical content, which mathematics teachers need in order to
possess a deep and integrated knowledge of mathematics. Establishing these
courses communicates the need for such courses to the mathematics and education
academic communities. The ESP project also creates a model of teacher education
based on well-respected research and theories of effective mathematics teaching
and learning and of effective professional development for mathematics teachers.
The pedagogical training equips project participants to enact reform-oriented
mathematics instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESP is broadly impacting
mathematics education by: i) creating a model of an exemplary teacher
preparation program that can be replicated on a larger scale (i.e., course
design, university/school district partnerships, mathematics department/school
of education partnerships), ii) training a corps of mentor teachers who can
continue to serve as lead teachers and promote mathematics reform efforts within
their schools, iii) providing a corps of pre-service teachers with training that
will enable them to become future leaders in mathematics education reform, and
iv) improving the pool of teaching candidates in an urban area serving an
underprivileged population. By improving the preparation of mathematics
teachers, the ESP project can serve to improve mathematics teaching and thereby
improve mathematics learning of U.S. students. &lt;br/&gt;