* 0301649
* A Volumetric Imaging System for Reconstruction of Macroscopic Fluid Flows in Organismic Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Andrew Biewener, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 130,200.00

A grant has been awarded to Harvard University under the direction of Dr. George
Lauder for the acquisition of a volumetric imaging system for the three-
dimensional reconstruction of macroscopic fluid flows in organismic biology. The
instrumentation will be shared among three cooperating institutions (Harvard,
Brown University, and the University of Rhode Island) to: (1) analyze air flow
patterns resulting from wing and body movements of flying bats and birds, (2)
study water flow patterns in the wake of swimming fishes, (3) analyze water flow
patterns during prey capture by small sharks, (4) study air flow over leaves and
flowers of plants, and (5) measure unsteady pressure or shear-driven flows
adjacent to flexible boundaries. The study of air and water flow patterns
resulting from animal locomotion and prey capture is a major endeavor in the
field of biomechanics. As animals capture prey and move through air and water,
they generate complex three-dimensional patterns of fluid movement that reflect
the application of force to the environment. Understanding these patterns of
fluid movement is critical to uncovering the fluid dynamic mechanisms that
govern flight, swimming, and the capture of prey by organisms living in fluids.
Similarly, understanding the process of wind pollination in plants and the
movement of air over leaves is dependent on quantification of air flow and
measurement of air velocities around complex three-dimensional plant
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation will benefit directly
numerous graduate students currently in the laboratories of the major and minor
user faculty by providing them with the latest technology for the study of
biological fluid mechanics. Three of the major users teach advanced
undergraduate research project classes in biomechanics (at two different
institutions), and undergraduates doing projects in the area of biological fluid
mechanics will have the opportunity to use this equipment as they participate in
laboratory research projects.&lt;br/&gt;