* 0301919
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Allele Mining for Useful Genetic Variation in Rice
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Michael Thomson, Thomson                 Michael        J
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/2005
* USD 180,110.00

0301919 Thomson

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship (within a duration of
27 months) by Dr. Michael J. Thomson to work with Dr. Sugiono Moeljopawiro at
the Research Institute for Agricultural Biotechnology and Genetics Resources in
Bogor, Indonesia.

This project will test a strategy for allele mining in rice using a combination
of candidate gene analysis and linkage disequilibrium mapping. The PI will
select a diverse set of wild rice accessions (representing natural selection),
traditional landraces (representing moderate levels of human selection), and
cultivated varieties of rice (under intense human selection since the Green
Revolution) from Indonesia and elsewhere. A total of 220 accessions will be
chosen to represent a broad range of genetic diversity, many of which are
predicted to contain trait-improving alleles for disease resistance, which is
the focus of the current study, as well as for other traits of agronomic
importance. The ultimate objective is to efficiently identify beneficial alleles
within the diverse germplasm accessions from Indonesia for future applications
in crop improvement. This project addresses several topics of biological
significance, including the evolution, domestication, and effect of modern plant
breeding activities on the genetic structure of rice cultivars. Crop improvement
requires a wide range of genetic diversity to provide sources of variation for
disease resistance and other important traits.