* 0301449
* Characterization of Damage and Development of Accelerated Test Method for Delayed Ettringite Formation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Amde Amde, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 10/31/2008
* USD 245,000.00

A potentially serious deterioration problem in concrete is associated with
delayed ettringite formation (DEF). This damage is typically viewed as the
result of an expansive process within the material similar to that of alkali-
silicate reaction (ASR), but many aspects of this process remain controversial.
Improvements in the characterization of damage associated with DEF are needed
both to gain a better understanding of the specific mechanisms involved and to
develop better models for predicting failure. The main objectives of this
project include the use of cutting edge technology to sort out the specific
damage mechanisms that make up the complex process of expansive concrete
cracking. This in turn will lead to more reliable predictive models of DEF and
to more accurate accelerated test methods that will serve as the basis for
recommendations for changes in specifications and /or practices of mixing and
curing concrete to prevent this problem. Specifically the study will investigate
the correlations between ettringite formation, ettringite distribution,
microcrack distributions and volumetric change. The advanced technologies that
are to be implemented in this project, including synchrotron radiation
diffraction, laser shearography and industrial X-ray computed tomography are
fairly novel to research in this area. The data will be analyzed using material
science theory including nucleation and growth kinetics and damage mechanics.
The proposed activities will provide new insights into the application of these
advanced technologies for materials such as concrete. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed extensive evaluations of existing, improved and proposed rapid test
methods will contribute to the development of a useful standard test method to
assess long-term dimensional stability and durability of concrete. These
contributions by the proposed study would be significant since the problem of
DEF has not been addressed in ASTM specifications for cement and concrete. No
standard tests are available and no limits on the chemical composition of
cements to control DEF have been set. Also the proposal to develop a rapid test
method if successful would have significant impact since the need to assess the
deleterious effects due to DEF in concrete is one of the most important issues
facing researchers today. The benefits of this project to the nations highway
and bridge systems and to civil infrastructures in general will be significant.
The proposed project will strengthen existing partnerships between University of
Maryland, FHWA and NIST, and would help establish new partnerships with
University of Michigan, Howard University, and Laser Technologies, Inc. The
research team will greatly benefit from collaboration with well-known specialist
in the field, Dr. Richard A. Livingston, Senior Physical Scientist, Office of
Infrastructure R&amp;D, FHWA. These partnerships will greatly enhance the
infrastructure for research and education for undergraduate and graduate
students at University of Maryland. This project will be supplemented with funds
from programs such as the McNair program to ensure the participation of
underrepresented students and women and this would include talented
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;