* 0301036
* Collaborative Research:  Characterization of the Wetlands Source of Tropospheric Methyl Bromide (CH3Br) and Methyl Chloride (CH3Cl)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Mark Hines, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/2003
* USD 70,326.00

This project is a collaboration between the University of New Hampshire and the
University of Alaska. It was submitted to the Environmental Geochemistry and
Biogeochemistry Program (EGB) and is supported by the Atmospheric Chemistry
Program of the Division of Atmospheric Sciences; the Petrology and Geochemistry
Program, and the Hydrologic Sciences Program of the Division of Earth Sciences;
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division of Chemistry of
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

Methyl bromide and methyl chloride are anthropogenically influenced trace gases
that play an important role in the stratospheric ozone balance. Although their
biogeochemisty is not well understood, it is known that these gases have
significant natural sources. The atmospheric budgets of these gases are out of
balance because the identified sinks for both gases outweigh known sources.
Recently, it has been discovered that flooded peatlands are a terrestrial source
for these gases which could impact their global budget. Information is still
lacking about the regional distribution and magnitude of this new source and how
the flooded soils might affect their ambient mixing ratios. In this project
direct flux measurements of methyl bromide and methyl chloride will be made in a
variety of peatlands and experiments will be carried out to determine the
chemical, physical, and biological parameters controlling these fluxes.