* 0301084
* A Novel Type of Vibration Isolator Utilizing Buckled Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Lawrence Virgin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2006
* USD 281,788.00

The importance of avoiding or suppressing vibration is a universal concern that
can hardly be overstated. Vibration may be damaging, annoying, or dangerous, and
is a problem occurring in a vast array of situations ranging from suspension
systems for vehicles to protective packaging to infrastructure hazard mitigation
during earthquakes. The objective of the research described in this proposal is
to develop a new class of vibration isolator based on elastically-buckled
structures. Analytical, numerical, and experimental methods will be used
together with a variety of test strategies and components to identify optimal
approaches to vibration isolation. The results of this research will allow a
generally undesirable effect (buckling) to be utilized in a beneficial context
(vibration isolation).&lt;br/&gt;The proposed isolators are post-buckled rigid-
link mechanisms, struts, and plates. They will be designed to have a high axial
stiffness under static loading, so that they support the weight of the system
without excessive displacement, and to have a relatively-low stiffness during
excitation. Harmonic, multi-frequency, shock, impact, and random inputs will be
considered, along with combinations of these. The isolator may protect the
system from base excitation (e.g., in an earthquake), or may reduce the
transmissibility of forces from the system (e,g., rotating machinery) to the
base. These passive isolators may be used in conjunction with dampers and with
semi-active or active control systems. The optimum properties, locations, and
number of isolators will be determined. &lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of
this approach includes a bridge between instability and structural dynamics.
This type of cross-fertilization of ideas is exactly the type of activity that
has enabled interdisciplinary research to be so successful. Both the
analytical/numerical work and the experimental work contain significant
challenges. &lt;br/&gt; The potential broader impacts of this approach are
profound. Noise reduction, stealth technology, and flutter suppression in
aircraft are just some of the directions in which this work could evolve.
Distributed mounting options for shock absorption, and high-cycle fatigue
mitigation, are clearly achievable goals. This is a collaborative proposal
between Duke University and Virginia Tech. Each institution will benefit from
enhanced interaction. The proximity of the two universities and previous
collaborative work of the Principle Investigators provides a team whose sum is
greater than the individual components. Underrepresented graduate and
undergraduate students will be sought, and the results of this research will be
disseminated broadly.&lt;br/&gt;