* 0302307
* Combinatorics with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Jerrold Griggs, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 210,601.00

The investigators are continuing their core research programs,
attacking&lt;br/&gt;important classic problems of combinatorics, including (1)
The theory&lt;br/&gt;of crossing numbers of graphs with connections to discrete
geometry; and&lt;br/&gt;(2) Searching for new insights on antichains and
intersecting families&lt;br/&gt;of subsets, and for connections between chain
decompositions of the subsets&lt;br/&gt;of a set and symmetric Venn diagrams.
Research by the investigators with a&lt;br/&gt;broader impact includes their
contributions to (3) Computational&lt;br/&gt;biology: phylogenetic tree
reconstruction, clustering biomolecular sequences,&lt;br/&gt;(4) Theoretical
computer science: graph drawing, security of statistical&lt;br/&gt;databases;
and (5) Communications: New models of real-number vertex labellings with
distance conditions to find optimal or near-optimal channel assignments for
large networks of transmitters.&lt;br/&gt;Research in combinatorics is carried
out on problems that lie at the very core of our understanding of how discrete
structures work and how to use them optimally. The investigators also apply
combinatorial theory to interdisciplinary areas (including computational
biology, theoretical computer science, and communications), where progress often
requires using or inventing deeper combinatorial results which exhibit
structures that are key to applications, or which provide bounds on what can be
achieved by any algorithm. Progress in these areas contributes to important
real-life problems, including the development of more efficient research tools
in bioinformatics; the design of better visualisation tools for computer
screens; increased computer and database security; and more efficient cell phone
communication. The investigators are adding to their impressive record of
recruiting and training graduate students and involving them in their research.
They are expanding their efforts to attract more minority and women students
into Ph.D. programs in mathematics. They are continuing their extensive
activities in managing research journals, organizing conferences, guiding the
Canada-USA Mathcamp for high school students, and contributing to the
international Mathematical Competition in Modeling for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;