* 0302452
* Great Lakes Geometry Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2004
* Xiuxiong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0302452&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Xiu Xiong Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next Great Lakes Geometry
Conference will be held May 1 - 4,&lt;br/&gt;2003 at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. This is an&lt;br/&gt;international conference held annually
in the Midwest region,&lt;br/&gt;rotating among different universities. The aim
of this conference&lt;br/&gt;will be to introduce the latest developments in the
field of&lt;br/&gt;geometric analysis and some closely related areas. A
partial&lt;br/&gt;list of topics which will be covered by this conference
include:&lt;br/&gt;(Kaehler-) Einstein equation and constant scalar curvature
metric&lt;br/&gt;equation (Yamabe problem); (Hermitian-) Yang-Mills
equation;&lt;br/&gt;minimal surface equation; harmonic map problem and J-
holomorphic&lt;br/&gt;curves (Cauchy-Riemann equation); and the geodesic
equation in&lt;br/&gt;the infinite dimensional space of Kaehler metrics which is
given&lt;br/&gt;by a homogenous complex Monge-Ampere equation. These
equations&lt;br/&gt;fit together with the corresponding evolution
equations:&lt;br/&gt;(Kaehler-) Ricci flow, Yang-Mills flow, the mean curvature
flow,&lt;br/&gt;and the harmonic map flow, etc. People would like to know
(local&lt;br/&gt;and global) existence, regularity and uniqueness of solutions
to&lt;br/&gt;these equations. Many deep works have arisen by
studying&lt;br/&gt;different aspects of these challenging
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differential geometry is a fundamental and vital
field of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics which has many far reaching applications beyond
the&lt;br/&gt;realm of pure mathematics. To name a few: the study of
Kaehler&lt;br/&gt;geometry, especially Calabi-Yau manifolds, has
important&lt;br/&gt;applications in theoretical physics; the study of (inverse)
mean&lt;br/&gt;curvature flow has important applications in image
processing;&lt;br/&gt;and the study of curves, surfaces and their higher-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;analogues have important applications in computer
graphics,&lt;br/&gt;engineering and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;