* 0302825
* Electron Spectroscopy of Emergent Quantum Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2009
* James Allen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2009
* USD 352,830.00

Strongly correlated electron materials exhibit a remarkable range of quantum
ground states, e.g., insulating, metallic, magnetic, superconducting, depending
on modest changes in chemical composition, temperature or pressure. Of great
recent interest are the behaviors of a system poised between two stable zero
temperature ground states, i.e. at a quantum critical point. This individual
investigator project uses the techniques of photoemission and inverse
photoemission spectroscopies to measure the single-particle electronic
structures of selected strongly correlated electron materials displaying novel
quantum behaviors, and seeks to construct the paths whereby these behaviors
emerge from the underlying electronic structure or transform from one order to
another. During the course of the next project period, the program will focus on
two main themes, (A) quantum criticality in relation to (1) Non-Fermi Liquid
(NFL) behavior generally and (2) electron fractionalization in low dimensional
materials, and (B) certain novel or paradigmatic phase transitions. If
successful the work will demonstrate the need for an overarching theoretical
picture linking quantum criticality, fractionalization and NFL behavior that
transcends dimensionality and material type. The experiments are performed both
in a home laboratory, and at various national and international synchrotron
facilities. The experimental data are analyzed by comparison to theories which
treat the Coulomb interactions in different ways, and which provide a link
between the spectra and the electrical or magnetic properties. The program
relies on strong collaborations with other groups for well-characterized samples
to measure, for determining electrical, thermal and magnetic properties of new
materials, and for expert theoretical advice and advanced calculations. Thus, it
builds human bridges across geographic, institutional and disciplinary
boundaries. It also brings Ph.D. students into close contact with scientists in
a variety of professional roles at a variety of institutions around the world,
and trains them in the techniques of collaborative
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrical, magnetic and mechanical properties of
materials are "emergent collective behaviors" of the underlying quantum
mechanics of their electrons and constituent atoms. A principal goal of solid
state physics and materials science is to elucidate this emergence. Achieving
this goal would imply the ability to engineer a material that is optimum for any
particular application. The mainstay of the current understanding of electrons
in solids is known as the "Fermi liquid theory." This theory explains why
electrons in solids can often be described in a simplified picture that appears
to ignore the large repulsive forces electrons are known to exert on one
another. There is a growing appreciation that this theory probably fails for
entire classes of materials and there is the suspicion that the failure has to
do with unresolved competition between different possible emergent behaviors.
This individual investigator grant supports an experimental program aimed at
using a technique called electron spectroscopy to measure and quantify the
underlying quantum mechanical behaviors of electrons in materials that manifest
this unresolved competition in various ways. If successful the work will
pinpoint essential ideas that must be combined to take the goal of engineering
materials to the next level of sophistication. The experiments are performed
both in a home laboratory, and at various national and international synchrotron
facilities. The program relies on strong collaborations with other groups for
well-characterized samples to measure, for determining electrical, thermal and
magnetic properties of new materials, and for expert theoretical advice and
advanced calculations. Thus, it builds human bridges across geographic,
institutional and disciplinary boundaries. It also brings Ph.D. students into
close contact with scientists in a variety of professional roles at a variety of
institutions around the world, and trains them in the techniques of
collaborative work.&lt;br/&gt;