* 0302647
* Analysis of Spectral Invariants on Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Kate Okikiolu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

Proposal 0302647&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Kate Okikiolu
(UCSD)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of Spectral Invariants on Manifolds:
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associated to a Riemannian manifold, there exist
natural geometric&lt;br/&gt;operators such as the Laplace-Beltami operator, and
one can study the&lt;br/&gt;relationship between the geometry of the manifold
and&lt;br/&gt;the spectra of these operators. (A famous question on this theme
is&lt;br/&gt;``can you hear the shape of a drum?".) This leads to the study
of&lt;br/&gt; spectral invariants of geometric operators, which&lt;br/&gt;are
geometric invariants of the manifold. The&lt;br/&gt;zeta invariants of geometric
elliptic operators form a family of&lt;br/&gt;such spectral invariants which
includes in particular the&lt;br/&gt;determinant of the Laplacian and certain
integrated local&lt;br/&gt;invariants such as the Yamabe functional.&lt;br/&gt;
It is well known that among metrics of a given&lt;br/&gt;volume and conformal
class, the Yamabe functional is extremized at&lt;br/&gt;a metric of constant
scalar curvature, and the same is true for&lt;br/&gt;the determinant of the
Laplacian on surfaces. This raises many&lt;br/&gt;questions regarding how the
determinant of the Laplacian behaves&lt;br/&gt;in higher dimensions, what
happens for different types of&lt;br/&gt;Laplacian, and how other zeta
invariants behave. There has&lt;br/&gt;already been progress on several of these
questions, the&lt;br/&gt;motivation being both to understand the behavior of
specific zeta&lt;br/&gt;invariants and to investigate possible applications of
zeta&lt;br/&gt;invariants to geometry. Okikiolu proposes to study a number
of&lt;br/&gt;issues related to the existence, uniqueness and behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;critical metrics for the determinant of the Laplacian and
other&lt;br/&gt;zeta invariants, including questions concerning global upper
or&lt;br/&gt;lower bounds, gradient flow, behavior across conformal
classes,&lt;br/&gt;behavior of model problems, and development of the basic
analytic&lt;br/&gt;theory of zeta invariants. In addition, Okikiolu proposes to
work&lt;br/&gt;on related questions concerning spectral invariants of
Toeplitz&lt;br/&gt;operators on manifolds, and in a somewhat different
direction, on&lt;br/&gt;the problem of extending the Verlinde formulas from
quantum field&lt;br/&gt;theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Understanding the
relationship between the&lt;br/&gt;geometry of a space and the spectra of
natural geometric&lt;br/&gt;differential operators on the space is a problem
which arises in a&lt;br/&gt;number of branches of science. Individual
eigenvalues are hard to&lt;br/&gt;analyze and often the geometry of a space is
more clearly&lt;br/&gt;reflected by certain weighted averages of the eigenvalues
such as&lt;br/&gt;zeta invariants. In particular, determinants of Laplacians
on&lt;br/&gt;manifolds have been studied and applied in several fields
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and physics including topology, quantum field
theory,&lt;br/&gt;string theory, algebraic geometry, and conformal geometry.
The&lt;br/&gt;research proposed here should lead to a more complete
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;theory of zeta invariants for geometrical and
physical&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;