* 0302748
* Mathematical Problems in General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Michael Dafermos, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 109,501.00

ABSTRACT

MATHEMATICAL PROBLEMS IN GENERAL RELATIVITY

This proposal deals with mathematical aspects of the problem of gravitational
collapse and the formation of black holes. Analytically speaking, this is the
study of the initial value problem for appropriate Einstein-matter systems for
asymptotically flat initial data. The central questions in the subject are the
celebrated weak and strong cosmic censorship conjectures of Penrose. In previous
work, the author was able to resolve the issue of strong cosmic censorship in
the setting of the spherically symmetric Einstein-Maxwell scalar field system,
confirming a heuristic picture that had been the subject of debate in the
physics community. The present proposal concerns the development of a complete
theory for gravitational collapse in spherical symmetry, which at the same time
takes into account the physics of angular momentum. In view of the constraint of
spherical symmetry, angular momentum is simulated through charge.
Mathematically, a rigorous formulation is given by the initial value problem in
the large for a charged self-gravitating scalar field, i.e. for the Einstein-
Maxwell-charged scalar field system. The study can be divided roughly into three
analytically distinct families of problems: the study of the formation of
trapped surfaces, the study of the decay of fields on the event horizon, and the
study of the instability of the Cauchy horizon. All problems require methods
which go well beyond standard techniques of the theory of quasilinear hyperbolic
p.d.e.'s in two dimensions. In particular, the interaction between geometric
features characteristic of black holes with non-linear wave equations will
certainly play a big role. Understanding these issues in the spherically
symmetric case will hopefully point to the correct framework where these issues
can eventually be studied in the absense of symmetry.

The collapse of a star under the force of its own gravity and the possible
subsequent formation of a black hole is one of the most exciting predictions of
the general theory of relativity. This process, however, is not well understood.
Most of our current intuition derives from so-called ``explicit solutions'' of
the Einstein equations, the governing equations of the theory. These
``explicit'' solutions, however, in addition to exhibiting behavior which is
hoped to be physically relevant, exhibit also behavior widely considered to be
pathological. For example, the Kerr solution, on which our intuition for the
final state of gravitational collapse is largely based, contains so-called
``closed timelike curves''. These allow observers who enter the black hole to
subsequently travel in time. Is this an unhappy accident of the very special
nature of this solution, or is this a general property of black holes? In view
of the strong non-linearity of the Einstein equations, and the difficulty of
making accurate predictions on the basis of numerical or heuristic work, this
seems to be an area where the techniques of rigorous mathematical analysis can
make a tremendous impact. In this project, it is proposed to undertake a
rigorous mathematical study of a realistic model of gravitational collapse, in
particular one which takes account of angular momentum, the mechanism that leads
to the failure of ``causality'' in the Kerr solution. Partial progress has
already been made in the author's previous work, and in particular, the question
of the stability of the picture alluded to above has been resolved in a very
restricted setting. As this problem addresses a spectacular failure of Newtonian
determinism in the setting of a completely classical (i.e. non-quantum) physical
theory, this work could impact current views on some of the fundamental
principles of physics.

