* 0302506
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Organisms and Organizations: Transnational Civil Society and Genetically Modified Food in Latin America, Europe, and the United States"
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Roberto Korzeniewicz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2004
* USD 7,465.00

The purpose of this project is to examine the organizational linkages and
cultural meanings connecting civil society organizations in Latin America and
Europe that are involved in debates about plant biotechnology and genetically
modified food. Current research about transnational civil society suggests an
increasing polarization between organizations willing and/or able to negotiate
with the formal political institutions establishing the rules of the global
economy and those that (have to) engage in more confrontational practices. Civil
society debates about genetically modified food are particularly contentious and
thus offer a unique setting for empirically addressing these widening concerns
about a growing participatory gap within organized transnational civil society.
Building on the student investigator's participation in current research
documenting the overall scale, composition, and significance of regional civil
society networks in Latin America, the proposed project is a comparative, multi-
location analysis of two transnational organizational networks that link non-
governmental organizations and farmers' organizations in Latin America with
their counterparts in Europe and the United States. The project seeks to explore
how political context, forms of decision-making, as well as cultural
understandings of genetic engineering shape network negotiations about the use
of collaborative versus confrontational advocacy. The study pays particular
attention to the practices and perspectives evident in different locations of
both networks (in regional as well as network structural terms) in order to
probe the extent of internal democracy. The research design involves semi-
structured and open-ended interviews with key network representatives in various
organizational sites in Mexico, Honduras, Germany, Belgium, and the US to
examine the history and character of network linkages and decision-making
processes, and to capture the discursive practices relating to genetic
engineering. In addition, two intensive case studies of network participants in
Mexico and Germany will serve to explore local everyday practices in two
different non-central locations of both transnational networks to be analyzed.
Participant observation in these locations will pay particular attention the
role of personal leadership, the organization of office work, and the
interactions with network members, other civil society organizations, as well as
state/international institutions in order to trace how advocacy strategies shape
up in practice. Finally, the historical trajectory and broader cultural and
political significance of civil society networks concerned with plant
biotechnology will be examined based on content and discourse analysis of
network activity reports and websites maintained by participating organizations.
The proposed research will contribute to a critical reassessment of the meaning
of accountability and representation in this local-global context. Rather than
assuming conventional conceptions of democratic legitimacy, the proposed project
attempts to contribute to social science understanding of the political and
cultural practices and visions that emerge simultaneously above and below
established channels of political participation and the conditions under which
these divergent definitions of the situation will challenge dominant notions of
democratic representation.