* 0302123
* Supernovae in 3-D:  Bridging the Gap Between Observations and Theory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Jennifer Hoffman, Hoffman                 Jennifer       L
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2006
* USD 194,000.00

AST-0302123 Hoffman, Jennifer

Dr. Hoffman is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
California, Berkeley. She will develop a three-dimensional Monte Carlo radiative
transfer code that will predict the observable spectro-polarimetric features of
the newest supernova explosion models. Increases in computing capabilities have
encouraged the development of three-dimensional hydrodynamical supernova
explosion models at the nation's largest supercomputer centers. The validity of
such models and their fundamental assumptions can only be tested, however, by
direct comparison with observations. Her calculations will facilitate the
testing of these models against the recently available spectro-polarimetric
observations of supernova ejecta on 8-m class telescopes.

In addition to her research, Dr. Hoffman will pursue a three-pronged plan to
foster the development of a local support network for women in the physical
sciences at all educational levels. She will (a) organize a new student
orientation for first-year female students intending to major in physical
sciences at UC Berkeley, (b) forge partnerships between the University and the
local community by arranging opportunities for female physical science students
at UC Berkeley to participate in existing Bay Area educational and outreach
programs aimed at girls' science education, and (c) sponsor a colloquium series
that will bring female scientists to the UC Berkeley campus to speak about their
research and to network with their female colleagues. ***