* 0302692
* ITWF:  The Influence of Professional Identification on the Retention of Women and Racial Minorities in the IT Workforce
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Vicki McKinney, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 05/31/2008
* USD 603,942.00

EIA-0302692&lt;br/&gt;Anne O'Leary-Kelly&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arkansas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: The Influence of Professional
Identification on the Retention of Women and Racial Minorities in the IT
Workforce&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITWF award provides support to study whether
differences in individual characteristics and situational experiences lead women
and minorities to develop different levels of professional identification
(compared to majority individuals), and to examine the influence of professional
identification on the career persistence of IT workers. The PI and co-PI's
postulate a multivariate model and 14 specific hypotheses around which their
proposed research project is based. Their general proposition is that many
antecedent factors that have the potential to influence career retention operate
through professional identification. In terms of women and racial minorities,
the researchers propose to determine which and/or if antecedent factors are
experienced differently by members of these groups and how these differences
influence attachment to the profession. The antecedent factors they will study
include: (1) motivation for choosing the IT profession; (2) socialization into
the IT profession; (3) self-efficacy regarding a career in IT; (4) experiences
in the IT workplace; and (5) congruence of professional and other valued
identities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers plan to use the cooperation of
a number of employers of IT workers to identify and contact a panel of
respondents in a program of original data collection. They will develop a data
collection instrument that will be used to create longitudinal records on
individuals at 3 time periods.&lt;br/&gt;