* 0302428
* GOALI:     Molecular Engineering of Mass Transport in Nanoporous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Randall Snurr, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2007
* USD 255,000.00

Snurr, Randall Q. - Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;Goralski, Christian T. -
Ford Motor Company&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Molecular Engineering of Mass
Transport in Nanoporous Materials&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This GOALI project
addresses several needs in the area of diffusion in nanoporous materials,
focusing particularly on zeolites as one important example. Nanoporous materials
are widely used in catalysis, adsorption separations, and ion exchange. They
also hold promise in new applications such as membranes, energy storage, and
radioactive waste containment. In these applications, rates of mass transport
can play a crucial role. Experimental studies and molecular modeling will be
used to attain the following objectives: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Develop a
Hydrocarbon Trap for Cold-Start Automotive Exhaust Treatment. The
&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern group has recently demonstrated a novel method for
trapping molecules inside of zeolites by exploiting one-dimensional pores that
exhibit single-file diffusion. Further experimental work is proposed to advance
this concept for treating an important &lt;br/&gt;environmental problem. If time
permits, molecular modeling will be applied to better &lt;br/&gt;understand
whether particular systems exhibit single-file diffusion and the desired
trapping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Create a Data Set of Multicomponent
Diffusivities in Zeolites. Pulsed field gradient (PFG) NMR measurements will be
used to obtain self-diffusion coefficients for a variety of multicomponent
systems in zeolites. The lack of such data is holding back validation of
theoretical models for multicomponent diffusion in zeolites. The data will be
used to test theories for predicting multicomponent diffusivities from single-
component values. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project will
contribute to graduate education of 1 PhD student. Having both simulation and
experiment in the same research group will enhance the research training. To go
beyond traditional faculty mentoring, the student will also work closely with
the industrial collaborator. This arrangement allows significant interaction
with industry and industrial input to the research direction. In addition,
graduate students can see how industrial research is done. Undergraduates will
also be involved in smaller research projects, drawing particularly from summer
research programs at Northwestern that make a special effort to recruit minority
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The societal impact of trapping in one-
dimensional zeolites is potentially very large if a &lt;br/&gt;hydrocarbon trap
for vehicles can be developed. This could substantially reduce automotive
hydrocarbon emissions and contribute to improved air quality. The project also
demonstrates how fundamental science (single-file diffusion in this case) can
help satisfy industrial and society needs in unexpected ways. Better
understanding of multicomponent diffusion in zeolites could impact zeolite
catalysis and adsorption separations, and particularly the development of
zeolite membranes. These membranes promise energy-efficient separations
processes and potentially highly selective membrane reactors. &lt;br/&gt;