* 0302313
* Association of Abnormal Joint Dynamic Stiffness with Impaired Voluntary Movement
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* William Rymer, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 06/30/2007
* USD 326,209.00

0302313&lt;br/&gt;Mirbagheri&lt;br/&gt;Although the precise mechanisms are
uncertain, motor impairments in stroke are broadly due to disturbances in
descending commands to the spinal cord. Three major mechanisms have been
suggested: spasticity, abnormal muscle co-activation, and weakness caused by
decreased drive command to motoneurons. These mechanisms also affect joint
dynamic stiffness, the dynamic relation between joint position and the torque,
which characterizes the interaction between a joint and the mechanical
environment. Accordingly, the long-term objective of this research program is to
develop advanced engineering techniques to investigate the neurophysiological
mechanisms underlying motor impairments in stroke, particularly, through the
study of the reflex components of joint dynamic stiffness. Results will provide
critical information for understanding the origins of neurological disabilities,
thus optimizing the efficacy of therapeutic intervention. The specific aims of
the proposed work are 1) to characterize effect of stroke on modulation of joint
dynamic stiffness with joint angle and voluntary contraction, 2) to characterize
impairment in voluntary movement of the spastic joint, 3) to assess the
relationships between the stroke effects on joint dynamic stiffness and impaired
voluntary movement, 4) to explore the time course of the relationships in Aim-3
from injury to 12 months, and 5) to characterize effects of stroke on stretch
reflex modulation during imposed joint movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mechanical parameters of stretch reflexes have been difficult to study in a
clinical setting due to the longstanding lack of accurate and sensitive tools
for separating torque generated by reflex mechanisms from torque generated by
passive and intrinsic mechanisms. The investigators have developed a novel
system identification technique (the parallel-cascade technique) that enables
them to characterize joint dynamic stiffness and to separate the relative
contributions of its components. The technique will be used to characterize the
interactions between abnormal joint dynamic stiffness and impaired voluntary
movement during recovery from stroke. Passive, intrinsic and reflex stiffness
are expected to be modulated abnormally across test conditions and these
abnormalities will be correlated with the parameters of impaired voluntary
movement.