* 0302097
* Alternative Pathways to Physics and Science Certification
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Marie Plumb, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 05/31/2007
* USD 503,000.00

Faculty of SUNY Buffalo State College (BSC), SUNY Jamestown Community College,
Buffalo Public Schools, the BSC Center for Excellence in Urban and Rural
Education, and other SUNY colleges throughout New York State are working to
create, institutionalize and populate model programs and opportunities necessary
to significantly increase the number of preK-12 teachers who are certified and
well-qualified to teach physical science and physics. This project improves the
quality of pre-service teacher preparation, and continued professional growth
for teachers in Western New York and throughout New York State. This project is
making particular efforts to recruit and support under-represented and minority
populations into the teaching profession via the provision of targeted
scholarships, assistantships and student wage opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities include significant expansion of BSC
graduate summer workshop courses in physics and physical science content. These
courses are taught via reformed teaching pedagogy to create a summer academy of
graduate credit courses offered to as many as 90 teachers and teacher candidates
each summer. Project instruction reinforces the development of standards-based,
student-centered constructivist-inquiry teaching strategies and Physics
Education Research (PER)-informed pedagogical methods. Summer academy offerings
support a variety of alternative tracks to certification. Project activities
also include developing and promoting a chain of experiences extending from
grade school through master teacher experiences promoting physics and science
teacher recruitment, preparation, certification, induction, professional
development and support. The project is creating a set of teacher preparation
models transferable both to other colleges and universities specializing in
teacher preparation and will be published and disseminated in journals and at
relevant local and national conferences.&lt;br/&gt;