* 0302588
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Pawns, Knights, or Kings: Understanding the Role of Regulators in Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Davita Silfen Glasberg, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2004
* USD 6,126.00

This project examines the role of regulators and regulatory agencies in the
formulation and enforcement of public policy, and how these roles are shaped by
both the internal and external organizational environment, in particular, how
the environmental context affects how regulators react to their various publics
as represented by consumer as well as capitalist interests. Data will be
gathered on these and related issues through interviews with financial service
regulators, banking industry representatives, and representatives from community
organizations and through analysis of documents within the services policy
arena. The financial services venue includes regulations that deal with economic
stability and the safety of financial system (focusing on capitalist interests)
as well as regulations that provide public rights and protections (focusing on
consumer or individual interests). I propose a cross case historical analysis
which will permit me to examine policy evolution over time and between cases. In
addition, I will examine public and private documents and publications relating
to regulatory, implementation, and enforcement. I will analyze within the
context of the economic and political environment to understand how regulators
matter in the policy process, and examine the opportunities available to
financial institutions and community groups to influence this process. This
research on regulatory agencies and their role in public policy will contribute
to our understanding of financial regulators and agencies and will help fill in
an integral piece in understanding the development and evolution of public
policy as well as extend organizational research in the realm of public
institutions. In a broader context, this detailed analysis of the regulatory
processes and the influence of various environmental factors on regulatory
outcomes is anticipated to be beneficial to both policy makers and community
organizers interested in influencing the policy making process.