* 0302503
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Mothers Make Decisions: The Multiple Contexts of Everyday Infant Care Practices among Inner City Women
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Irma Elo, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 04/30/2004
* USD 6,997.00

The objectives of this study are: 1) to understand how mothers in disadvantaged
settings make infant care decisions; 2) to examine the roles of other social
actors (including the baby's father, family members, friends, and health care
providers) in decision-making processes; and 3) to explore differences and
similarities in mothers' caring practices by race and ethnicity. The data are
based on a combination of: 1) focus groups with first-time mothers; and 2) in-
depth, semi-structured interviews with 40 first-time mothers from various racial
and ethnic backgrounds in the city of Philadelphia. The open-ended format of the
interviews will allow women to narrate how they learn how to mother, as they
manage infant care in the contexts of their work, household, familial, and
social obligations, and residential neighborhoods. The proposed research will
make important contributions to the sociological understanding of how people
make decisions. The intellectual merit of the study is to understand how inner-
city mothers, whose infants are most prone to adverse health outcomes, make
infant care decisions using a sociological framework that explores how decisions
are embedded within everyday lives and shaped and negotiated through social
interactions. The findings from this research have broader implications at a
societal level since they will inform the health community on the question of
why low-income mothers do or do not engage in recommended practices set by
medical and government organizations.