* 0302337
* International - Optimal Impact Protection for Disabled Persons in Vehicles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Walter Pilkey, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2007
* USD 184,249.00

0302337&lt;br/&gt;Pilkey&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to provide support for two
distinguished Russian scientists to work with a US counterpart. The Russian-US
team has worked together previously and has written a book, Optimal Protection
from Impact, Shock, and Vibration (Gordon and Breach, 2001), on optimal
protection, primarily of military hardware. The team wishes to initiate joint
work in a new area, namely that of injury control under impact conditions. The
interest in wheelchair occupant injury protection stems from the US participant
having served earlier as the director of the University of Virginia (UVA)
transportation research center for persons with disabilities. He was also the
founder and director of the UVA Automobile Safety Laboratory (ASL), where
extensive high speed sled testing of wheelchair tiedown systems has been
performed. Much of the sled testing for the development of the ANSI/RESNA
(American National Standards Institute/Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive
Technology Society of North America) crashworthy wheelchair standard was
conducted at the ASL. The goal of the proposed research is to develop the
technology for characterizing the best possible (theoretically optimal)
protection from impact for disabled persons during their transportation in
assorted types of vehicles. The "theoretically optimal" is referred to as the
limiting performance in this proposal. The limiting performance involves a
protection system in which the structural configuration of the system is
replaced by a generic force. Of particular interest in this project will be an
investigation of the advantages of a pre-acting isolation unit.