* 0302845
* Increasing the Number of Women in Computer Fields: A Community College Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Donna Tupper, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Standard Grant
* Ginger H. Rowell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 340,386.00

The Community College of Baltimore County is developing the Grace Hopper
Scholars Program in Mathematics and Computer Science. This program is designed
to prepare women for success in required mathematics courses, provide an
environment that builds their confidence, create awareness of careers in
computer science, and emphasize the impact women can make in this vital field.
Major components of the program include a summer bridge program before students
enter in their first full semester of coursework, a curriculum which emphasizes
mathematics and job market skills, and a support network which helps to create a
community of learners. This project also encourages female students to pursue
advanced mathematics in combination with computer science. By offering solutions
to acknowledged barriers, the investigators seek to demonstrate whether the key
to attracting more women to the field of computer science lies in support for
rigorous mathematics training, multiple applied learning opportunities, or
female role models and mentors. This project is also providing a replicable
model for other community colleges as it expands to neighboring Anne Arundel and
Prince George's Community Colleges. A working group of educational partners from
other Vanguard community colleges, in addition to the two partners listed above,
are consulting on new course design, program development, and assessment to
ensure a replicable program. Course materials, professional development
resources, and data are being made available online.