* 0302945
* Framing Student Success: Increasing Math and Science Achievement through Construction Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Larry Flick, Portland Community College
* Continuing grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 07/31/2007
* USD 697,750.00

The project members are developing and implementing a model of instruction and
articulation that creates linkages for students from high school to community
college to four-year university to career. The project provides student support
which reinforces their sense of purpose in their chosen discipline and enhances
their ability to excel in math and science and pursue technical careers in the
areas of construction technology. This project addresses the problem of high
school students' underpreparation in math, science, and technology and the need
to upgrade these skills for students interested in the construction industries
by informing high school teachers and counselors about the requirements and
rewards of college study or careers in construction, developing capacity for
teachers to infuse technology instruction across high school curricula, and
providing summer workshops and work experiences for high school students.
Pathways for students to pursue post secondary education or careers in
construction are also being mapped out to assist students in becoming better
trained in the use of technology in construction. New courses in construction
technologies and the strategies to implement them are being developed so that
community colleges nationwide may upgrade math, science, and technical
instruction. The project is also serving a diverse group of high schools in
rural and urban western Oregon and cutting across curricular bounds in those
high schools to ensure that this project will be replicable in communities and
schools nationwide.