* 0302754
* Maryland Center for Manufacturing Education Excellence
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Dennis Faber, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,998,908.00

Four community colleges serving constituencies throughout the state of Maryland
are collaborating to create the Maryland Center for Manufacturing Education
Excellence (MCMEE). With the participation of private industry, trade
associations, higher education, secondary education, government agencies, and
assessment experts, the Center aims to inform and improve manufacturing
education through discovery, utilization, and dissemination of intellectual
resources such as the National Skill Standards Board, the Manufacturing Skill
Standards Council, and the ATE centers. The Community College of Baltimore
County (CCBC) will lead the effort, with assistance from College of Southern
Maryland, Harford Community College, and Wor-Wic Community College. The project
objectives, activities and deliverables represent a comprehensive strategy to
increase the number of manufacturing technicians to meet local workforce
demands, and to improve the technical skills of those workers. The center will
focus its energies in four program areas: (1) Curriculum development and
adaptation: To address Maryland's diverse manufacturing base, the partners are
designing a modular, flexible program that can be reconfigured and adapted to
address varied workforce education needs at the high school or college level.
The model arranges thirteen industries into three primary segments: processing,
fabrication, and electronics/instrumentation. The curriculum is structured
around a cluster of core workplace skills as defined by the WorkKeys system
(e.g., applied technology, teamwork, observation) and core technical skills
(e.g., instrument calibration, industrial measurements, process control)
identified by the project team as common to a majority of the industries.

(2) Skill assessment and workforce/program improvement: Employers are demanding
reliable methods to assess critical technical and workplace skills of job
applicants; educators seek similar skill measurements to ensure that their
students are work-ready upon graduation. To that end, MCMEE is constructing an
assessment methodology grounded in the strong positive correlation between the
newly-created curricula and on-the-job performance expectations of local
employers. With those new instruments, the Center can assess the skills of
current and future manufacturing workers. Assessment data is being compiled,
aggregated, analyzed, and reported to educators and employers for use in quality
improvement efforts.

(3) Enhanced recruitment to manufacturing careers: A two-pronged approach to
change the negative image of manufacturing jobs targets both educators and
students. Faculty and career counselors from both high schools and colleges are
participating in on-line technical courses, tours and presentations at
manufacturing facilities, attending workshops and national conference, and
participating in internships at local companies. Innovative efforts to attract
students to manufacturing include new experiences at the Baltimore Museum of
Industry and intensive summer workshops for high school students.

(4) Electronic communication and integration of services: A web-based portal is
a central resource for accessing services and information related to
manufacturing, including skills-based career exploration and job matching; a job
exchange for on-line job postings and applications; promotion of education and
training opportunities; linkages among faculty, employers, service providers,
and other audiences; and on-line dissemination of project and assessment
information.