* 0302780
* Integrating Asynchronous Technology and Virtual Reality to Support Aircraft Maintenance Technology Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Michael Leonard, Greenville Technical College
* Continuing grant
* Kathleen A. Alfano
* 08/31/2007
* USD 651,329.00

Our faculty team from Greenville Technical College in collaboration with faculty
members from Clemson University have developed and implemented an interactive
virtual reality (VR) model of the aircraft inspection maintenance process for
asynchronous delivery. Our model has emphasized the curriculum development and
workplace preparedness needed by modern aircraft maintenance technology for
local, state and national audiences. Our effort has brought together a
multidisciplinary team including a two-year technical college, research
university, high schools and industry. Our participants have expertise in
aircraft maintenance technology education, VR, human/machine systems design,
inspection and maintenance processes in aviation, asynchronous learning and
curriculum assessment with demonstrable results from previous NSF, FAA and NASA
grants. Moreover, we have had the resources of the Advanced Technology Systems
Laboratory and Virtual Reality Eye Tracking Laboratory at our disposal. The
industry partners contributed experienced practitioners, a diversity of
inspection tasks and test beds for integrating our VR products. This innovative
approach is the first effort to extend tested VR technology to the aircraft
maintenance technology curriculum in a two-year college. Existing approaches
have not been able to mimic accurately the complexity of the aircraft
maintenance process, reporting limited transfer capabilities and student
preparedness for the workplace. The outcome of our collective efforts have lead
to the following: an innovative, high-impact model for curriculum application in
aircraft maintenance technology for college students and industry employees; an
increased workplace pool of aircraft maintenance technicians prepared for the
transition from learning to workforce; recruiting and mentoring material to
attract under-represented groups to aircraft maintenance technology; a program
providing the use of VR technology as a pedagogical tool; and a national model
for collaboration among research institutions, community colleges, industry and
high schools. Most importantly, this effort has integrated deliverables from on-
going research funded by NASA and FAA in the use of advanced technology and
virtual reality to improve the aircraft inspection and maintenance processes.