* 0302122
* Development of Novel Encoded "One-Bead One-Compound" Combinatorial Small Molecule Libraries
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Carlito Lebrilla, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2006
* USD 424,000.00

This project involves the development and validation of a novel encoding
technique for "one-bead one-compound" (OBOC) small molecule combinatorial
libraries. Using a solid phase split-mix synthesis method, bead libraries can be
obtained such that each bead expresses only one compound, with 1013 copies of
that compound in one single bead. The bead-library can then be screened for
biological, chemical and physical properties of interest, and positive beads are
then isolated for structure determination. In terms of synthesis and screening,
the OBOC technique is highly efficient. However, a major limitation in the small
molecule OBOC combinatorial library method is the difficulty in elucidating the
chemical structure of a small molecule compound on one single bead. A rapid,
sensitive, and reliable encoding/decoding methodology is necessary for full
exploitation of the OBOC combinatorial method. In this proposal, topologically
segregated bi-functional beads with testing molecules in the outer layer of the
bead and coding molecules in the interior of the beads will be developed. Triple
or quadruple cleavable coding arms will be constructed in the interior of the
bead. Each of these coding arms contains a functional group that is identical or
related to the functional groups on the scaffold of the testing compound to be
synthesized. In this encoding method, each building block will react with the
testing arm and the encoding arms simultaneously, thus eliminating many
synthetic steps and lengthy encoding times. Decoding is accomplished by cleaving
all the coding tags at once and analyzing the released molecules by mass
spectroscopy. This novel encoding method is highly versatile and efficient. Over
100 beads can easily be decoded in one day. There is room for automation in
terms of sample preparation and data analysis. Twelve different model library
compounds obtained from the literature will be used to optimize the procedure,
and the encoding method will be validated by designing, synthesizing, and
screening three encoded small molecule libraries.

In recent years, many organic chemists have turned their attention from the
synthesis of single molecules to the preparation of large "libraries" of related
compounds, permitting fast and efficient screening for desirable properties.
These "combinatorial" synthesis approaches come with their own challenges, often
relating to the ability to determine the structure of the specific molecule
giving rise to the most promising properties. With the support of the Organic
and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professors Kit S. Lam, of the Department
of Hematology and Oncology, and Carlito B. Lebrilla, of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of California - Davis, are developing new methods
for the simple, rapid, and efficient identification of molecules in
combinatorial libraries.