* 0302288
* MET Summit II - Conference on the Mathematical Education of Teachers:  Meeting the Demand for High Quality Education in America
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Irvin Vance, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 04/30/2005
* USD 229,865.00

The Benjamin Banneker Association, Inc. (BBA) and the National Association of
Mathematicians (NAM) with the support of the other fourteen member societies of
CBMS is conducting a Second National Summit -MET Summit II - on the Mathematical
Education of Teachers with emphasis on participation by HBCU's and other
institutions that produce minority teachers or teachers that work in areas with
high concentrations of minority students. The Mathematical Education of Teachers
(MET), is the mathematics community's agenda for improving the mathematical
preparation of future teachers. The Conference Board of the Mathematical
Sciences (CBMS), launched MET with a breakfast Policy Briefing, and a National
Summit on the Mathematical Education of Teachers. This Second National Summit
engages college and university mathematics faculty in the hard work of
implementing the vision of the mathematical education of teachers presented in
MET. Since HBCU's train a significant number of teachers of mathematics, MET
Summit II uses the format of the first national summit (MET I) which was a
working conference to introduce mathematics faculty and department chairs to the
report, to give them vivid and concrete examples of successful implementations
of the recommendations in the report, and to engage them in beginning widespread
local efforts to implement and spread the vision of the report. Invited teams
include a faculty member from the mathematics department, a faculty member from
mathematics education, a college or university administrator with responsibility
for teacher preparation programs, a teacher from a K-12 school system involved
in teacher preparation and/or in-service activities associated with the college
or university and a community college mathematics faculty member. The working
sessions engage the participants in thinking about how to address the challenges
in carrying out the recommendations of the report at their institution and
surrounding community. Discussions in the working sessions aid the participants
in analyzing the implications for designing courses in their own institutions
and cooperative programs with other institutions and state agencies. In addition
to these sessions focus on what must be done to change the content of teacher
education.