* 0303491
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration:  Surface Structure and Metal Uptake of Apatite Films and Particles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Donald Ellis, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration brings together two groups led by D.
Ellis at Northwestern University (NU) in the US and A. Malta Rossi at the Centro
Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The investigators
carry out theoretical and experimental analyses of surface structure and metal
ion uptake of hydroxyapatite (HAP) and related apatite structures, in
nanoparticulate and thin film morphologies. Theoretical studies are made for
both stoichiometric and defected states, using hybrid classical and quantum
methodologies developed at NU for applications to complex materials. Materials
are prepared at NU using sputtering and evaporation techniques that permit close
control over chemical composition and surface textures. Spectroscopic analyses
of textured surfaces and comparison with nanoparticulates prepared by
precipitation from solution, are carried out in collaboration with personnel at
Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas at Rio de Janeiro and elsewhere in
Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem addressed lies at the interface between
Biomedical Engineering, Chemistry, Materials Science, and Physics. Successful
outcomes will have impact on three main areas: (i) a better understanding of
heavy metal uptake and retention in human bone and tooth, of particular
importance due to lead accumulation in the environment, (ii) possibly improved
materials and strategies in treatment of wastewaters and soils, to remove or
prevent migration of heavy metal contaminants, (iii) improved understanding of
basic chemical processes, needed for development of apatite-based catalysts for
environmentally friendly chemical processing. This award is supported by the
Division of Materials Research, the Office of International Science and
Engineering, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;