* 0303366
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration:  Correlating Erbium Structure with Host Geometry in Doped Silicon Nanocrystals and Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Jeffery Coffer, Texas Christian University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 06/30/2007
* USD 49,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration research focuses on fundamental
investigations of rare earth-doped silicon nanocrystals and nanowires through an
exchange of junior scientists, with directed interdisciplinary research
training, between the groups of Jeff Coffer of the Texas Christian University
Department of Chemistry and Leandro Tessler of the Department of Applied Physics
at the State University of Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil. The research examines
the fundamentals of confinement of the rare earth in the nanostructure. This is
being evaluated in terms of: size dependence of the host crystalline Si, average
Er 3+ concentration, local Er3+ coordination, and average Er3+ location for
doped, soluble nanocrystals isolated from pyrolysis reactions. Centering on the
high temperature pyrolysis of disilane (Si2H6 ) or silane (SiH4) and a rare
earth precursor complex under carefully-controlled conditions, the resultant
nanostructures are being characterized by photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy,
UV/visible optical absorption spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy /
high resolution electron microscopy (TEM/HREM), Raman spectroscopy, and Extended
X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS) measurements. EXAFS measurements
performed at the Brazilian National Light Source are crucial to correlating
local erbium structure with other structural features of the nanostructure,
including its associated photophysical behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Site-
specific control of any dopant atoms is a central and unanswered issue in the
legitimate structural control of the next generation of nanoscale electronic
materials. The international collaboration provides an interdisciplinary
training experience to the junior scientists in materials chemistry at TCU,
their counterparts in applied physics in Brazil, and permits the evolution of
future research opportunities through networking for all involved. This award is
supported by the Division of Materials Research, the Office of International
Science and Engineering, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;