* 0303702
* University Consortium for a Linear Collider
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Maury Tigner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 08/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

This proposal requests support from nineteen U.S. university groups that have
banded together to form the University Consortium for Linear Collider (UCLC)
R&D. This collaborative effort responds directly to the recent recommendations
of the U.S. High Energy Physics Advisory Panel that a high-energy electron-
positron linear collider should be the highest priority in the U.S. program in
elementary particle physics. The work proposed here comprises 27 specific
projects, spanning a broad range of issues in both accelerator and detector R&D
for a linear collider. Twelve of the projects pursue important issues in
accelerator physics and technology and the other fifteen projects are directed
at linear collider detector R&D.

A number of broader impacts are to be expected from this proposal. The
accelerator physics R&D will push the state of the art in many areas (such as
diagnostics) that have applications across the whole spectrum of accelerators.
The detector R&D is similarly often of a generic nature, and complements well
the detector development done for the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, Geneva,
Switzerland. This proposal will also provide significant benefits in the
training of accelerator physicists. By supporting accelerator physics at
universities, this proposal will provide training opportunities that can begin
to address the current national shortage of accelerator physicists.

Finally, the collaborating groups that form the UCLC have a strong history of
outreach to undergraduates and K-12 students and teachers. The work supported by
this proposal will be integrated into these outreach efforts. The dissemination
of the concepts explored by basic research in high-energy physics to students in
their developing years will provide for an increased understanding of the field
by the general public, and will foster the public's interest in science in
general.