* 0303447
* SGER: Anaphora in African Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Kenneth Safir, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2005
* USD 61,555.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kenneth Safir will conduct one
year of research on patterns of anaphora in African languages. "Anaphora" is the
use of a linguistic term (e.g., a pronoun) to refer to an entity already
mentioned or implicated in a discourse. Anaphora is interesting because it uses
a limited number of terms and structures in the world's languages, and it is
often the case that unrelated languages show exactly the same pattern. This
research asks where the patterns come from. One possibility is historical
connection among languages. Another is the way that language is used (e.g.,
people in different cultures want to talk about the same things and refer back
to things they have mentioned). But certain subtle requirements on anaphora seem
to depend on grammatical constructions and semantic interpretation that could
only be uniform across languages if grammar has its origin in a deeper human
property. Thus the study of anaphora explores a subtle realm of human cognitive
functioning that is highly, structured, systematic, and hypothesized to be
innate. An opportunity to study African anaphora patterns is to probe the
expertise of the hundreds of African language specialists and native speakers
who will attend the first joint meeting of the American Conference on African
Linguistics and the World Congress of African Linguistics at Rutgers University
in June, 2003. This project will enlist conference participants who are native
speakers of the non-colonial languages of Africa in a questionnaire study of the
patterns of anaphora in their languages. After the conference, the most
productive consultants will collaborate with the research team in building a
database including analytic essays on a
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical work inspired by the distribution of
anaphora in natural language has been a major engine for innovation in
linguistics for over 30 years, but very few African languages have received the
detailed study that has been focused on languages like Chinese, Hindi, Korean,
Germanic, Slavic or Romance. Many of the most theoretically interesting aspects
of anaphora, which depend on subtle structural and interpretive distinctions,
have only been uncovered by state of the art research. This new expertise has
not yet been applied in detail to the anaphora of any African language. The
understudied patterns of African languages may hold important keys to our
understanding of anaphoric phenomena generally and may serve to open up many
poorly studied African languages for wider grammatical comparison. &lt;br/&gt;