* 0303916
* NIRT on Wetting of  Surfaces with Nano-Scale Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Paul Sokol, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will study the fundamental science and practical engineering of
liquids confined to spaces of the order of up to just a few nanometers in size.
In view of current efforts to develop technologies based on micro- and nano-
fluidics this type of understanding can be of immense practical importance. One
example where the need for this knowledge arises is in connection with the
developing 'lab on a chip' devices that promise to play an important role in
medical and chemical science. When liquids are confined to spaces that are not
much larger than the molecular size their physical properties are influenced by
the properties of the surface. For example, the condensation of liquid within a
small capillary occurs at different vapor pressure from condensation on a flat
surface of the same material. The difference depends on the interfacial energy
between the liquid and the capillary walls and this is precisely the reason why
engineers commonly insert surfactants into oil wells in order to enhance
secondary oil recovery from porous rocks. In this project we will study the
fundamental processes that determine the liquid-solid interfacial energy. A
special feature of this project is that we are able to manufacture macroscopic
samples with controlled nano-scale features that make precision in-situ
measurements of the properties of confined liquids feasible. In addition to the
laboratory-based techniques such as laser feedback interferometry and confocal
optical microscopy, this project will make extensive use of synchrotron x-ray
and neutron scattering facilities at our national laboratories. The experiments
will be complemented by theory and computer simulations. Students participating
in this project will be well trained in the cutting edge research that this
country is committed to.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Current efforts to develop
technologies based on micro- and nano-fluidics promise to provide cost effect
methods to deal with basic medical and chemical applications. For example, the
often discussed 'lab on a chip' should make it possible to carry out both basic
scientific experiments and practical diagnostic tests using only small amounts
of fluids that would be either costly or dangerous if done with standard
amounts. A real problem that these developments will encounter eventually is
that the properties of liquids that are confined to spaces that are not much
larger than the molecular size are often different than those of unconfined
liquids. This occurs because of the increased influence of the surface on
smaller samples. This project will use both modern laboratory-based techniques
such as laser feedback interferometry and confocal optical microscopy, as well
as synchrotron x-ray and neutron scattering facilities at our national
laboratories to study the scientific and engineering properties of liquids
confined to specially manufactured nano-scale structures. Students participating
in this project will be well trained in the cutting edge research that this
country is committed to. Thus, this project will satisfy the dual national goals
of advancing our scientific/technological knowledge while simultaneously
preparing the next generation of men and women for research in our countries
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;