* 0303030
* The Northeast Regional Biomanufacturing Center: Increasing Biomanufacturing Human Resource Capacity to Meet Workforce Needs
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Judith Leff, Manchester Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/2005
* USD 199,969.00

To meet the burgeoning needs of the biotechnology industry for skilled
production technicians, New Hampshire Technical Community College (NHCTC),
Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC), and industry and community college
partners are working together to develop a Northeast Regional Biomanufacturing
Center. This project involves three components: working with partners to develop
the foundation for a Center; determining biomanufacturing job competencies for
technicians and supervisors; and beginning the development of a biotechnology
equipment and supplies resource center.

The Northeast Region has a large, growing need for skilled biomanufacturing
technicians. A 2000 survey by the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council predicted
that between September 2001 and September 2002, the Massachusetts/New
Hampshire/Rhode Island corridor would create over 1,000 new biomanufacturing
jobs. The expansion of two facilities in Rhode Island by 2005 will produce an
estimated 800-1000 additional biomanufacturing technician jobs. In Maryland, the
16,000 biotechnology work force is expected to double in size in a few years. To
compound this situation, manufacturing supervisors report significant turnover
rates of current manufacturing workers because they lack appropriate skills. A
biomanufacturing education center is needed, and there needs to be coordination
throughout the region. This project is beginning that process.