* 0303969
* NER:     Enhanced Magnetoabsorption Oscillations in Semiconductor Nanorings
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* David Citrin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) award that is funded as a result
of a proposal submitted to the Nanoscience and Engineering (NSE) initiative.
This theoretical research focuses on new phenomena and the resulting
functionalities that may be afforded by intrinsic ring-shaped semiconductor
nanostructures, called nanorings, based on recently developed fabrication
capabilities. In preliminary work, we have predicted that nanorings should
exhibit sensitive magneto-optical characteristics in the presence of a static or
high-frequency electric field as a magnetic flux threading an intrinsic nanoring
is varied. Spectroscopic signatures associated with magnetic field changes of
~0.1 Tesla are evident in the presence of dc electric fields on the order of
1-10kV/cm (consistent with ~1 V potential applied across the structure). The
magnetic-field sensitivity is considerably superior to that typically associated
with magnetoexcitons in quantum wells where magnetic fields in excess of one
Tesla is often needed to affect an appreciable spectroscopic change. Moreover,
unlike the analogous transport phenomena, these magneto-optical phenomena are
predicted to occur at temperatures up to several tens of Kelvins.

This provides a potentially sensitive optical probe of the Aharonov-Bohm effect
of neutral excitons in nanorings, in which the magnetoabsorption varies
periodically with the threading flux, the period being given by the electron
flux quantum hc/e. The demonstration - both theoretical and experimental - of
the Aharonov-Bohm effect in the optical properties of semiconductor nanorings,
moreover, spurs the search for related phenomena that have traditionally been in
the domain of transport. We have begun work investigating the effects of
disorder, with an eye on possible Al'tschuler-Aronov-Spivak oscillations, whose
period hc/2e is half the electron flux quantum. In addition, effects analogous
to universal conductance fluctuations are likely to be observable in the
frequency vicinity of an excitonic resonance. Such optical studies allow for
superior frequency and wavevector selectivity compared with transport
measurements where there is limited control of these parameters.

The studies will determine the feasibility of devices exploiting this effect and
provide a theoretical basis for related problems. This research is both of
fundamental and applied interest across several fields of physics and
engineering. The work will be carried out in collaboration with groups in
Germany and Switzerland, in addition to Georgia Tech. %%% This is a Nanoscale
Exploratory Research (NER) award that is funded as a result of a proposal
submitted to the Nanoscience and Engineering (NSE) initiative. This theoretical
research focuses on new phenomena and the resulting functionalities that may be
afforded by intrinsic ring-shaped semiconductor nanostructures, called
nanorings, based on recently developed fabrication capabilities. In preliminary
work, we have predicted that nanorings should exhibit sensitive magneto-optical
characteristics in the presence of a static or high-frequency electric field as
a magnetic flux threading an intrinsic nanoring is varied. The studies will
determine the feasibility of devices exploiting this effect and provide a
theoretical basis for related problems. This research is both of fundamental and
applied interest across several fields of physics and engineering. The work will
be carried out in collaboration with groups in Germany and Switzerland, in
addition to Georgia Tech. ***