* 0303510
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration:  New Steel Microstructures Developed Through Carbon Partitioning
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* David Matlock, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2007
* USD 329,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration brings together two groups led by
John Speer at the Colorado School of Mines and Fernando Rizzo at the Pontificia
Universidade Catolica in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The project investigates novel
steel microstructures developed through carbon partitioning. The concept is
based on a new thermodynamic model that has been developed to understand carbon
partitioning between martensite and retained austenite. The model to describe
the endpoint of partitioning is new, and defines the conditions under which
carbon reaches a uniform chemical potential in the two phases, while the
martensite/austenite interface remains stationary (implying complete immobility
of iron atoms). A number of important potential applications for this new
concept are identified, along with fundamental implications related to the
mechanism of bainite transformation in steels.

The education of US student participants is enriched through the interactions
with academia and industry in Brazil. Students benefit generally from the
research, publishing, and external interactions associated with this work, and
are educated for employment in an academic or industrial research setting. The
project is expected to lead to important developments that will be incorporated
into physical metallurgy curricula at the participating universities and
elsewhere, and should provide results that can lead to novel alloying/processing
approaches that can be employed for a variety of important steel applications.
Collaboration with PUC-Rio allows the US investigators to maintain a
relationship with one of the highest regarded physical metallurgy groups in
Brazil, which is located nearby to the largest steel producer in that country.
This award is supported by the Division of Materials Research, the Office of
International Science and Engineering, and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.