* 0303523
* Schubert Calculus, and Degenerations to Toric Simplicial Complexes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Allen Knutson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2006
* USD 197,262.00

Dr. Knutson's proposed work covers two rather different connections
of&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics and algebraic geometry. The first concerns Schubert
calculus, &lt;br/&gt;a boolean lattice's worth of problems whose minimal element
is the (now &lt;br/&gt;extremely well-understood) intersection theory on
Grassmannians. Its &lt;br/&gt;extensions include equivariant intersection theory
(recently solved by Knutson &lt;br/&gt;and T. Tao), K-theory (recently solved by
A. Buch), quantum cohomology (unsolved, but a very solid conjecture exists),
replacing the Grassmannian by larger flag manifolds, and analogues for arbitrary
Lie groups (for these last two almost nothing is known). Since the submission of
the proposal, much progress has been made (by Knutson and R. Vakil) towards one
more level in this lattice, the equivariant K-theory of Grassmannians, but all
other combinations remain. The second part is a generalization of Littelmann's
path model in representation theory, which one should regard in this context as
providing a flat degeneration of the flag manifold to a union of toric
varieties. In the generalization, the only property used of the flag manifold is
that it carries an action of the circle with isolated fixed points. Many other
varieties should thus have a "path model" for their coordinate ring, such as
toric varieties (a testbed, where the theory is rather trivial), wonderful
compactifications, and Hilbert schemes. As an example application, this would
provide a ppositive formula for Haiman's generalization of the (q,t)-Catalan
numbers (where positivity is known for vanishing-cohomology reasons, but there
is no formula).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of Dr. Knutson's two projects
concerns a 19th-century intrusion&lt;br/&gt;of combinatorics into algebraic
geometry: counting the number of lines (or &lt;br/&gt;planes, or chains
consisting of a point inside a line inside a plane etc.)&lt;br/&gt;satisfying a
number of generic intersection conditions. The first interesting &lt;br/&gt;such
question is ``Given four generic lines in space, how many other lines touch
&lt;br/&gt;all four?'' (The answer is 2.) There are many generalizations of this
problem; &lt;br/&gt;one of the newest and most exciting is quantum intersection
theory, in which there may be no single solution to all the conditions, but
rather the solution may "quantum tunnel" between the requirements, while paying
a well-defined "penalty."(In physical terms, this penalty means the occurrence
is impossible classically, but in the quantum world is only very rare.) There
already exist formulae to solve any one of this huge family of problems, but
they are extremely unsatisfying, as they determine the count by adding and
subtracting many numbers. Such cancelative formulae are essentially useless for
proving that a general class of intersection problems has an answer, and
moreover they are computationally very inefficient. Dr. Knutson and his
collaborators have provided noncancelative formulae for some of these
generalizations, and have conjectures about others. His other project is not
directly related, though it also uses combinatorics to control algebraic
geometry, building on work of P. Littelmann. Littelmann showed how to use the
very great symmetry of certain algebraic spaces, such as the set of all k-planes
in n-space, to compute the space of functions on them in terms of lattice points
inside a union of large-dimensional tetrahedra. This second proposal is based on
recent work of Dr. Knutson's indicating that this large degree of symmetry is
unnecessary -- a single circular symmetry, plus a technical (but common and
easily checked) condition, seem to be enough to be able to make use of this
lattice-point machinery. Such algebraic spaces with symmetry are endemic in
mathematics and physics.&lt;br/&gt;