* 0303563
* RUI:  Dynamic Properties of Magnetic Multilayers and Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Camley, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This condensed matter physics project focuses on the
properties of magnetic multilayers and nanostructures. While static behaviors,
such as exchange coupling and giant magnetoresistance have received most of the
attention, there are important issues in understanding the dynamical behavior of
these materials as well. In this area three studies are proposed. (1) Dynamic
behavior of exchange-coupled magnetic multilayers. This will be studied at low
fields via ferromagnetic resonance methods. This area, unlike the well studied
case of magnetic resonance in magnetic multilayers, is known as the anti-
resonance condition - where the skin depth becomes large and the material "opens
up" - has not been investigated. This is surprising since theoretical
calculations indicate that anti-resonance in multilayers is very different from
anti-resonance in single films and because there are significant technological
applications for this effect. In addition we intend to investigate a very strong
low-field absorption that occurs in some magnetic multilayers. (2) Studies of
the variance of exchange coupling strength in layered structures. The
determination of th e exchange coupling strength between two ferromagnets
through a nonmagnetic spacer material has now been measured for many material
combinations. In contrast, the variance in this exchange coupling strength has
not been addressed, even though it plays a critical role in the dynamic
properties of the structure. The variance will be measures by using linewidth
information from ferromagnetic resonance measurements. This will be done for the
metallic multilayers and for ferromagnet/antiferromagnet structures where
interface roughness is likely to create large variations in exchange coupling.
(3) Dynamic response of ultra-small patterned structures. This will include
dynamic measurements on ultra-small (10 nm diameter) magnetic dot arrays, and
both single material dots (Fe and Permalloy) and multilayer (Fe/Pd and Co/Pd)
dots. The Co/Pd dots are particularly interesting in that the magnetization can
be changed from in-plane to out-of-plane by changing the thicknesses of the
layers. The project will also investigate how the magnetic quality of the dot
arrays depends on fabrication process (ion-beam etching and deposition through a
protein mask), dot separation, and dot structures. These measurements will be
important for magnetic memory technology&lt;br/&gt;The PI's all have a
demonstrated history of integrating education with research as well as promoting
diversity, and this commitment to education and human resource development will
continue to be emphasized in the proposed activity. Graduate and undergraduate
students involved in the project receive training in fundamental experimental
techniques with cutting edge technology. This training will prepare them for a
range of careers in academe, industry or
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of layered
magnetic materials has been exceptionally active in the last decade. Important
discoveries such as giant magnetoresistance have already been implemented in
computer memories, leading to significant improvements in magnetic hard disk
systems. The project will include studies of these new layered materials to
explore fundamental physics and possible applications. The first of these
investigations deals with the electromagnetic response of these materials at
high frequencies. Theoretical calculations show that at particular frequencies
the material rejects electromagnetic waves. This feature has not been tested
experimentally even though it has significant technological promise for high
frequency signal processing. Magnetic multilayers will be fabricated and tested
to see if this works as predicted and if it is usable technologically. The
second main topic deals with the magnetic coupling in these layered materials.
Of particular interest is how this coupling varies from position to position
along the layers. This is important because this variation plays an important
role in the high frequency response described above. The final project deals
with ultra-small magnetic dots. These ultra-small dots are only about 50 atoms
in diameter so they can have very different properties than materials we deal
with on an everyday basis. The experiments will study how varying the shape of
the dots as well as the layering pattern can change the magnetization direction
in these dots. This could be very important for magnetic recording because an
array of these tiny dots could store an enormous amount of information. The
Principal Investigators have a demonstrated history of integrating education
with research as well as promoting diversity, and this commitment to education
and human resource development will continue to be emphasized in the proposed
activity. Students in this program receive rigorous training in physics and
materials, and can pursue careers in either academic or industrial
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;