* 0303639
* Regulation of the Orientation of Cell Expansion in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Philip Benfey, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Herbert
* 08/31/2003
* USD 105,168.00

The long term goal of this project is to understand the molecular mechanisms
that regulate the orientation of cell expansion. The shape of plant organs
depends heavily on the ability of cells to direct expansion in specific
orientations. The quality of agricultural products such as cotton is dependent
on highly oriented cell expansion. &lt;br/&gt; A genetic analysis of cell
expansion in the root of Arabidopsis has identified mutants with abnormally
oriented expansion. Of particular interest is the cobra mutation which results
in cells that appear to expand radially rather than longitudinally. A detailed
analysis of the cobra phenotype led to the hypothesis that the COBRA gene
product regulates the transition from radial to longitudinal expansion.
&lt;br/&gt;The COBRA gene has been positionally cloned and its deduced amino
acid sequence indicates that the COBRA protein is anchored to the plasma
membrane and that a portion of the protein could interact with the cell wall.
Evidence that COBRA activity is regulated at the transcriptional level comes
from the finding that there are increased levels of COB RNA in root cells that
are undergoing the transition from radial to longitudinal expansion.
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to test the hypothesis that COBRA is a
regulator of oriented cell expansion and to use COBRA to characterize the
molecular mechanisms by which oriented cell expansion is controlled. This will
be done by determining the normal expression and localization of COBRA RNA and
protein and by analyzing the effects of altering these expression patterns.
COBRA will then be used as the starting point to build an understanding of the
molecular interactions that regulate oriented cell expansion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;