* 0303738
* NER:     Silicon Insert Molded Plastics (SIMP)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Alexander Slocum, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 90,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a process for injection molding
polymer parts with sub-micron three-dimensional features, such as angled planes,
using a process we call Silicon Insert Molded Plastics (SIMP). It is
hypothesized that silicon inserts can be manufactured using microfabrication
techniques allowing for tolerances, smoothness, and dimensions at a nanoscale
level. In particular, advantage would be taken of silicon's ability to be
selectively etched for low cost with KOH to obtain nanometer smooth <111> planes
at an inclination angle of 54.7 degrees from the vertical (for a common <100>
wafer), There are a host of precision products from surgical tools to fiber
optic couplers that can be created with the <111> planes, and in particular, the
availability of planes and edges with nanometer precision can revolutionize the
way small precision parts are designed.

Research into the SIMP process will progress in four areas. The first area is
the design and fabrication of the silicon inserts. While microfabrication
processes are becoming standardized, many concerns must be addressed for each
new part, especially for features such as cooling passages or KOH etched
features combined with DRIE features. The second area of research must account
for the integration of the silicon inserts into a metal mold carrier that is
then inserted into the molding machine. For example, thermal effects on the
silicon inserts are a major concern for processing of the polymer, mold lifetime
and accuracy issues. The third research area investigates the material
processing aspects of nanoscale features in polymers. Specifically, the issues
to address are the determination of the limits of moldable features and the
discovery of techniques to improve the processability of the polymers. The final
research area encompasses the design of parts to allow for easier molding of any
nanoscale features. Undergraduate and graduate students will be working closely
with our industrial partners -- Bayer Corp. (Polymers Division), Schick, and
Teradyne Connection Systems - to help develop the SIMP process thus ensuring
rapid transfer of the technology to industry.