* 0303112
* IR Hall Effect in the Pseudogap State of the Cuprates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* H. Dennis Drew, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2008
* USD 330,000.00

This individual investigator award will support continued infrared magneto-
transport studies of cuprate high temperature superconductors in order to
elucidate the anomalous transport observed in these materials. The emphasis will
be on the pseudogap state of the underdoped cuprates. Measurements of the
infrared Hall effect in thin single crystal samples will be made over the
frequency range corresponding to the important interaction energies. These
measurements will use the highly sensitive polarization modulation technique
developed by the PI. The magneto-transport data will be critically compared with
the data from Angular Resolved Photoemission experiments on the same materials.
In the superconducting state the goal is to provide the phenomenology that will
allow an understanding of vortex dynamics in high Tc superconductors both below
and possibly above Tc in the pseudogap state. The proposed studies will break
new ground in superconductivity research and they hold the promise of opening
new paths for the science and technology of superconductors. The broader impact
of this program includes the development of novel measurement techniques for
materials science and the training of high school students, undergraduate
science majors, graduate students and post docs in infrared materials physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magneto-optical measurements of metals with strongly
interacting electrons, mostly the cuprate high temperature superconductors, will
be performed at infrared frequencies. The measurements will be made in high
magnetic fields and at cryogenic temperatures. The proposed studies probe the
electrical transport properties of the cuprates, which appear highly anomalous
in comparison with conventional metals and superconductors. The measurements
cover the frequency range corresponding to the important interaction energies of
the electrons. The results may provide important new insights into the
mechanisms of high temperature superconductivity and in the understanding of
materials with strongly interacting electrons in general. They also hold the
promise of opening new paths for the science and technology of these novel
materials. The techniques developed in this program are novel and may be used in
other laboratories. The project also involves the training of undergraduate
students, graduate students and post docs in materials physics. In addition, new
teaching demonstrations of materials science in magnetic fields will be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;