* 0303947
* NER:     A Novel High Rate Combustion Synthesis Method for Europium-Doped Glass Nanophosphors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Yiguang Ju, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

A one-year exploratory experimental research program to study of a novel high
rate combustion synthesis method using well controlled CO-air flames for
europium nanophosphors is proposed. The goal is to achieve the following: 1) a
high rate synthesis, 2) significant reduction of hydroxyl residual, 3) narrow
nanophosphor scale distribution, 4) uniform incorporation of europium ions and
5) control of particle size and fluorescent properties. The novel features
embodied in the proposed study to achieve these goals are: a) significant
reduction of hydroxyl residual in nanoparticles by using a low OH concentration
flame in synthesis, b) narrow particle scale distribution and uniform
incorporation of europium ions by the employment of the one-dimensional flame
geometry, c) control of nanoparticle size and fluorescent properties by
precisely changing the synthesis size residence time and flame temperature and
d) the high rate synthesis. The success of the present proposal will provide not
only a scale-up, but also high quality and high rate synthesis technology for
industry and for development of applications of europium nanophosphors such as
in optical devices and biomedicine. Furthermore, the proposal also provides a
challenge to educate one graduate and one undergraduate student in the cutting
edge research and study of a multidisciplinary research field and provides
summer training of one high school student. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed technique
for the synthesis of europium-doped glass nanoparticles comes from different
expertise and a new method, and holds significant advantage over existing
approaches in terms of scale-up, high-rate and high-quality production. The key
point is to employ OH free CO-air flame. However, the technique is untested. The
combination of the investigators in combustion and materials science brings
complementary expertise to this exploratory research project. &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and
Engineering". The award is jointly supported through this initiative by the
Division of Materials Research within Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the
Division of Chemical and Transport Systems within Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;