* 0303945
* NER:     Multiscale Modeling and Simulation of the Surface Nanolayer of Molecular Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Tonglei Li, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,625.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NER: Multiscale
Modeling and Simulation of the Surface Nanolayer of Molecular
Crystals&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CTS-0303945&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Tonglei Li&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response
to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 02-148, category NER. This
study is aimed at modeling crystal morphology. Currently available methods to
predict crystal morphology are unable to consider factors such as solvent
composition, additives, and temperature variations; the prediction of polymorphs
is even more challenging. Difficulties may be attributable to the fact that the
information about surface structures is difficult to obtain, especially when a
surface is submerged under another medium. As a result the importance of surface
reconstruction may not be realized. The electronic structure of the nanolayer of
crystal surfaces will be investigated to determine how the surface
reconstruction affects crystal growth with multiscale modeling. At the atomic
scale, quantum mechanics and density functional theory will be utilized to
compute the surface structure when solvent and additive molecules are introduced
to the surface. Based on the reconstructed surface at the molecular level,
kinetic Monte Carlo will be employed to study the kinetics of individual
molecular events such as surface diffusion, detachment, and adsorption. In terms
of the broader impacts, this work will shed light on using the surface structure
control for nanofabrication. The educational component will be the normal
mentoring of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;