* 0303705
* Quantum-coherent Transport in Quantum Hall Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Vladimir Goldman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 420,000.00

This low-temperature condensed matter physics research is focused on fundamental
quantum properties of matter that can be probed using the simple and well-
characterized system of electrons confined to a two-dimensional geometry. Two-
and lower-dimensional electron systems manifest some of the most fundamental
many-body quantum physics of strongly correlated electrons, including the
integer and fractional quantum Hall effects and the associated one-dimensional
chiral edge states, and the single particle tunneling phenomena in zero-
dimensional quantum dots and antidots. The quantum-coherent properties of the
collective ground states of two-dimensional electrons and the size-quantized
systems of few electrons, their excitations, chiral edge state dynamics, and the
quantum phase transitions will be studied experimentally via techniques of
tunneling and resonant single-particle tunneling. The results are of great
interest in the formulation and confirmation of advanced quantum theory. The
experimental techniques developed in the study of the semiconductor
nanostructured samples can have an impact on technology via realization of new
electronic devices whose fabrication and operation is based on similar materials
and techniques. This research includes collaborations with materials scientists
and electrical engineers in sample preparation and with theorists in analysis of
experimental results. This cutting-edge research involves training of
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students, who will be excellently
trained to enter positions in industry, government and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is focused on fundamental quantum
properties of the simple and well-characterized systems of interacting electrons
in fabricated semiconductor structures. Two- and lower-dimensional electron
systems manifest some of the most fundamental quantum physics such as the
integer and fractional quantum Hall effects and the associated one-dimensional
edge channels, the single particle tunneling phenomena in zero-dimensional
quantum dots and antidots. The quantum-coherent properties of the low-
dimensional electrons and the size-quantized systems of few electrons will be
studied experimentally at very low temperatures and very high magnetic fields.
The results are of great interest in the formulation and confirmation of
advanced quantum theory. In addition, this study can have impact on technology
via realization of new electronic semiconductor nanostructured devices whose
fabrication and operation is based on similar materials and techniques. The
quantum antidot physics may form a basis of novel quantum computing devices.
This research involves collaborations with materials scientists and electrical
engineers in sample preparation and with theorists in analysis of experimental
results. Students in this program are excellently trained to enter positions in
industry, government and education. The PI teaches undergraduate classes, his
research activity is vital in bringing real-world science and modern technology
into classroom.