* 0303886
* Collaborative Research: Facilitation, Competition and Woody Patch Dynamics in a Savanna Parkland
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Steven Archer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mike Bowers
* 08/31/2003
* USD 73,764.00

9815607&lt;br/&gt;Archer&lt;br/&gt;Savanna research has emphasized tree effects
on soils, microclimate and grasses. Little is known of tree-tree interactions
and how these might influence sacanna function and dynamics. Furthermore,
savanna research has largely been conducted where individual trees are scattered
throughout a grassy matrix. However, the formation of tree and shrub islands is
a common, but little-studied phenomenon in many arid land
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will quantify
mechanisms of facilitative and competitive interactions between an overstory
tree, honey mesquite, and associated understory shrubs in a subtropical savanna
ecosystem in south-central Texas. The goal of the project is to elucidate
mechanisms of patch dynamics associated with the physiognomic transformation of
grassland and open savanna to closed-canopy thorn woodland. The specific
objectives are to elucidate the mechanisms associated with the initiation and
development of tree-shrub islands, and to predict how species interactions in
these islands change across topoedaphically diverse landscapes over time. The
approach to this research will involve a combination of selective removal and
reciprocal transplant experiments that will be coupled with manipulations of
resources (light, nutrients and soil moisture) and measurements of plant growth,
foliar chemistry, leaf gas exchange, plant/soil water relations and isotopic
abundances. Results will increase our ability to generalize the roles of
facilitation and competition in succession and mechanisms of woody plant
increase in grasslands and savannas, enhance our ability to represent and
parameterize spatially explicit simulation models for tree-shrub-grass
ecosystems, and contribute directly to the development of a sound basis for
monitoring, managing and manipulating grassland and savanna
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;