* 0304173
* NER:  Dendrimer-Mediated Assembly of Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Vincent Rotello, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Tissue
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

The focus of this research involves four specific aims. First, the fabrication
of gamma-Fe2O3 nanoparticles of varying diameters will be carried out and the
particles will be decorated with cationic monolayers using a place exchange
method. Second, using dendrimers, the self-assembly of theses particles will be
explored and the ordering and interparticle spacing of the resulting materials
will be determined using Small Angle X-Ray Scattering (SAXS). Third, the bulk
properties of the materials will be quantified using SQUID magnetometry. Fourth,
patterned surfaces will be created using electron beam lithography and these
patterns will be employed to template nanocomposite assembly. The resulting
systems will be studied using magnetic force microscopy.

With this Nanoscale: Exploratory Research (NER) award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the Chemistry Office of Special Projects
are supporting the research of Dr. Vincent M. Rotello of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Professor Rotello will
focus his work on the use of nanoparticles for the production of well-defined
magnetic materials. The interparticle distance of the materials will be
controlled through self-assembly of superparamagnetic nanoparticles featuring
cationic functionality using anionic dendrimers. In addition to the broader
impact of the research in the materials area, the project presents an excellent
site for the multidisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students.