* 0304640
* NIRT: Dynamic Heterogeneity and the Behavior of Glass-Forming Materials at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Ranko Richert, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2008
* USD 1,005,000.00

This NIRT award is being funded by the Polymers Program of the Division of
Materials Research and the Interfacial, Transport and Thermodynamics Program of
the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems. The work is aimed at
understanding how spatially dynamic heterogeneity in polymeric and small
molecule glass formers is influenced by confinement at the nanoscale, and how
this in turn, influences the relaxation of molecular and thermodynamic
properties. Dynamic heterogeneity will be systematically probed using
fluorescent probe studies and solvation dynamics in nanoconfined materials as a
function of confinement size. In addition, volume and enthalpy relaxation will
be studied as a function of confinement with the specific aim of examining
whether or not dynamic heterogeneity influences the relaxation of these
properties and whether or not it is the cause of the divergence of times
required to reach equilibrium. Nanoconfinement will include "soft" confinement
of low molecular weight glass-formers in crosslinked rubber, "rigid" confinement
of both low molecular weight glass-formers and polystyrene in nanoporous
matrices, and confinement of polystyrene to ultrathin films. In addition, the
macroscopic and molecular relaxation behavior of freeze-dried polystyrene
glasses will be examined. The work will include many novel measurements that
have not been performed previously and is anticipated to lead to an
understanding of how dynamic heterogeneity is influenced by confinement, and
more generally, the importance of dynamic heterogeneity on the relaxation of
macroscopic properties near Tg.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The work will provide a
better understanding of the behavior of materials near their glass temperatures
at the meso- or nanometer scale and is important for the ultimate usefulness and
function of materials in, for example, nanocomposites and nanoelectronics
applications. The program will also provide excellent training for the graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers and high school students. Efforts will be
made to include undergraduate researchers and high school students. Efforts will
be made to include women and underrepresented minorities through special
recruiting efforts at women's and minority colleges in the Texas and southwest
region. In addition, an effort will be made to include undergraduate students
who participate in the TTU McNair Scholars Program for first generation college
students (often minorities). The work will be broadly disseminated within the
scientific community by presentation at national forums and publication in both
proceedings conferences and archival journals. The results of the project will
also be incorporated to the extent feasible in both undergraduate and graduate
courses taught by the respective PIs.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;