* 0304439
* NUE: Undergraduate Exploration of Nano-Science, Applications, and Societal Implications at Michigan Tech
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Bruce Seely, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,718.00

A faculty group at Michigan Tech will develop a suite of educational and
research experiences to introduce students, primarily in their first and second
years, to the exciting prospects and challenges of nanoscale science and
engineering. The group includes faculty from most of the departments of physical
sciences and engineering as well as the social sciences. Relying primarily upon
the framework of existing courses, the group will prepare an array of
educational experiences and opportunities designed to provide an integrated
introduction to three crucial aspects of nanoscale work: the underlying science,
possible scientific and engineering applications, and the societal implications
of this still unfolding realm of science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific activities include preparing modules and problem
sets on nano topics for use in several introductory science and engineering
courses; offering a course in the required, first-semester freshman general
education seminar devoted to nanoscience and technology; creating a new, first-
year, team-taught interdisciplinary seminar on the Fundamentals of
Nanotechnology; installing nano modules in second-year courses on manufacturing
engineering; materials science and engineering; modern physics; and a social
sciences course focusing on societal implications of science and technology. The
program also includes a lecture series, and opportunities for undergraduate
research experiences and international activities, including the development of
links to an established Research Training Network (RTN) in Europe coordinated by
the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. This menu of varied options insures
that nanotechnology issues and educational activities are placed before a
substantial number of all first-year students at Michigan Tech, including almost
all engineering students, with continuing opportunities available into the
second year and after. Additionally, this project substantially advances an
internal effort to develop fully integrated and multi-disciplinary undergraduate
(a nanosciences/nanotechnology minor and a BSE degree) and graduate programs in
the realm of nanoscience and engineering at Michigan Tech, particularly by
stimulating substantial faculty collaboration in program and curriculum
development. The primary intellectual merit flows from the integration of
science, engineering, and societal implications from the outset of these
programmatic activities. In particular, the project pays particular attention to
the societal implications of the unfolding domain of the nanoscale,
incorporating an element minimally represented in many existing nanoscale
research and educational programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Nanotechnology
Undergraduate Research (NUE) proposal was submitted in response to the
solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 02-148). It is being
supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE),
the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Division of Physics in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).&lt;br/&gt;