* 0304506
* NIRT: Synthesis, Characterization and Modeling of Aligned Nanotube Arrays for Nanoscale Devices and Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Hai Wang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,510,000.00

NIRT 0304506&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NIRT: SYNTHESIS, CHARACTERIZATION AND MODELING
OF ALIGNED NANOTUBE ARRAYS FOR NANOSCALE DEVICES AND
COMPOSITES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tsu-Wei Chou&lt;br/&gt;University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zhifeng Ren&lt;br/&gt;Boston
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rodney S. Ruoff&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hai Wang&lt;br/&gt;University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 02-148, category NIRT. As
scientists and engineers seek to make practical materials and devices from
nanostructures, fundamental understanding of nanoscale behavior across length
scales is required. The multi-disciplinary research team will take an integrated
approach to synthesis, characterization and modeling of nanostructures based on
model systems of aligned carbon nanotube arrays. The proposed research will (1)
develop and improve techniques for nanotube array synthesis, (2) develop models
to elucidate growth mechanisms and optimize nanotube processing, (3) develop
novel methods to quantify mechanical properties based upon nanotube structure
and interface chemistry, (4) implement atomistic modeling techniques for
modeling long-lived physical and mechanical phenomena and establish linkages
among atomistic, micro-scale and macro-scale modeling and (5) combine modeling
and experimental efforts to explore development of novel three-dimensional
scaffolds for nanoscale devices and composites. This research seeks a
fundamental understanding in manufacturing processes at the nanoscale, multi-
scale and multi-phenomena theory, as well as modeling and simulation at the
nanoscale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;