* 0304426
* Experimental Study of Formation of Open-framework Gravels
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* John Bridge, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2005
* USD 147,830.00

0304426 Bridge An experimental investigation of the formation of open- framework
gravels by midirectional water flows is proposed. Open-framework gravels have
very small Imounts of sand and mud in the spaces between the gravel grains, and
are significant Jecause of their exceptionally high permeability. They are
common in the gravelly river ieposits that form so many important hydrocarbon
reservoirs and aquifers. In lydrocarbon reservoirs, open-framework gravels act
as "thief zones" during water- Gooding and miscible-gas injection. In many
glaciofluvial aquifers, open-framework ~avels allow rapid, localized dispersion
of groundwater contaminants. Open-framework ~ravels in rivers are also prime
spawning sites for salmonid fish. It is therefore important :0 understand the
origin, geometry and spatial distribution of open-framework gravels in )rder to:
(1) design oil recovery projects; (2) model contaminant dispersion in aquifers,
md; (3) assess the impact of human activities on salmonid spawning. However, the
origin n open-framework gravels is poorly understood, and it is difficult to
understand and Jredict where they occur in fluvial deposits. Furthermore, the
permeability of open- rramework gravel is very difficult to define accurately.
The experiments will be used to :est the hypotheses that: (1) open-framework
gravels are formed at relatively low ;ediment-transport stage (rather than at
high stage) by preferential entrainment and ;eparation of sand and silt,
transport of matrix-free gravel as bedload sheets, and ieposition on the lee-
side of dunes and unit bars; (2) thick, extensive open-framework ~ravels cannot
be formed under steady flow conditions, but require repeated fluctuations in
discharge, and; (3) infiltration of sand into open-framework gravel at low flow
stage is lot a significant process in forming associated bimodal sandy gravel.
The experiments will also allow the permeability of open-framework gravels to be
measured much more lccurately than possible up to now, and testing of
geophysical techniques that predict ;ediment porosity. The laboratory
experiments (which will be videotaped) will be an invaluable learning tool for
students. The results will have a major practical impact in the lfeas of
hydrogeology, reservoir engineering, and freshwater fish ecology.