* 0304120
* NUE:      A Nanoscience Program at Lawrence University
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2004
* David Hall, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award, funded by the
Division of Materials Research, the Division of Chemistry and the Division of
Undergraduate Education, supports Dr. Karen Nordell and Dr. David Hall,
Department of Chemistry, and Dr. Jeffrey Collett, Department of Physics,
Lawrence University, to create an interdisciplinary Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology (N&amp;N) program for undergraduates. The development and
implementation of the N&amp;N program stems from a recognition that nanoscale
science has enormous potential in applied science and engineering, as well as
its potential to attract additional students to these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three primary initiatives:
1) development and incorporation of additional nanoscience classroom materials
and laboratory experiments into various introductory science courses in
chemistry and physics, 2) creation and biannual offering of a Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology course aimed primarily at sophomore and junior undergraduates,
and 3) dissemination of nanoscience instructional materials through both
traditional and innovative methods including K-12 and community outreach
opportunities. Students conduct experiments involving the synthesis and
characterization of gold and cadmium selenide nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes
using various types of microscopies. Nanoscience research projects involving
biological and environmental toxin detection applications are also available to
students. Dr. Nordell and Dr. Hall maintain active collaborations with the
University of Wisconsin-Madison NSF-sponsored Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) for Nanostructured Materials and Interfaces. These
collaborations provide a method for dissemination of new laboratories,
demonstrations, and teaching modules via a website
(http://www.mrsec.wisc.edu/nano).&lt;br/&gt;