* 0304312
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Rural Domestic Economy and Chimu Political Economy: Household Organization at the El Brujo Site Complex, Chicama Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Katharina Schreiber, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2004
* USD 11,915.00



Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, Mr. James Tate will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Tate will carry out archaeological
excavations at the El Brujo Site Complex in the Chicama Valley, Peru. The
complex is of great interest archaeologically as it consists of a series of
domestic habitations and ceremonial mounds that represent over four thousand
years of human occupation spanning the Preceramic through Colonial periods, ca.
3000 B.C. - A.D. 1532. This investigation focuses on the later Chimu occupation
of the site and the organization of the domestic economy of the residents. The
site is particularly significant given the existence of early colonial period
documents that describe the economic and social organization of the site and the
surrounding area. In addition, the exceptional preservation of organic material
at the site results in an unparalleled opportunity to observe archaeological
patterns of production, processing, distribution, consumption, and disposal of
craft goods and subsistence resources. A primary recovery method will be the
collection of soil samples that will produce data on diet and subsistence. The
investigator will then compare patterns of production and consumption to
existing research, and ethnohistoric accounts of the Chicama Valley, El Brujo,
and the nearby town of Magdalena de Cao, a method that has proven valuable to
Inca studies.

During the Late Intermediate Period (A.D. 1000-A.D. 1476) the Chimu culture
developed on the north coast of Peru and established a hierarchically organized
expansive state that eventually grew to control the coastal region from the
Chillon Valley on the central coast to Tumbes in the north. The Chimu are known
archaeologically and ethnohistorically as specialized producers of elite goods
such as metals and textiles that served in a redistributive economy based on the
control of luxury goods, and financed by irrigation agriculture. Little however
is known about the relationship between the state political economy and the
local domestic economy of communities outside administrative and political
centers. Mr. Tate's investigation will add a new dimension to existing research
by presenting data gathered from household contexts. Research carried out at the
household level provides the opportunity to study aspects of human economic,
political, and social organization invisible at a larger scale. Accordingly, the
study of El Brujo provides a necessary addition to existing research by
identifying the range of domestic activities that characterize a household in
the archaeological record, and contributing a detailed description of daily life
in a Chimu community.

This research is also important because it will integrate different approaches
to the understanding of prehispanic culture at El Brujo, where the overwhelming
focus of investigation has been monumental architecture. Further, the research
will contribute to a growing body of anthropological and archaeological
literature on households in complex societies and will assist in training a
promising young scientist.

