* 0304574
* Optical Interconnects for High Performance Processors: Architectures, Circuits, and Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Philippe Fauchet, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 07/31/2007
* USD 750,000.00

NIRT: Optical Interconnects for High-Performance Processors: Architectures,
Circuits, and Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 02-148, category NIRT. This project involves the development of
nanoscale-silicon-based optical interconnect technology and associated design
methodologies to alleviate the global signaling problem in future CMOS chips.
The device research focuses on two specific building blocks, namely a silicon
laser and silicon modulators/switches. The laser is made using silicon quantum
dots as the gain medium. Both optically pumped and electrically pumped laser
structures are being investigated. The modulators/switches are made of tunable
photonic bandgap structures made of silicon infiltrated with an electrically
active material such as liquid crystals. In addition, optimal signaling at both
the data and control levels is being explored, and solutions developed, while
taking into consideration both the structural characteristics of the system
architecture and the impedance and physical constraints of the
electrical/optical interface. In the process, an integrated modeling environment
spanning the nanoscale device, integrated circuit, and architecture levels is
being created in order to conduct this research. Top-down and bottom-up design
methodologies are being developed for potential incorporation into commercial
design automation tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several educational initiatives
are intricately linked with this research (including undergraduate design
projects, summer employment of undergraduates, graduate student research,
participation in diversity programs, and tutorials given at leading conferences
and forums) in order to educate current and future applied physicists,
electrical engineers, and computer scientists in the broad aspects of this
interdisciplinary field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;