* 0304665
* NER:  Single Molecule Magnets for Quantum Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Talat Rahman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 304665&lt;br/&gt;Title: NER: Single Molecule
Magnets for Quantum Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are proposing a
1-year nanoscale exploratory research (NER) in the technologically and
fundamentally important area of single molecule magnets (SMM) whose application
in quantum computing has been the subject of intense speculation. The SMM's
typically consist of 2 to 15 magnetic ions embedded in non-magnetic ligand
groups. The magnetic interaction strengths within each SMM are in the range
1-100K, while that between SMM's is about 10 mK. These exchange interactions
maybe ferromagnetic (FM) or antiferromagnetic (AFM). Although the AFM SMM's
appear to exhibit more interesting low temperature quantum effects than do the
FM SMM's, the latter have attracted a considerable interest, due to the
suggestion that their properties might be exploited to construct useful magnetic
storage devices and quantum computers. The two SMM's studied most extensively
experimentally, Fe8 and Mn12, have multiple spin-spin interactions within a SMM
unit, consisting of both FM and AFM signs, and are difficult to model
theoretically. However, since a number of smaller SMM's can be made with
magnetic cores that consist of as few as 2-4 magnetic ions, we propose to study
initially the effects of the magnetic interactions within SMM's consisting of
3-4 magnetis ions in the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) configuration.
This environment consists of a constant magnetic induction of strength B0 and a
transverse oscillatory magnetic induction with frequency ?0 and strength B1, and
can be used to investigate if the SMM's have special features that might allow
one to read and write information on the scale of 1-2 nm using a static field
that contains a large spatial gradient. By comparing these quantum results with
the classical results for the dynamics of these systems, as measured by the
various time correlation functions, better understanding would be possible for
the larger systems. Such exactly solvable systems will also be studied to
investigate the severity of the decoherence that can arise after a SMM has been
excited by the oscillatory magnetic induction. This can be investigated by
analyzing the EPR linewidths. The information obtained in this exploratory
research is expected to provide the knowledge base necessary for developing
reliable numerical methods to simulate the behavior of larger systems like Fe8
and Mn12 of more practical interest. A significant outcome of the proposed
research will be the education and training of junior members of the PI's group
in a subject at the forefront of exploratory research for future applications.
Because of the simplicity of the systems, results of the research will be used
by the PI for general educational purposes and broader dissemination to the
educational community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;