* 0304414
* Research in Random Matrices and Integrable Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Craig Tracy, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 222,333.00

This proposal has three main projects. The first, with Harold Widom, is to study
the connection between the ``Airy process'' and integrable differential
equations. The Airy process is a stochastic process that is expected to describe
a wide class of growth processes. The distribution function for the Airy process
at one single time is the GUE Tracy-Widom distribution function. In this case
the distribution function is represented as either a Fredholm determinant of a
certain operator (the ``Airy kernel'') or in terms of a solution to a certain
nonlinear ordinary differential equation called Painleve II. The finite-
dimensional distribution functions for the Airy process (at many different
times) are also expressible as Fredholm determinants of an integral operator
(the ``extended Airy kernel''). The goal is to find the corresponding integrable
differential equations and to use these differential equations to analyze the
Airy process. The second project, again with Widom, is to complete earlier work
on the asymptotics of solutions to the periodic Toda equations by determining
the asymptotics on what are called the ``critical curves.'' The third major
project, with graduate student Momar Dieng, is to find explicit Painleve type
representations for the distribution function for the next-largest, next-next
largest, etc. eigenvalues in the random matrix models GOE and GSE. These
distribution functions will have applications to statistics. If time permits
certain combinatorial sums involving Hall-Littlewood symmetric functions will be
analyzed.

The famous bell-shaped curve, known more formally as the Gaussian distribution
function, is well-known due to its many applications in the social sciences, the
physical and biological sciences, and engineering. Mathematicians in the early
part of the twentieth century gave precise conditions under which one can expect
to find the Gaussian distribution. It is now common in these disciplines to
apply these conditions (``sums of independent random variables'') to predict the
appearance of the Gaussian distribution. When these conditions fail and we are
dealing with strongly dependent random variables, we cannot expect to see the
Gaussian. Quite remarkably it has been realized in recent years that the
distribution functions of the largest eigenvalues in various random matrix
models describe new universal laws for a wide variety of problems appearing in
combinatorics, growth processes, random tilings, queuing theory, the analysis of
large data sets (``principal component analysis'') as well as applications to
the physics of quantum dots. These distribution functions, known as the Tracy-
Widom distribution functions, are now realized in terms of a time dependent
process called the Airy process. (The Airy process plays the same role as
Brownian motion does to the Gaussian distribution.) One of the goals of this
project is to find differential equations that characterize the Airy process.
These differential equations will facilitate analysis of the Airy process much
in the same way that the ordinary differential equation (Painleve II) has aided
in the description of the Tracy-Widom distribution functions. A second project
is to go beyond the largest eigenvalue distribution functions and to consider,
for example, the next-largest eigenvalue distribution functions for a class of
models called GOE and GSE. The GOE case is particularly relevant to multivariate
statistics and these additional distribution functions can be expected to find
applications to problems involving large data sets.

