* 0304871
* Synthesis and Characterization of New Molecular Clusters of Tetrels
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Philip Power, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,165,000.00

Phillip Power, Susan M. Kauzlarich and Matthew P. Augustine of the Department of
Chemsitry at the University of California at Davis will examine the synthesis
and characterization of a series of silicon, germanium and tin-based cluster
compounds, of the formula EnRm (E = Si, Ge or Sn; R = alkyl, aryl or amide
ligand; n &gt; 10 &lt; ca. 200; n &gt; m). In this research, funded by the
Division of Chemistry, the Division of Materials Research and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, these Si and Sn-containing clusters, where Si, Ge
and Sn are also called the heavier tetrel elements, will be synthesized by a
variety of approaches under controlled conditions. Preliminary work has produced
capped clusters of crystalline tetrels that have relatively uniform sizes from
nanoscale dimensions to as low as ca. 10-20 angstrom (ca. 25-200 atoms). Through
the isolation of well-formed crystals of such clusters, molecular techniques,
e.g. with NMR or X-ray crystallography, will afford more precise data than
currently available for the characterization of small nanoclusters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will produce new cluster phases, especially
of silicon and germanium, that are likely to have potential electronics
applications and/or novel optical properties owing to changes in their
electronic properties from those seen in the bulk state. The collaborative
nature of the proposal, combined with the diverse nature of the three research
groups, will provide outstanding opportunities for undergraduates, graduate
students, and post-docs to acquire knowledge and skills in very broad areas of
research, including solution chemistry, materials chemistry and NMR spectroscopy
in both the liquid and solid phases. This project is funded through the
Collaborative Research in Chemistry Program (CRC).