* 0304743
* Epitaxial Ge/Si(100) Quantum Dots and Mn-Based Ferromagnetic Group IV Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Jeff Drucker, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 318,573.00

This project aims to investigate fundamental materials issues related to
lithographically templating ensembles of heteroepitaxial Ge/Si(100)quantum dots.
Ideal ensembles consist of periodically arranged, identical, coherent (defect
free) Ge islands. Epitaxial overgrowth of electron beam lithography patterned
substrates will be employed to periodically position the dots. This technique is
expected to have advantages over other methods for ordering heteroepitaxial
quantum dots. The lithographic template is planarized during strained-layer SiGe
overgrowth, effectively translating topographic periodicity at the patterned
substrate into elastic periodicity at the planar growth front. Quantum dot
placement at elastic energy minima on a planar substrate allows them to be
easily integrated into functional architectures. Additionally, any etch-induced
damage is buried during overgrowth. Dot spacing and periodicity may be varied
through changes in the pat-tern pitch, providing flexibility for producing
periodic single or multi-dot arrays. Planarization during strained SiGe layer
overgrowth relies on the interplay between surface morphology, com-position and
misfit strains. The project will employ atomic force microscopy to characterize
sur-face topography and state-of-the-art high spatial resolution electron
microscopy to characterize composition to achieve greater understanding. A new
class of Mn-based, ferromagnetic, group IV semiconductors, lattice-matched Si:Mn
and strained SiGe:Mn, will also be grown on Si(100) in order to assess their
utility for 'spintronics' applications in Si-based materials. These magnetic
semiconductors will be integrated into heterostructures incorporating
heteroepitaxial Ge quantum dots so that the efficiency for injection of spin-
polarized carriers may be assessed. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses fundamental research issues associated with electronic/photonic
materials having technological relevance and emphasizes the integration of
research and education. The project will involve graduate students from
underrepresented groups and undergraduate students. The dissertation research of
a female graduate student will be supported and a Hispanic graduate student will
be involved in a closely related project supported by an ASU/National Labs
fellowship. Undergraduate students will be supported by REU supplements and the
ASU Physics REU site award. The PI will be involved in activities which broaden
its scope and impact, including participation in development of a Nanoscience
and Technology graduate program at ASU. This will be an interdisciplinary
program spanning the Colleges of Liberal Arts and Sciences and En-gineering and
Applied Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;