* 0304243
* Effect of Grain Boundary and Size on Electro-Thermo-Mechanical Properties and Internal Friction of Nano Grained Thin Metal Films Using MEMS Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Taher Saif, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2008
* USD 299,000.00

Objective: Our first goal is to measure, for the first time, using MEMS sensors
and actuators, the following properties of free standing nano grained nano scale
metal films:(a) elastic and plastic response due to uniaxial loading, (b)
electrical conductivity, (c) thermal conductivity, and (d) internal friction in
low to high temperatures and under various mechanical stresses. Our second goal
is to explore the role of grain boundaries and the surfaces in determining the
measured properties. For example, grain boundary atoms are known to be randomly
and sparsely arranged compared to those within the grains. We will investigate
whether the grain boundaries offer sufficient compliance (in contrast to the
mechanism of grain boundary sliding) to nano-grained metals lowering the elastic
modulus compared to their bulk counterparts (observed in our preliminary
experiments). Similarly, we will explore whether the abundant grain boundaries
may cause sufficient scattering of the conduction (electrical and thermal)
electrons, thus increasing thermo-electric resistively. Theoretical models will
be developed to explain and predict the thermo electro mechanical properties of
nano scale metals.&lt;br/&gt;The models will account for grain boundaries and
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education: Research and education must
be complementary to each other. Research advances the frontier of knowledge,
whereas education disseminates it. As part of PI 's CAREER project (awarded
1998), video series on MEMS has been developed for broad audience including high
and middle school students and people with basic science background interested
in MEMS. The series, titled A voyage through the world of micromachine is
available at http://www.mie.uiuc.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education
component of the this project will include:(a) development of short video series
on&lt;br/&gt;nano materials and technology ,and the micro instruments for
testing such invisible samples. Undergraduate research assistants from diverse
group will be recruited for this project; (b) development of web page where
micro instruments will be highlighted as well as new findings on nano materials
will be posted through videos of experiments and animations (to clarify
concepts),(c)development of new course for seniors and entering graduate
students on new methods of studying materials at nano scale, (d)introduction of
the topic of nano scale materials 'behavior in the traditional courses of
mechanical engineering such s mechanics of materials, and design. University of
Illinois hosts summer camps for school students. The concepts of nanotechnology
will be presented to the visiting young audience through PI 's lab tour, the
video series and informal discussions.&lt;br/&gt;