* 0304314
* NIRT: Building Nanospintronic and Nanomagnetic Systems - Growth, Manipulation, and Characterization at the Atomic Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Sergio Ulloa, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,169,375.00

In this NIRT project, nanospintronic and nanomagnetic systems will be explored
utilizing a unique, unprecedented combination of spin-polarized scanning
tunneling microscopy (SP-STM), STM atom manipulation, and theoretical modeling.
The nanostructures will be prepared on novel nitride substrates (including GaN
and Mn3N2 surfaces) prepared by molecular beam epitaxy and then introduced into
the atom manipulation system. The nanostructures will be formed by selectively
removing single atoms one by one from the nitride surface and then replacing
them with magnetic atoms placed on, in, and above magnetic and nonmagnetic
nitride surfaces using atom manipulation. The unique insertion/extraction
procedures of magnetic atoms into/out of nitride surfaces will be investigated.
From beginning to end, the substrates and nanostructures will be characterized
using STM, obtaining direct real space pictures of the surface and the
nanostructures, as well as obtaining the electronic properties via tunneling
spectroscopy. Spin-polarized microscopy and spectroscopy will be simultaneously
under investigation as a tool to directly probe the spin structure of the
surfaces and nanostructures at every stage of the process. The experimental
results will provide important input for theories to explain the interaction of
local moments with non-magnetic or magnetic Fermi seas of varying density. The
theoretical complement in this project will also involve the collaborative
efforts of scientists from Germany and Brazil. The work has the potential for
making important impact in the understanding of the fundamental physics
involving spins at the nanoscale. Students and postdocs will receive exceptional
training oportunities in nanoscience and will be positioned to become the top
nanoscientists of tomorrow. Another important part of this NIRT project is
public outreach. The projects seeks to inform a broad audience about nanoscience
and nanotechnology via professional media, an attractive and informative
nanoscience website, and direct visits to regional K-12 schools.

Nanospintronic and nanomagnetic systems are a new class of nanoscale objects at
the intersection of two important, emerging scientific fields: spintronics and
nanoscience. Spintronics seeks to employ the property of electron spin, which is
the basis of magnetism, in conventional electronics which currently makes use
only of the electron's charge. This could result in hybrid spin-electronic
devices. Nanoscience seeks to explore and understand objects having the
dimension of only a few atoms. This NIRT project involves the atom-by-atom
construction and simultaneous measurement of the properties of nanospintronic
and nanomagnetic structures. The nanostructures themselves will be constructed
on both magnetic as well as non-magnetic substrates using a needle-shaped probe
which is able to position one atom at a time using atom manipulation. Atoms from
the surface will be removed and replaced with magnetic atoms such as iron,
chromium, or cobalt. Such magnetic atoms will be positioned to form 10 or 20
atom nanomagnets or nanospintronic structures. Such nanoscale magnets will be
some of the smallest synthetic magnets ever made. Such small spintronic
structures are expected to be important for future devices. This NIRT project
will allow not only the formation of the magnetic nanostructures but also their
direct imaging using the needle probe to take pictures of the surface. The probe
tip is also able to measure the electronic and magnetic properties of these tiny
nanostructures. Theoretical work will complement these experiments to provide a
complete understanding which will also be aided by the theoretical expertise of
foreign scientific collaborators from Germany and Brazil. Students and postdocs
will receive exceptional training oportunities in nanoscience and will be
positioned to become the top nanoscientists of tomorrow. Another important part
of this NIRT project is public outreach. The projects seeks to inform a broad
audience about nanoscience and nanotechnology via professional media, an
attractive and informative nanoscience website, and direct visits to regional
K-12 schools.