* 0304664
* NUE:  NanoLab -- A Hands-On Introduction to Nanoscience for Scientists and Engineers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Lloyd Bumm, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 04/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award, funded by the
Division of Materials Research, supports Drs. Lloyd A. Bumm and Mathew B.
Johnson, Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Oklahoma,
Norman, to develop a nanotechnology laboratory course for undergraduates,
NanoLab - a Hands-On Introduction to Nanoscience for Scientists and Engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;NanoLab is a hands-on laboratory course in nanotechnology targeting
sophomore undergraduate students in the physical sciences, the biological
sciences, and engineering. The students gain an understanding of nanotechnology
through hands-on experience with top-down and bottom-up nanofabrication
techniques, such as lithographic patterning, nanoparticle growth, and self-
assembly. Hands-on experience with state of the art nanometer-scale
characterization techniques, such as atomic-force microscopy, is an integral
part of the course. NanoLab is offered during the August intersession as an
intensive four-week laboratory course. The course is also open to students from
other universities, RET scholars, and to especially talented high school
students. The NanoLab facilities are also available for Capstone undergraduate
research and for REU summer research. Modules are spun off and incorporated into
the junior physics laboratory course where the science is explored in more
depth. &lt;br/&gt;