* 0304159
* NIRT:Development of Mesoporous, Ultra Low Dielectric Constant, Patterned Films by 3-D Replication of Structured Organic Templates:A University/Industry/NIST Collaboration
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Christopher Ober, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,011,928.00

Research Objectives: A Multi-University/Industry/NIST team will address the
development and integration of mesoporous, ultra-low dielectric constant films
for semiconductor devices. Continuation of the historical trend of reduced
device dimensions requires materials with dielectric constants (k) of less than
2.4 that can survive the structural and mechanical demands of integration.
Moreover, at dimensions less than 70 nm, techniques that offer control over long
range order, pore orientation and patterning at multiple length scales are
required for practical integration schemes. A new approach offers these
possibilities. The technique involves the infusion and selective condensation of
metal oxide precursors within one domain of highly ordered block copolymer
templates using supercritical (SC) carbon dioxide as the reaction medium. The
template is then removed to produce the mesoporous oxide. By separating template
preparation from oxide condensation, the block copolymer architecture can be
manipulated at the local level by domain orientation and alignment using surface
and external fields and at the device level by lithographic patterning prior to
precursor infusion. Watkins (UMass) will coordinate the NIRT Team and lead the
development of highly ordered mesoporous films in SC CO2. Ober (Cornell) will
lead the development of templates for direct patterning by photolithography.
Burkett (Amherst College) will characterize film structure and composition using
solid state NMR. Maroudas (UMass) will develop models to relate film
architecture to mechanical properties. Lin (NIST) will lead the development of
new metrology tools for the analysis of patterned, highly ordered films.
Schulberg from Novellus Systems, a leading semiconductor equipment company, will
lead process development and scale-up efforts to full process wafers (200 and
300 mm) and develop post-processing strategies and integration schemes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: Successful preparation of viable low k films
will have an enormous near term impact on semiconductor manufacturing, a $100
billion/yr industry. The approach also provides a realizable technology platform
for other metal oxide nanostructures including sensors, photonic materials, data
storage arrays and separation media. Throughout the program, postdoctoral
fellows, graduate and undergraduate students will acquire fundamental skills in
a multidisciplinary environment that fosters an awareness of the demands of
technology implementation. The partnership of a diverse team of PIs from
Universities, Colleges, and Industry provides important opportunities for
mentoring women and undergraduates from four-year institutions and advanced
training of post-docs at the University/National Laboratory
interface.&lt;br/&gt;