* 0304472
* NIRT: Science and Technology of Ultrananocrystalline Diamond Films for Multifunctional MEMS/NEMS Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Horacio Espinosa, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,325,000.00

NIRT: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY OF ULTRANANOCRYSTALLINE DIAMOND FILMS&lt;br/&gt;FOR
MULTIFUNCTIONAL MEMS/NEMS DEVICES&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this three-year
NIRT project are to investigate microstructure-mechanical-electronic transport
property relationships of a new multifunctional material designated as
ultrananocrystalline diamond (UNCD), and to utilize this material in novel
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS).
While silicon has been the dominant material in the microelectronics revolution
of the 20 th Century, carbon in its various forms, especially diamond, may be a
dominant material in the 21 st Century; particularly, in the MEMS/NEMS
revolution currently underway.&lt;br/&gt;New methods of chemical vapor
deposition recently developed by this team make possible
the&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing of the UNCD films that exhibit unique and
outstanding properties such as high hardness, high fracture strength, high
Young's modulus, extremely low friction coefficient and high wear resistance,
negligible stiction, low residual stress in as-deposited thin films, unique
field electron-emission properties, a wide range of conductivity controlled by
microstructure and doping, and highly conformal films, which are all crucial to
the development of novel MEMS/NEMS applications. Through interdisciplinary
efforts of the team members from Northwestern University (NU), University of
Illinois at Chicago (UIC) and University of Missouri-Columbia (UMC), in
collaboration with Argonne and Sandia National Laboratories (ANL and SNL), an
integrated experimental, analytical and computational program is proposed here
with the following main research topics:&lt;br/&gt;1. Scan probe microscopy
approaches, including conductive atomic force microcopy and ultra high vacuum
scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy, for nanoscale characterization of
surface structure and conductivity of UNCD films, that will enable the
microstructure to be ascertained for films made with various
dopings;&lt;br/&gt;2. Investigation of mechanical properties, such as Young's
modulus, hardness, plasticity, and fracture, of UNCD with varying degrees of
doping, at the microlevel using a recently developed membrane deflection
experiment, and at the nanolevel by means of a novel MEMS loading device that
can operate in-situ surface probe and electron microscopes; and&lt;br/&gt;3.
Study of the relationship between nanostucture and electro-mechanical properties
of UNCD films via modeling and simulation with combined molecular/continuum
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;The above interdisciplinary research efforts would make an
intellectual contribution to understanding the relationship between grain size-
grain boundary chemistry and electro-mechanical properties of UNCD at the
nanoscale. In particular, the atomic-scale information suitable to unraveling
the electronic conduction mechanism in UNCD and the effect of its microstructure
on this phenomenon will be obtained, which can be positively used to design
MEMS/NEMS devices. In this regard, the following two applications will be
developed in collaboration with national laboratories and industry:&lt;br/&gt;o
Arrays of cantilevers with UNCD tips for conductive atomic force microscopy
(AFM), and&lt;br/&gt;o MEMS switches/Nanoresonators made of conductive UNCD
membranes for wireless communication and other electronic scanning
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The educational part of this NIRT includes the following
components, which could impact the multi-level teaching-learning process in
nanoscale science and engineering:&lt;br/&gt; Outreach to educators from
community colleges and high schools: Teaching materials will
be&lt;br/&gt;developed during a summer workshop in the area of micro and nano
technologies.&lt;br/&gt; Research Experience for Graduate and Undergraduate
Students: In collaboration with two other major programs at NU, NSF-NSEC and
MRSEC, and with national laboratories, undergraduate participants will engage in
full-time research for a nine-week period over the summer. In particular,
coordinated tours to ANL and frequent group meetings will be made to allow for
the interaction among graduate and undergraduate students involved in this NIRT
program.&lt;br/&gt;