* 0304904
* U.S.-Hungary Computer Network Research on Anonymous Accountable Self Organizing Cooperation
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Csilla Farkas, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 18,522.00

The goal of this U.S.-Hungarian cooperative research project between Csilla
Farkas of University of South Carolina Columbia and Andras Lorincz of the Eotvos
Lorand University, Budapest, is to strengthen the theoretical foundation
required for a secure web community model that would be self-organizing and
support anonymity of the initiator and responder. The joint research plan calls
for developing a system architecture that supports collaboration while
guaranteeing information confidentiality, integrity, availability and non-
repudiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this, the team of senior and junior
U.S. researchers with Hungarian counterparts will attempt to integrate existing
domain systems to form a complete model capable of supporting security,
anonymity and accountability in a single dynamic environment: 1) with relevant
security concepts, 2) conforming communication protocols and 3) self-organizing
mechanisms. Their integrated model will be based on XML, RDF, and RBAC
(Extensible Markup Language; Resource Definition Framework, and Role-based
Access Control). Success would enhance users' ability to join online communities
and participate in electronic societies while maintaining protected identities
or reputations associated with personal pseudonyms. Progress in this area could
lead to a refined paradigm for Internet usage and the development of prototype
software designed to guarantee personal privacy for Internet users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in computer science fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts
include the introduction of U.S. students to the international research
community through work at the partner institution and direct involvement in the
project's advanced system testing and validation techniques.