* 0304132
* NER:      Chemical Vapor Deposition of Carbon Nanotube/Diamond Composites
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Min-Feng Yu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 07/31/2004
* USD 99,606.00

PROJECT SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this nanoscale
exploratory research project are the growth of composite films of carbon
nanotubes and diamond using chemical-vapor deposition, to extensively
characterize these films, and to understand the film-growth process at the
atomistic level through detailed simulations of the molecular processes. Carbon
nanotubes (CNT) and diamond have properties that are individually exceptional
but also complementary in a fashion such that a composite material made of these
components should have truly unique properties. CNT are predicted to have
extremely high values of Young's modulus while also being able to sustain large
strain in the axial direction. It has been demonstrated that, using the tip of
an AFM, multiwalled CNT can be bent repeatedly through large angles without
causing any apparent fracture. On the other hand, diamond is the hardest known
material and has the highest room-temperature thermal conductivity. Other
properties include a very low coefficient of friction, good resistivity and
optical transparency, and some superior semiconducting properties when
appropriately doped. Recent research has shown that polycrystalline diamond can
be readily deposited as a film on various substrates. Such diamond films have
found applications primarily as wear-resistant coatings and heat-spreading
devices, though film brittleness significantly limits the use of pure diamond
films. In order to capitalize on the favorable properties of diamond while
addressing the brittleness problem, a CNT/diamond composite material is
manufactured that should have extreme hardness combined with outstanding
toughness. The synthesis method is chemical vapor deposition (CVD) which is
currently used to deposit both diamond and CNT under similar conditions. By
careful selection of process conditions, a dense CNT/diamond film with a strong
interface is produced that can be controlled and optimized by variation of
reactor parameters. Deposition experiments are conducted in an existing CVD
reactor, which is slightly modified to allow for CNT and diamond deposition on
the same wafer. After the initial CNT film is generated, diamond is deposited
using hot-filament CVD (HF-CVD). The structural properties of the composite
films are characterized by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy. The
roles of the substrate and catalyst on the growth of CNT and diamond, and the
interface and internal film stresses are investigated. The mechanical properties
of the composite are studied with atomic-force microscopy using a diamond-tipped
probe. A complementary modeling and simulation effort provides understanding of
the fundamental phenomena offers insight into remedial measures and potential
process improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work provides education and experience for
university students in nanotechnology. Results obtained in this study are widely
disseminated through conferences and archival journal publications. Should this
effort at film synthesis be successful, a great potential for technology
transfer with the emerging nanotechnology industry will be present. The
involvement of students from under-represented groups is promoted through
recruiting efforts, as well as through the university's formal SURGE program.
Facility upgrades required for this project improve the infrastructure and
enhance the ability to conduct research in the area of nanomaterials
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;