* 0304127
* NER:     Caged Clusters for Single-Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Andreas Mayr, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2005
* USD 99,145.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was submitted in response to
the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 02-148). The project
addresses synthesis and processing of cluster based hybrid molecular-electronic
architectures to overcome fundamental limits to miniaturization of solid state
semiconductor mass-produced circuitry. Emphasis is on control of precise
composition and the spatial arrangement of clusters. Part of the motivation for
the project is that it may be possible to arrange groups of clusters so that
they perform the basic functions of electronic circuits, with the presence or
absence of single electrons representing bits of information. A cluster-based
single-electronics technology could provide a means to overcome the technical
and fundamental barriers that are expected to limit further miniaturization of
current types of electronic circuit, but also set the stage for the
implementation of revolutionary electronic circuit designs based on the
principles of single-electronics. Preliminary studies have shown that even
networks with relatively simple single-electron synapses could be sufficiently
complex to reproduce some of the characteristic capabilities of the human brain.
Thus extremely powerful signal processing technologies may become available in
the foreseeable future. In this exploratory project molecular frameworks of
sufficient size to enclose clusters will be synthesized. Initially, the
frameworks will be modified by means of appended side chains to fulfill two
tasks: hold clusters with diameters of up to 2 nm and mediate the attachment of
"caged clusters" to solid surfaces. The electron transport properties of these
caged clusters will then be studied. In subsequent work, the frameworks will be
interconnected to form precisely defined cluster arrays that function as single-
electron devices. Additionally, they will be interfaced with nanofabricated
electronic circuits to demonstrate the feasibility of novel computing
architectures based on principles of single-electronics. The proposed research
is a collaborative effort involving researchers from two Departments (Chemistry;
Physics and Astronomy). &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic
exploratory research issues in a topical area of materials science and chemistry
with high technological relevance; it is considered a high risk/high pay-off
activity. The project encompasses the NSE research and education theme of
Nanoscale Structures, Novel Phenomena, and Quantum Control. An important feature
of the program is the integration of research and education through the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The scope
of the project is interdisciplinary, spanning atom-by-atom construction and
physical characterization of nanostructures to the integration of such
structures with existing technology. This interdisciplinary research setting is
expected to attract students to nanoscience and provide a unique training ground
for young scientists at all stages of their education and training. The research
results will be published in scientific journals, and also used to attract local
undergraduate and high school students into research activities. The project is
jointly supported by the MPS/DMR/EM and the MPS/CHE Special Projects and IBO
programs. &lt;br/&gt;