* 0304531
* NIRT: Complex Nanostructures of Dissimilar Elements: Synthesis, Assembly &amp; Proximal Electrical and Optical Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Dawn Bonnell, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2008
* USD 1,203,109.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 02-148, category NIRT. The research involves the assembly of
complex structures that contain ferroelectrics, metals, synthetic polypeptides,
nanowires and nanotubes and the behavior that results from interfacing these
structures at the molecular and nanoscale level. The research defines a new
paradigm for fabricating multi component nanoscale structures that combines many
advantages of self-assembly with the ability to selectively position dissimilar
nanoscale elements. The approach exploits coupling to atomic polarization of
ferroelectric domains and the specificity of nucleotide interactions. Engineered
nanostructural elements are incorporated into complex configurations; including
optically active porphyrin based compounds, designed polypeptides, nanotubes,
nanowires, and particles. Several approaches are used to determine the
properties of individual molecular and nanostructural elements and proximity
effects in electrical and optical behavior. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Enthusiastic
research efforts in several fields have yielded a wide array of functional nano
structures, including particles, wires, tubes, dots, organic molecules, and
biological molecules. And device concepts abound. The potential of
nanostructures can not be realized until multiple constituents can be co
assembled and until the behavior of these constituents are understood.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is jointly supported within Mathematical and
Physical Sciences directorate through the Division of Materials Research
(Ceramics and Solid-State Chemistry programs) and the Division of Chemistry. The
Office of International Science and Engineering in the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences is also contributing to this award.&lt;br/&gt;