* 0304798
* MRI:     Laboratory Instrumentation for Biophotonics:    Investigation of Plant and Cyanobacteria Pigments
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Susan Spiller, Mills College
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 01/31/2007
* USD 94,000.00

0304798&lt;br/&gt;Spiller&lt;br/&gt;The requested instrumentation will
facilitate the participation of PI, undergraduate women and post baccalaureate
students, and faculty at Mills College, Oakland, CA in two research projects and
increase potential for future projects. The general descriptions of the current
projects are: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1) Control of yellow starthistle achene
germination by phytochrome pigment &lt;br/&gt;2) Relative pigment composition of
two cyanobacteria genera, Spirulina and Arthrospira, &lt;br/&gt;compared to
chlorophyte alga of the Spirogyra genus. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
spectroradiometer plus LED and tunable laser illuminating instruments will
enable us to deliver precise doses of photons in narrow bandwidths and to
calibrate our systems precisely. The combined instrumentation will also allow us
to analyze the absorbance characteristics of our experimental organisms. Our
phytochrome research aims to obtain results that add to a body of knowledge
about phytochrome, a plant pigment that controls developmental processes.
Phytochrome acts as a switching mechanism whereby red light (660nm) initiates
developmental processes by a conformation change in the chromophore and
apoprotein. The initiating signal can be reversed by light wavelengths in the
far red (730 nm) range by returning the chromophore and its attached apoprotein
to the original conformation. The escape time from reversal of the developmental
signal is one goal of our project. The phytochrome system is a very interesting
biological switching mechanism with potential for useful applications in many
areas of agriculture and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;