* 0304510
* NER:    Single File Diffusion:     Application to Transport of Encapsulated Atoms and Molecules Inside Nanotubes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Louis Girifalco, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

Khantha, Mahadevan University of Pennsylvania

"NER: Single File Diffusion: Application to Transport of Encapsulated Atoms and
Molecules Inside Nanotubes"

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research proposal examines the single file diffusion
of encapsulated atoms and molecules inside nanotubes. The diffusion of a chain
of "particles" in one-dimensional channels with the particles maintaining the
order of their arrangement at all times is called "single" file diffusion.
(SFD). The SFD displays anomalous (non-Markovian) diffusion characteristics even
when particle-channel interactions are not taken into account. The objective of
this exploratory research is to understand how "particle-channel" interactions
and "particle-particle" interactions within the channel (nanotube) influence
SFD. Representative and technologically important systems, C60 (fullerene)
molecules and Li atoms, diffusing inside single wall carbon nanotubes were
chosen. The interactions of fullerene molecules inside carbon nanotubes and
fullerenes with nanotube walls are both of the van der Waals type. Under a
current NSF funded research project, the PI's are studying the interactions of
Li atoms inside nanotubes. The results obtained so far show that the interaction
is similar to that of a screened Yukawa potential which is quite different from
the van der Waals type interactions of fullerenes inside nanotubes. The PI's
will first carry out a molecular dynamics simulation of transport within finite
open tubes using these two potentials to understand how the characteristics of
SFD varies with particle interactions. These results will serve as a foundation
to build analytical stochastic models of SFD to answer the following basic
questions: (i) How does the probability of an atom entering an open nanotube
depend on its interaction with the tube? (ii) What is the average duration of
time spent by the chain of encapsulated molecules inside the nanotube?

Prior work on SFD in nanotubes has focused on transport of liquids or gases
where the attractive interaction between fluids and the nanotube walls often
lead to wetting and layering transitions. Both C60 molecules and Li atoms are
known to have repulsive interactions with the carbon nanotube walls and there is
strong experimental evidence to show they form one-dimensional chains inside the
tubes. In addition, the interactions of C60 molecules and Li atoms with
nanotubes are of different types due to the different degrees of charge transfer
and screening produced within the tubes. This exploratory study involving
numerical simulation and analytical models will lead to predictive models of
particle transport within nanotube channels at short, intermediate and long time
scales. By using realistic interaction potentials, the results of the analysis
can be generalized to more complex systems of filled nanotube "peapods"
containing endofullerenes (i.e., fullerenes encapsulating foreign atoms),
metallic halides, metal oxides, etc., which are nanostructures of considerable
potential in technological applications.

Broader impacts: The fundamental problem of SFD in nanotubes addressed here has
implications for environmental processes that involve nanofluidic transport
through membranes or channels, industrial processes such as shape selective
catalysis, isotope based separation of gases and biological advances such as
development of nano-syringes with encapsulated drugs allowing direct delivery to
cell channels. The results of this study will lay the groundwork for a longer-
term research project which involves the transport of complex organic molecules
in a single file through nanotubes where the non-spherical shape and
confirmational transitions of the molecules can influence the motion.