* 0304013
* Real and Complex Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Eric Bedford, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 179,702.00

We investigate the dynamics of plane polynomial diffeomorphisms.&lt;br/&gt;These
mappings define diffeomorphisms of the real plane as well as&lt;br/&gt;the
complex plane. This project will investigate the dynamics of&lt;br/&gt;the
complex mappings using the methods of complex analysis and&lt;br/&gt;complex
geometry. An important part of our research will be to&lt;br/&gt;understand when
and to what extent the complex results can be&lt;br/&gt;applied to the
underlying real system. Our main focus will be on&lt;br/&gt;the Henon family of
quadratic mappings of the plane. And within&lt;br/&gt;this family we study the
horseshoe mappings. Among other things, we&lt;br/&gt;will describe the shape of
the boundary of the horseshoe locus, and&lt;br/&gt; the behavior of the mappings
on the boundary. We&lt;br/&gt;will also apply our methods to describe the
dynamics of certain bifurcations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One motivation is that an
understanding of the polynomial&lt;br/&gt;diffeomorphisms of the plane should be
a useful guide to the&lt;br/&gt;investigation of the dynamics of general
diffeomorphisms of the&lt;br/&gt;plane. It should provide examples of mappings
and bifurcations that&lt;br/&gt;can be understood in detail and provide the
examples that&lt;br/&gt;serve as guideposts for the development of the theory
for more&lt;br/&gt;general mappings. Closely related to this is the study of
birational&lt;br/&gt;mappings of the plane. In particular, we will analyze
birational&lt;br/&gt;maps that arise in renormalization questions in lattice
statistical&lt;br/&gt;mechanics.