* 0305043
* Infrared Studies of Cuprate Superconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2007
* USD 290,379.00

This individual investigator award is co-funded by the Department of Energy's
Basic Energy Sciences program. It supports a project that will study a wide
class of cuprate materials by measuring the optical conductivity over a spectral
range from the far infrared, where the superfluid density dominates the
response, through intermediate frequencies, from which comes most of the
spectral weight of the paired condensate, to the optical range where non-Fermi
liquid behavior and charge-transfer excitations are observed. One focus of the
project will be effects that suppress the superfluid density, beginning with an
attempt to understand the fact that even at optimal doping this quantity is
anomalously low. A second focus will be the overdoped materials, in an effort to
search for and characterize phase transitions within the superconducting state,
and to understand the high-doping superconductor-to-metal transition. Third, the
project will investigate the electron-doped side of the phase diagram, where
recent experiments near optimal doping have found evidence of d-wave
superconductivity. The final focus is to study the effect of a large magnetic
field on these materials. This will include an investigation of the
superconductor-to-insulator transition that has been observed in high magnetic
fields at low temperatures. Students working on this research will be involved
with novel materials, sophisticated optical measurements, theories of novel
materials, low-temperature techniques, vacuum deposition, transport studies, and
methods for analysis of optical data.

This individual investigator award is co-funded by the Department of Energy's
Basic Energy Sciences program. It supports a project to study of high-transition
temperature superconductors using infrared and visible light to measure effects
associated with the superconductivity. One unique aspect is the wide range of
wavelengths employed; they span almost a factor of 10,000. This wide coverage
allows studies of both collective effects of the superconducting electrons,
called "the condensate," and also vibrations of the atoms in the crystal and
absorptions by the electrons. The experiments address a number of questions of
intense current interest aimed at increasing our understanding of the
potentially technologically useful high temperature superconductors. Students
working on this research become involved with novel materials, sophisticated
optical measurements, theories of novel materials, low-temperature techniques,
vacuum deposition, transport studies, and methods for analysis of optical data.