* 0305495
* NGS:  Collaborative Research:  An Autonomic Component Framework for Grid Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Manish Parashar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 01/31/2008
* USD 274,950.00

&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of computational Grids and the potential for seamless
aggregation, integration and interactions has made it possible to conceive a new
generation of realistic, scientific and engineering simulations of complex
physical phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These applications will symbiotically
and opportunistically combine computations, experiments, observations, and
realtime data, and will provide important insights into complex systems.
Furthermore, the underlying Grid infrastructure is similarly heterogeneous and
dynamic, globally aggregating large numbers of independent computing and
communication resources, data stores and sensor networks. The combination of the
two results in an application development, configuration and management
complexities that break current paradigms based on passive components and static
compositions. This projectwill make the following specific
contributions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Definition of Autonomous Components: We
will define programming abstractions and supporting infrastructure that will
enable the definition of autonomous components. Together, the aspects, policies,
and policy engine allow autonomous components to consistently and securely
configure, manage, adapt and optimize their execution.&lt;br/&gt;2. Dynamic
Composition of Autonomic Applications: We will develop mechanisms and supporting
infrastructure to enable autonomic applications to be dynamically and
opportunistically composed from autonomic components. The composition will be
based on policies and constraints that are defined, deployed and executed at run
time, and will be aware of available Grid resources (systems, services, storage,
data) and components, and their current states, requirements, and
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;3. Online Performance Modeling of Component-based
Applications: We will investigate the formulation of&lt;br/&gt;predictive
performance functions that hierarchically combine analytical, experimental and
empirical performance models for application components and elements of the
Grid. &lt;br/&gt;4. Autonomic Middleware Services: The project will design,
develop and deploy key services on top of the emerging Grid middleware
infrastructure to support autonomic applications. One of the key requirements
for autonomic behavior and dynamic compositions is the ability of the
components, applications and resources (systems, services, storage, data) to
interact as peers. Furthermore the components should be able to sense their
environment. The project will extend the Grid middleware with (1) a peer-to-peer
substrate, (2) context aware services, and (3) peer-to-peer deductive engines
for composition, configuration and management of autonomic applications. An
active peer-to-peer control network will combine sensors, actuators and rules to
configure and tune components and their execution environment at runtime and
satisfy requirements, and performance and quality of service
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;