* 0305377
* Hydrothermal Synthesis of New Solids for Optics Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Joseph Kolis, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2007
* USD 379,999.00

This project will exploit techniques recently developed by the PI at Clemson
University for the efficient, high throughput investigation of new solids from
high temperature hydrothermal solutions (up to 600 degrees C, and 3 kbar). These
reactions often lead to high quality single crystals of new compounds that are
otherwise difficult or impossible to prepare by any other technique. Many of
these materials have very interesting optoelectronic properties. Specific
emphasis will be placed in compounds crystallizing in acentric or polar space
groups. The chemistry of metal complexes of several interesting oxyanion
building blocks will be investigated, including borates, germanates and
vanadates. New metal fluoride will also be investigated as well as several new
fluoride-based building blocks such as BeF42- that show exceptional promise as
reagents for new wide bandgap acentric solids. This work has substantial impact
in terms of training of students particularly in specialty crystal growth. The
growth of device quality crystals induces students to become involved with
numerous collaborators, especially in industrial labs, using their new materials
in real applications. This allows students to confront many of the issues they
will face in their professional careers. This work has already led to the
development of several short courses and tutorials, such as one for the NSF
Solid State Chemistry Undergraduate Summer Program. %%% Many of these high
quality crystals of new compounds have very interesting optical properties and
can be used in next generation lasers, high-density data storage and high-speed
optical communication. The technique mimics the methods used by nature to grow
gems such as rubies and emeralds. This work has substantial impact in terms of
training of students particularly in specialty crystal growth, a subject that is
almost ignored in US university chemical curricula. It also induces students to
become involved with numerous collaborators, especially in industrial labs,
using their new materials in real world applications. This intimate exposure to
real world industrial applications forces the students to develop the kinds of
team oriented problem solving they will confront in their professional life. The
development of several short courses and tutorials, such as one for the NSF
Solid State Undergraduate Summer Program is having significant impact in meeting
educational needs by providing new curricula. This project is jointly supported
by the Chemistry Division and the Division of Materials Research. ***