* 0305749
* Detection, Estimation and Optimization Problems in Stochastic Systems, and Applications to Genetics, Engineering and Economics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Tze Lai, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2009
* USD 946,785.00

Proposal: DMS-0305749&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tze L. Lai&lt;br/&gt;Title: Detection,
Estimation and Optimization Problems in Stochastic Systems, and Applications to
Genetics, Engineering and
Economics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will study a large number of change-point like problems that arise in industrial
quality control, automated fault detection of complex engineering systems and
gene mapping. A common feature of these problems involves the probability that a
random field exceeds a high threshold. A unified analytic approach will be
developed to evaluate the relevant boundary crossing probabilities. Importance
sampling techniques and sequential Monte Carlo methods will also be developed to
supplement the analytic approximations. For on-line applications, relatively
simple parallel, recursive algorithms, which are not too demanding in
computational and memory requirements and yet are nearly optimal from a
statistical viewpoint, will be developed. Another direction of research is
financial time series and stochastic control problems in financial economics.
New statistical models, computational algorithms, and data analysis and
forecasting methods will be developed to address a variety of sequential
decision, portfolio selection, and pricing problems in investments and financial
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address problems of (i)
industrial quality control, especially control of complex engineering systems,
(ii) gene mapping, i.e., the identification of genomic regions containing a gene
(or genes) affecting a trait of interest in humans, model experimental
organisms, or agriculturally important crops, and (iii) financial economics,
especially time series analysis of financial data. The problems will be studied
by using recent developments in probability and statistical theory, and by
extensive experiments involving computer simulations. Computational algorithms
will be developed to facilitate applications. The investigators will also
develop new undergraduate and graduate courses in statistical genetics and in
financial mathematics and write textbooks for these courses.&lt;br/&gt;