* 0305853
* Geometrical and Physical Phenomena in Algebraic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Igor Kriz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 145,673.00

DMS-0305853&lt;br/&gt;Igor Kriz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic topology is an
area which examines properties of &lt;br/&gt;shapes not affected by continuous
deformation: in a traditional &lt;br/&gt;example, a coffee cup made out of
modelling clay can be &lt;br/&gt;continuously, without gluing or
tearing,deformed into the &lt;br/&gt;shape of a donut, but not a solid ball
(because of the `hole' &lt;br/&gt;in the handle). Sophisticated methods using
algebra, primarily&lt;br/&gt;groups, were developed to describe and explain such
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;String theory is an area of theoretical physics which is
&lt;br/&gt;currently the best candidate for solving the greatest
puzzle&lt;br/&gt;of modern physics, namely unification of gravity with the
other&lt;br/&gt;forces of nature. The fundamental idea of string theory is that
&lt;br/&gt;very small particles may not be `dots', but $1$-dimensional
&lt;br/&gt;objects (`strings'). The present project focuses on connections
&lt;br/&gt;between algebraic topology and string theory. While physicists
&lt;br/&gt;know about the fact that topology is connected to the phenomenology
&lt;br/&gt;of strings, the present project explores connections of a new
&lt;br/&gt;nature. Notably, algebraic topology is needed in making the
&lt;br/&gt;concepts of string theory mathematically rigorous, which in turn
&lt;br/&gt;is a necessary step toward possibly using such concepts for
&lt;br/&gt;scientific prediction. On the other hand, string
theory&lt;br/&gt;suggests exciting new methods for algebraic topology, which
&lt;br/&gt;will also be explored in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will continue to work on using string theory to
&lt;br/&gt;construct mathematical models for elliptic cohomology. He will
&lt;br/&gt;also consider extending these methods to finding
generalized&lt;br/&gt;cohomology theories related to D-branes and M-theory. In
the process,&lt;br/&gt;he will work on mathematical theories which will serve
as&lt;br/&gt;axiomatic systems for fundamental and extended objects of
string&lt;br/&gt;theory. Many aspects of this project are joint work with Po
Hu.&lt;br/&gt;