* 0305866
* Collaborative Research: Development of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Coils for Cognitive Neuroscience Research
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Shinsuke Shimojo, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 157,766.00

Collaborative Research: Development of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Coils
for Cognitive Neuroscience Research
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation
support, Drs. Shimojo, Gabrieli, Maeda, and colleagues will conduct a two-year
project aimed at developing and validating a new transcranial magnetic
stimulation coil device. A transcranial magnetic stimulator (TMS) coil produces
relatively focal magnetic current which can be used non-invasively (outside the
skull) to safely create "virtual brain lesions" and to transiently modulate
neural activity. It can probe brain areas at different points in time during the
performance of a psychological task and thereby assess the causal relationship
between brain activity at the targeted location and components of task
processing. &lt;br/&gt;It is particularly powerful in combination with
neuroimaging, which can provide activation maps and precise stereotactic
reference frames (anatomical MRI) for accurate and task-relevant TMS targeting.
TMS provides a means to study of causal relationships between brain activity and
behavior by induction/facilitation or extinction/inhibition of an effect, a
significant advantage over other brain imaging techniques that in general offer
only correlational effects. The device to be developed in this project will
allow rapid switching of current in the TMS coil in a novel fashion that allows
much greater range of precisely matched control conditions, and it is
particularly useful in neuroimaging settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the proposed device will deliver three kinds of stimulation
without having to move or switch coils, and all while causing similar sensations
hence being unnoticed to the participants. First, I can produce real TMS.
Second, it can produce sham TMS: by manipulating the current in each loop of the
coil, most of the induced electric field will be cancelled out, hence resulting
in no substantial physiological effect. Third, the device can produce real TMS
with reversed current direction. Many brain regions have optimal TMS current
direction to disrupt or evoke an effect, and by reversing the current direction
in the coil, this type of TMS applies non-optimal stimulation while maintaining
identical subjective sensation and induced electric field. In many cases, the
coil can be set so that this reversed current is ideal to stimulate another
(usually the contralateral) site. The device will be validated using well-
established tools and paradigms in the fields of cognitive neuroscience and TMS.
In particular the proposed device will be validated with respect to (1) its
physical properties using a search-coil electric circuit, (2) associated
subjective sensations, (3) in behavioral paradigms of motor physiology and (4)
visual psychophysics, and (5) electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings of the
TMS-evoked responses and behavior/TMS interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This proposed TMS device is superior
to conventional TMS in five ways. First, it can be used in fluently and
simultaneous with brain imaging studies in which moving or switching coils is
highly undesirable. Second, it can be used to interleave different sham and
control conditions with great control. Third, it can be used in a double blind
designs, in which neither the experimenter apply the TMS nor the subject know
whether the TMS is real, sham TMS, or real-TMS in the reverse direction. Fourth,
the device can be used to produce consecutive and controlled activations of
either the same brain area or two different neural structures, without the
participant's awareness. Fifth, it can be used to investigate the physiologic
and behavioral interactions of two consecutive stimuli in the same or different
current directions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Undergraduate and
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and staff members will receive
interdisciplinary training in psychophysics, electrical engineering,
neurophysiology, and signal processing. The proposed device will be used by
cognitive, clinical, and TMS neuroscience research communities to enable new
avenues for more sophisticated and novel research techniques for better
understanding of brain function, pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders,
and the mechanism of action of TMS. Findings and techniques will be disseminated
through conferences, journals, and our laboratory web-sites. Circuit diagrams,
theories, and results of our validation studies will be available at those web-
sites. Upon success of this proposal and with demand from the research
community, this device should become commercially available from a major
manufacturer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;