* 0305617
* NGS:Collaborative Proposal:Structural and Composable Performance Simulation of Complex Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Li-Shiuan Peh, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2006
* USD 879,503.00

The most prevalent modeling methodology for computational systems employed
today,&lt;br/&gt;hand-writing monolithic simulators in sequential programming
languages, yields simulators that are&lt;br/&gt;difficult to retarget or
integrate with one another. The proposed solution, the Liberty Simulation
Environment (LSE), automatically constructs simulators&lt;br/&gt;from machine
descriptions that closely resemble the structure of hardware. This structural
resemblance&lt;br/&gt;to the hardware provides confidence in the model and frees
systems researchers to think about systems, not&lt;br/&gt;simulator coding
concerns. LSE's strict but general component communication contract enables the
creation&lt;br/&gt;of highly reusable component libraries and eases the task of
rapidly exploring ever more exotic designs. LSE&lt;br/&gt;components and
descriptions can be hierarchically composed of other components and can exist at
any level&lt;br/&gt;of abstraction (statistical to gate-level). This choice of
abstraction level combined with partial specification&lt;br/&gt;support allow
models to be iteratively refined; descriptions generate fully functional
simulators from the&lt;br/&gt;very start, allowing users to specify and validate
precise models incrementally. Through observing current&lt;br/&gt;and future
users of LSE, we will continually refine the framework to arrive at the most
effective design of&lt;br/&gt;these features in practice.&lt;br/&gt;