* 0305968
* Dynamics From Forced Symmetry-Breaking
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Edgar Knobloch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 123,838.00

Systems with symmetries arise frequently in applications. Such systems exhibit
behavior that is not typical of nonsymmetric systems. Even though this behavior
may be more complex than expected techniques from equivariant bifurcation theory
permit one to analyze its origin and properties. However, in many applications
the presence of symmetry is an idealization. It is important therefore to
understand which aspects of the dynamics of the symmetric system are robust with
respect to small symmetry-breaking imperfections. In many cases the loss of both
discrete and continuous symmetries introduces global bifurcations into the
dynamics and hence the possibility of chaotic time-dependence. This project
proposes a study of such symmetry-breaking perturbations in several important
classes of systems arising incontinuum mechanics (fluid flow, chemically
reacting systems etc) with emphasis on identifying robust behavior both near
threshold of a primary instability and further away from it. The former gives
rise to low-dimensional systems with broken symmetry via center manifold
reduction, while the latter require a study of partial differential equations.
Special emphasis is placed on understanding the effects of breaking both
reflection symmetry and translation invariance (both separately and
simultaneously). Phenomena arising from the breaking of time-translation
invariance due to parametric forcing and the loss of Galilean invariance will
also be studied. The goal of the project is to gain a deep understanding of the
limitations on the applicability of idealized models and to provide a
description of the type of behavior that is typical of ''nearly-symmetric''
systems.

The project aims at understanding the basic principles behind robust behavior.
For example, understanding the effects of broken reflection symmetry is
essential when studying the effects of a small inclination of an apparatus to
the horizontal, and the effects of through-flow or rotation on transitions from
one state to another. Problems of this type arise in microscopic situations
(thin films on horizontal or inclined substrates) in geophysics (for example in
oceanography) and everywhere in between. Similarly, understanding the trapping
of wavelike disturbances by spatial inhomogemeities is of importance not only in
catalysis where the inhomogeneities may be on atomic scale, and in the trapping
of weather patterns by topography.