* 0305360
* Ferromagnetic Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Don Heiman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 375,280.00

This project addresses materials issues relevant to the the hybridization of
conventional electronics with ferromagnetic materials, candidates for enhancing
present information storage devices, as well as providing ingredients for novel
electronic-like devices based on spin injection and spin manipulation
(spintronics). The objective of the proposed work is to synthesize novel
ferromagnetic semiconductor nanostructures in order to gain fundamental
understanding of their magnetic, transport, and optical properties. Goals
include: (i) comprehensive understanding of the magnetism and its relation to
the semiconducting properties; (ii) higher Curie temperatures; and (iii)
improved optical properties. Novel materials and structures of III-V
ferromagnetic semiconductors will be synthesized in Northeastern's MBE facility.
A primary focus is the exploration of transition metal ions other then Mn,
beginning with Cr, but also to improve Mn containing materials. Several
theoretical and experimental studies indicate that Cr in III-V materials has the
potential for high Curie temperatures. The PI's group has been growing
(Ga,Cr,Mn)As for about one year and has recently discovered transition
temperatures as high as 700 K. Bandgap engineering will be used to facilitate
the investigation of the dependence of electronic energy levels of magnetic
ions. For example, Cr has an acceptor-like transition that is midgap in GaAs. By
alloying antimony with arsenic, the acceptor energy can be reduced to a level
comparable to Mn in GaAs. Varying the energy level of magnetic ions is important
for testing and developing theoretical models of ferromagnetism in
semiconductors. Magnetic and transport experiments will be used to examine the
interaction between the semiconductor carriers and Cr ions. Quantifying this
interaction is important for elucidating the coupling within and between
magnetic polarons observed in the magnetization of (Ga,Cr)As and the carrier
localization effects observed in transport measurements. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses basic materials research issues in a topical
area of materials science with significant technological relevance, and places
emphasis on the integration of research and education. The research program
provides excellent opportunities for hands-on experience in the use of
sophisticated scientific equipment. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
involved in the design, synthesis, characterization, and science of
nanostructured materials. The broad resources, and collaborative aspects,
provide special opportunities for education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students involved in interdisciplinary forefront research.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;