* 0305973
* ITWF:  Understanding Gendered Attrition in Departments of Information Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Tona Henderson, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 06/30/2007
* USD 323,524.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: EIA-0305973&lt;br/&gt;Investigator:
Elizabeth Lawley and Tona Henderson&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rochester Institute
of Technology&lt;br/&gt;Title: Understanding Gendered Attrition in Departments
of Information Technology &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rochester Institute of
Technology (RIT) has received an ITWF award to study the experiences of
undergraduate women in departments of Information Technology (IT). Most research
to date into women's experiences in undergraduate computing programs has focused
on Computer Science departments. While IT programs have cast themselves as
qualitatively different from traditional CS, it is not clear whether women's
experiences in these programs are more positive than in CS, where retention of
female students has been consistently problematic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will be done in two parts. The first will be a qualitative study of all
women, and a sample of men, entering the IT department at RIT as freshmen. These
women will be interviewed upon entrance into the program, at the end of their
first quarter, and at the end of the academic year. Based on the information
gained in that study, key factors related to women's persistence or attrition
will be identified. The second part of the study will be the development of
questionnaires for faculty and students intended to identify the presence and
influence of those actors in academic departments. The questionnaire will then
be administered at departments of IT across the US, in order to determine
whether the factors identified at RIT can be generalized across institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;