* 0305794
* Some Mesoscale Issues in Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* David Kinderlehrer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2009
* USD 489,262.00

&lt;br/&gt;Mesoscale phenomena in biological and material systems assume
prominence when an intermediate length or time scale is required to assess gross
system behavior or when the finer active scales cannot be directly interrogated.
These systems are frequently metastable. They give rise to challenging and novel
issues for modeling, analysis, and simulation. In this project we have isolated
two broad areas for investigation directly from potential application.
Diffusion- mediated transport applies to Brownian motors and molecular ratchets
and, typically, involves very small scales. Here, there is a collaboration
between a diffusive process, which tends to spread density isotropically through
a medium, and a transport process, which tends to localize density, to produce
net transport or work when either taken separately would not. Methods from
Monge-Kantorovich mass transportation theory are employed to determine the
metastable environment of this type of system, but additional techniques seem to
be required for better information. The second broad area concerns interfaces in
polycrystalline materials and especially the large-scale simulation of grain
growth. Here we are implementing a novel data structure and carefully designed
algorithms to produce simulations which can accommodate experimentally derived
energy and mobility functions and also be large enough to produce reliable
statistics. It is a fundamental question to actually derive the relationship
between the statistics and the simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesoscale
phenomena in biological and material systems assume prominence when an
intermediate length or time scale is required to assess gross system behavior or
when the finer active scales cannot be directly interrogated. These systems are
frequently metastable. They give rise to challenging and novel issues for
modeling, analysis, and simulation. Here, we have chosen two quite different
areas with important applications. Diffusion-mediated transport lies behind the
Brownian motor. This mechanism is implicated, most importantly, in the motor
proteins responsible for eukaryotic cellular traffic. The opportunity to
discover the interplay between chemistry and mechanics and to elaborate the
implications of metastability could not offer a more exciting venue. The second
broad area concerns interfaces in polycrystalline materials and their large-
scale simulation. Most useful materials are polycrystalline, comprised of many
small grains separated by interfaces called grain boundaries. These interfaces
play a role in many material properties and across many scales of use. Preparing
arrangements of grains and boundaries, a texture suitable for a given purpose,
is a central problem in microstructure. There is a changing paradigm of
experimental science. Automated data acquisition technologies, now practiced in
disciplines as varied as materials science and molecular biology, allow
interrogation at vastly diverse ranges of scales. These scales need not be the
smallest nor the largest and, indeed, they are typically those mesoscales which
are rich in information. The principal challenge is the development of
strategies for the extraction of this information in a reliable and robust way.
Simulation is becoming an increasingly important tool and, moreover,
interpreting the results of this type of simulation is a major question. We
believe that understanding the predictive character of large-scale simulations
of metastable systems used to interrogate and model physical and biological
systems is an emerging fundamental challenge for computational science. The goal
of this project, of course, is to meet this challenge.&lt;br/&gt;