* 0305712
* Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Steven Kerckhoff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2007
* USD 295,596.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0305712&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: R.L. Cohen, S.P. Kerckhoff, R.J. Milgram&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project consists of research programs in a broad range of&lt;br/&gt;topics in
Algebraic and Geometric Topology. The principal&lt;br/&gt;investigators,
Professors R.L. Cohen, S.P. Kerckhoff, and&lt;br/&gt;R.J. Milgram are senior
topologists whose research interests&lt;br/&gt;cover a large number of areas of
topology and related fields.&lt;br/&gt;Included in these projects are the study
of core topological&lt;br/&gt;questions such as the study of 3 - dimensional
geometry, the&lt;br/&gt;study of the topology of complex and related structures
on&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, and topological invariants of finite groups.
In&lt;br/&gt;addition it includes applications of topological methods
to&lt;br/&gt;engineering questions in the field of
Robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topology of 3-dimensional manifolds is
intimately connected&lt;br/&gt;to differential geometry, particularly to
homogeneous structures&lt;br/&gt;like Euclidean, spherical, and hyperbolic
geometry. Of these,&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic geometry is the most prevalent. On a
closed&lt;br/&gt;3-manifold a hyperbolic structure, if it exists, is unique by
the&lt;br/&gt;Mostow Rigidity Theorem. Thus, any geometric invariant is
a&lt;br/&gt;topological invariant and can be used to distinguish
different&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds. When the 3-manifold has boundary, it can have
a&lt;br/&gt;large parameter space of hyperbolic structures; in this case,
the&lt;br/&gt;qualitativeq properties of the structures as one varies over
the&lt;br/&gt;parameter space are of particular interest. Kerckhoff
studies&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic structures on 3-manifolds, trying to describe
the&lt;br/&gt;behavior of these geometric structures under a
topological&lt;br/&gt;procedure, called Dehn surgery, and in the presence
of&lt;br/&gt;singularities modeled on a cone. R.L. Cohen is pursuing
several&lt;br/&gt;projects that involve studying algebraic topological aspects
of&lt;br/&gt;questons stemming from geometry. These projects lie under
the&lt;br/&gt;following general headings. 1. The topology of moduli spaces
of&lt;br/&gt;holomorphic curves in complex and symplectic manifolds. 2.
The&lt;br/&gt;homotopy type of the stable mapping class group and the
Mumford&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture. 3. Properties and applications of
holomorphic&lt;br/&gt;K-theory. R.J. Milgram will pursue questions involving
the&lt;br/&gt;cohomology of finite simple groups, as well as applications
of&lt;br/&gt;the topology of configuration spaces to questions in the
design&lt;br/&gt;and behavior of robotic arms.&lt;br/&gt;