* 0305895
* Quantum Cohomology, Quantum K-theory, Frobenius Manifolds and Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Yuan-Pin Lee, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 111,990.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0305895&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Yuan-Pin Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this project
is to study Gromov--Witten theory&lt;br/&gt;and its relations and applications
to other areas of mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;including enumerative geometry,
integrable systems, K-theory, and&lt;br/&gt;representation theory. The emphasis
is placed on some key&lt;br/&gt;problems where these areas intersect. These
problems include the&lt;br/&gt;study of higher spin curves, quantum K-theory,
enumerative&lt;br/&gt;geometry, and Frobenius
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gromov--Witten theory was born in early 1990's
through the&lt;br/&gt;interaction of mathematics and physics. On the
mathematical side,&lt;br/&gt;it starts with Gromov's invention of a new way to
produce&lt;br/&gt;symplectic invariants. On the physical side, it was
Witten's&lt;br/&gt;study of string theory. Although of a relatively short
history,&lt;br/&gt;Gromov--Witten theory is a major active field of research.
This&lt;br/&gt;is due not only to its powerful solutions to old problems,
but&lt;br/&gt;also to its interdisciplinary nature, with continuing inputs
from&lt;br/&gt;several fields of mathematics and string theory. This
project&lt;br/&gt;proposes to investigate Gromov--Witten theory through
various&lt;br/&gt;perspectives and to search for its applications in other
subject&lt;br/&gt;areas.&lt;br/&gt;