* 0305815
* Variational Eigenvalues of Quasilinear Elliptic Operators and Critical Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Kanishka Perera, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 08/31/2004
* USD 19,068.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award DMS-0305815&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kanishka S
Perera, Florida Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Variational
eigenvalues of quasi-linear operators and critical
groups&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boundary value problems involving variational type
quasilinear&lt;br/&gt;elliptic operators arise naturally in a wide range
of&lt;br/&gt;applications. The solutions of such problems can often be
obtained&lt;br/&gt;as the critical points of an associated variational
functional&lt;br/&gt;defined on a suitable function space. In recent years
infinite&lt;br/&gt;dimensional Morse theory, which is one of the most important
tools&lt;br/&gt;in critical point theory, has been used to study
semilinear&lt;br/&gt;problems with striking success, but unfortunately this is
not so&lt;br/&gt;in the quasilinear case. Basic Morse theory describes the
local&lt;br/&gt;behavior of a functional near an isolated critical point by
a&lt;br/&gt;sequence of groups called the critical groups, and there
are&lt;br/&gt;serious difficulties in determining the critical groups, both
at&lt;br/&gt;finite critical points and at infinity, for functionals
arising&lt;br/&gt;from quasilinear problems. Standard tools such as the
generalized&lt;br/&gt;Morse lemma and the shifting theorem can no longer be
applied&lt;br/&gt;since the domains of such functionals are generally not
Hilbert&lt;br/&gt;spaces. Moreover, a complete description of the spectrum of
a&lt;br/&gt;quasilinear operator is usually not available and there are
no&lt;br/&gt;eigenspaces to work with. The goal of this proposal is
to&lt;br/&gt;determine the critical groups in a broad class of variational
form&lt;br/&gt;quasilinear problems, both resonant and nonresonant, and apply
the&lt;br/&gt;results to obtain existence, multiplicity, and
qualitative&lt;br/&gt;properties of solutions such as the number of nodal
domains.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear partial differential equations is one
of the most&lt;br/&gt;applicable and highly interdisciplinary areas of
mathematics. They&lt;br/&gt;are widely used to model fundamental processes in
science and&lt;br/&gt;engineering. While tools for numerically computing
solutions of&lt;br/&gt;quasilinear equations have been developed extensively,
there is&lt;br/&gt;very little analytical theory currently available. Our goal
is to&lt;br/&gt;establish parts of the needed theory and to investigate
the&lt;br/&gt;structure of solutions. The knowledge gained by this project
will&lt;br/&gt;have applications to a wide variety of physical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;