* 0305837
* Collaborative Research:    Dynamics, Stabilization and Control of Nonholonomic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Anthony Bloch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 130,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0305837&lt;br/&gt;PI: Anthony M. Bloch
[abloch@math.1sa.umich.edu]&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Michigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Dynamics, Stabilization and
Control of Nonholonomic
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators explore the dynamics of nonholonomic systems, that is, mechanical
systems subject to velocity constraints. Proposed research includes studying the
existence and properties of momentum conservation laws in nonholonomic dynamics,
energy-momentum methods in stability analysis, the qualitative analysis of
dynamics of systems with non-free group actions, nonlinear feedback
stabilization, and the energy-based approach to tracking problems, both
holonomic and nonholonomic. Momentum conservation laws in nonholonomic mechanics
are subtle as the classical Noether theorem does not in general apply. This
leads to rich dynamics which the investigators study. The role of integrability
and discrete symmetries in nonholonomic systems is also analyzed. The
investigators study various extensions of the energy-momentum method to both
stability, stabilization and control of physical systems. In the nonholonomic
setting integrability of the momentum equation is utilized, while in general use
is made of the method of controlled Lagrangians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
dynamics of systems with velocity constraints (such as rolling and sliding
constraints) has numerous applications in industry; robotics and the dynamics of
wheeled vehicles are examples. In applications, stabilization of steady-state
motions (such as the straightforward motion of a car at a constant speed) is
often desired. The investigators use various tools from the geometric theory of
dynamics and control for studying such motions and, more importantly, for
programming desired motions in the presence of control forces. The study is
ultimately aimed at the design of energy-efficient controllers based on the
natural mechanical features of the systems under investigation. The dynamics of
single-wheeled vehicles is of special interest because of their exceptional,
maneuverability. More complex systems are studied as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;