* 0305448
* Cycles in Locally Symmetric Spaces of Orthogonal and Unitary Type and Modular Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Jens Funke, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 88,190.00

Principal Investigator: Jens Funke&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0305448&lt;br/&gt;Institution: New Mexico State University&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Cycles in locally symmetric spaces of orthogonal and unitary type and modular
forms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
concerned with the utilization of the theory of dual pairs and the theta
correspondence to study the connections between geometrically defined cycles in
certain locally symmetric spaces and automorphic forms. One major theme of the
proposal is to extend the theta lift introduced by Kudla and Millson to the full
cohomology of locally symmetric spaces of orthogonal and unitary type and to
cohomology with non-trivial coefficients. The other major theme is based on
recent work of the PI in collaboration with Bruinier establishing a duality
result between the Kudla-Millson lift and the singular theta lift first
introduced by Borcherds. Based on this, the main goal is to establish (further)
generalizations of the Borcherds lift with applications to arithmetic algebraic
geometry and Riemannian geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal deepens the
relationship between several different areas of mathematics related to number
theory, the most classical discipline in mathematics. More precisely, it
involves an interaction between representation theory (the study of symmetries)
on one hand and geometry on the other. Interesting in their own right, these
subjects have contributed to advances in cryptography and physics, among others.
Specifically, parts of this project are concerned with certain aspects of the
work of Fields medalist R. Borcherds that turned out to be important in string
theory. It is therefore not unreasonable to expect applications of the proposed
work to theoretical physics. The collaborations outlined in this project are
part of a larger network of researchers working in these kind of mathematical
problems nationally and internationally. Through these collaborations, the
proposed work strengthens this infrastructure, which has been effective in
facilitating research progress and dissemination of results.&lt;br/&gt;