* 0305823
* A Study of Diversity Among Comets
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Anita Cochran, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 53,646.00

AST 0305823&lt;br/&gt;Cochran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comets represent important
tracers of the early history of our solar nebula because they are altered little
from their time of formation. Knowledge of their composition can be used to
constrain the chemistry of the region in which they formed. The chemistry,
coupled with our current understanding of the dynamical evolution of the Kuiper
belt and Oort clouds, can then be used as constraints for the temperature and
pressure conditions in solar nebula models. In order to probe the degree of
homogeneity of the nuclei, one needs a data set of a wide variety of objects
which has been obtained and reduced in a uniform way. Dr. Anita Cochran and
colleagues, at the University of Texas, will analyze a large database of extant
comet observations in order to probe the degree of homogeneity of cometary
nuclei. Over many years, they have used the telescopes of McDonald Observatory,
coupled with a variety of spectrographs, to collect optical spectra of comets,
including information on the distribution of the gas within the coma, resulting
in a large database of observations which can be used to help determine the
uniformity of the chemistry of comets. In this study, they will utilize their
existing observations to study the diversity of cometary nuclei. The spectra
will be analyzed to determine the production rates of various molecular species
and to determine the relative composition of over 100 comets. These compositions
will then be&lt;br/&gt;inter-compared to determine trends of composition with
the formations of the bodies. The research&lt;br/&gt;will be published in peer-
reviewed journals and submitted to the Planetary Data System
Small&lt;br/&gt;Bodies Node Archive for future use by all
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is intended to be accomplished
primarily by an undergraduate student at the University of Texas, under the
supervision of Dr. Cochran. As such, not only is a scientifically important
result expected, but the next generation of astronomers will be trained. At the
end of the project, the student will be proficient in skills useful for future
astronomical research, will have some experience at the undergraduate level with
real research, and will be part of at least one publication in a refereed
journal. The student will be supported to travel to a professional society
meeting to present the results. In addition, the vast database will become
available to the scientific community through publication and inclusion in the
Planetary Data System Small Bodies Node
archive.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;