* 0305198
* NGS: Collaborative Research: Adapting Program Code Continuously and Adaptively
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Mary Lou Soffa, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 660,538.00

Much of the past and recent research in program optimization has focused on
developing new algorithms to perform a particular optimization or
transformation. Indeed, over the previous decade the compiler research community
has developed sophisticated, powerful optimization algorithms for a variety of
code improvements: register allocation and assignment, common subexpression
elimination, partial redundancy elimination, loop optimizations (e.g., loop
fusion, loop unrolling, loop interchange, etc.), code scheduling, and function
inlining to name a few. While there are still avenues of promising research for
particular optimizations, we are at the point where the performance gains of a
new or improved optimization algorithm is usually small?an improvement of a few
percent is typical. Today?s challenge for optimization research is to develop
new techniques and approaches that yield performance improvements that go beyond
today?s small single digit improvements. In this research, we address this
challenge by investigating and developing an innovative framework and system for
continuously and adaptively applying optimizations. Our system, the Continuous
Compiler (CoCo), applies optimizations both statically at compile-time and
dynamically at run-time using optimization plans developed at compile time and
adapted at run time.&lt;br/&gt;Rather than focusing on developing new
optimization algorithms (e.g., a new register allocation algorithm,
a&lt;br/&gt;new loop interchange algorithm) or improving existing optimizations
(e.g., better coloring heuristics, better placement algorithms), the proposed
research focuses on understanding the interaction of existing optimizations and
the efficacy of static and dynamic optimizations. Using this knowledge along
with information about the application gathered by static analysis, profile
information and monitoring, CoCo will determine how to apply a suite of
optimizations so that the optimizations work in concert to yield the best
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;