* 0305140
* Collaborative Research: Upper Mantle Structure Beneath the Gulf of California
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2003,08/31/2009
* John Collins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2009
* USD 136,020.00

In this experiment, which is part of the NSF Margins initiative on Rifting
Continental Lithosphere, the investigators are deploying 18 wide-band ocean
bottom seismographs (OBS) in the Gulf of California for a period of 15 months.
These seismographs are recording naturally occurring seismicity (over 200
moderate and large earthquakes) from around the globe. Using these seismic
recordings, the investigators are constructing images of the mantle beneath the
Gulf and the surrounding region, providing a means to evaluate the degree to
which mantle processes control lithospheric rupture and the initiation of
seafloor spreading in the Gulf of California. The experiment is focused on two
questions that are particularly important for achieving the goals of the Rifting
Continental Lithosphere initiative: (1) Is the upper-mantle directly underlying
Gulf of California extension anomalously hot? (2) To what extent do North-South
variations in extensional style correlate with upper-mantle velocity variations?
The OBS deployment also provides the means to better characterize seismically
active faults within the Gulf of California, improving the assessment of the
natural hazards environment of the region. The Gulf of California OBS array
builds two ongoing Margins-funded experiments: the NARS-Baja onshore broadband
seismic array, and an active-source crustal survey. The ocean-bottom seismic
data collected in this experiment will be available to any interested
investigator 2 years following instrument recovery through the IRIS Data
Management Center.