* 0305673
* Workshop for the Retention of Underrepresented and Minority Engineering Educators
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Norma Mattei, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2004
* USD 129,956.00

This workshop is designed to encourage retention and advancement of qualified
women and underrepresented minority engineering educators in pursuit of
scientific and engineering challenges. The workshop will bring together a select
group of 80 of the nation's outstanding engineering educators. Participants will
be underrepresented and minority engineering educators who predominately have
been in tenure track positions for less than five years or are in the last year
of their Ph.D. program and actively pursuing tenure track academic positions.
The participants will be employed in teaching and/or research positions and
actively developing their own unique research programs. Specific workshop goals
are to: ! Foster technical and intellectual exchange among Ph.D. level,
underrepresented and minority engineers who are or desire to be engineering
educators; ! Instill in its participants the sense of a technical community in
which they can thrive and to which they can contribute; and ! Increase
participant awareness of research and funding opportunities. The workshop will
consist of ten formal sessions spread over a three-day period. The workshop will
open with a presentation in which integration of research and education will be
emphasized. This will be followed with detailed presentations on funding
opportunities from technical program managers representing agencies such as NSF,
ARO, AFOSR, ONR, DARPA, and NASA. A panel of university deans will discuss their
perspectives on reasonable career expectations and demands. The deans' panel
will be set up to include discussion of issues related to tenure, teaching,
research, publications, funding, outreach and a rewarding personal life along
the career path of an engineering educator. Role models selected based on their
outstanding technical abilities and successful careers will be invited to give
technical presentations, blended with personal and professional insights, and
will be available for discussion with younger participants throughout the
workshop. All participants will give a brief summary of their current research
interests, increasing fellow participants' awareness of the diversity of related
opportunities for involvement in different research areas. Participants will
attend several working sessions on topics ranging from diversity issues to
preparing successful grant proposals and tours of national research laboratory
test facilities. Each day will close with a reception or banquet organized to
promote discussion and networking among participants. The workshop proceedings
will summarize the recommendations from the working session discussions, provide
a workshop outcomes assessment and recommendations statement, and include a two
page abstract from each participant that describes their research interests. The
envisioned short-term significance and benefits of the workshop are threefold:
enhanced participant awareness of what is required to be successful in academe
(teaching, publishing, outreach, etc.), diversification of participants'
research program goals, and development of a network of mentors and peers who
encounter similar challenges in advancing within academe. The envisioned long-
term significance and benefits of the program are improved retention of women
and underrepresented minority engineers as active researchers, mentors, and
instructors in engineering education, and increased diversity in the
undergraduate engineering student population as a result of a more diverse
engineering faculty.