* 0305726
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Michael Grabe, Grabe                   Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and
training plan is entitled "Electromechanical models of voltage-activation."
Voltage-gated ion channels are essential for the generation of action potentials
that trigger neurosecretion and muscle contraction. Membrane depolarization
causes rearrangements of a voltage-sensing domain required for conduction. This
project will construct molecular models using electrostatic calculations in
order to understand these motions in potassium channels. &lt;br/&gt;