* 0305280
* 4-manifolds, von Neumann Algebras and Elliptic Cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Peter Teichner, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 10/31/2004
* USD 223,666.00

DMS-0305280&lt;br/&gt;Peter Teichner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work, the
principal investigator constructed a highly &lt;br/&gt;nontrivial filtration of
the knot concordance group, indexed by the &lt;br/&gt;height of gropes embedded
in the 4-ball, and partially detected by &lt;br/&gt;von Neumann's continuous
dimension. The resulting graded group &lt;br/&gt;remains unknown, and the
principal investigator proposes various &lt;br/&gt;approaches to uncover the
structure of this group. Related questions &lt;br/&gt;about link concordance and
embedding problems of 2-spheres into &lt;br/&gt;4-manifolds can also be studied
by these methods.&lt;br/&gt;In the second part of the project, the principal
investigator is &lt;br/&gt;attempting to give a geometric definition of elliptic
cohomology in &lt;br/&gt;terms of a modification of Segal's "elliptic objects".
These are &lt;br/&gt;conformal field theories parametrized by a topological
space X, in &lt;br/&gt;particular to each circle in X they associate a Hilbert
space. For &lt;br/&gt;more than 15 years, Segal's approach could not be turned
into a &lt;br/&gt;cohomology theory because of the failure of the Mayer-Vietoris
&lt;br/&gt;principle. The new idea is to apply the fusion of bimodules of von
&lt;br/&gt;Neumann algebras, developed by Connes, to make the conformal field
&lt;br/&gt;theory "local in X". Fusion is used to decompose the Hilbert space
&lt;br/&gt;whenever the corresponding circle in X is decomposed. Such a local
&lt;br/&gt;theory should then satisfy all the axioms of a cohomology
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both parts of the project relate notions from
theoretical physics to &lt;br/&gt;mathematics. Historically, the converse
relation was more common, &lt;br/&gt;where a mathematical notion (like
Riemannian geometry or functional &lt;br/&gt;analysis) was used to explain a
physical theory (like relativity or &lt;br/&gt;quantum mechanics). In the last
decades, surprising mathematical &lt;br/&gt;predictions (provable only in very
rare cases) came out of &lt;br/&gt;considerations in theoretical physics (like
quantum gravity or &lt;br/&gt;conformal field theory). It is thus of the
ultimate importance for &lt;br/&gt;mathematical research to incorporate such
considerations into the &lt;br/&gt;body of well understood
theories.&lt;br/&gt;In the first part of this project, the principal
investigator &lt;br/&gt;proposes to continue his successful study of
4-dimensional manifolds &lt;br/&gt;(most relevant in relativity) via techniques
originally proposed by &lt;br/&gt;von Neumann for the study of quantum
mechanics. In the second part, &lt;br/&gt;the principal investigator proposes to
refine the notion of a &lt;br/&gt;conformal field theory so that it leads to a
geometrical definition &lt;br/&gt;of "elliptic cohomology". This cohomology is
an enormously successful &lt;br/&gt;tool in mathematics and the proposed
refinement has the potential to &lt;br/&gt;lead to a topological understanding
of all conformal field theories.&lt;br/&gt;