* 0305221
* Thin Film Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors with Tetradymite Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Ctirad Uher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/28/2007
* USD 383,438.00

This project explores the simultaneous presence of electronic and spin degrees
of freedom in the tetradymite-type A2V B3VI (A=Bi, Sb; B=Te, Se) family of
semiconductors. The incorporation of relatively high concentrations of magnetic
impurities in tetradymite-type semiconductors, and thus higher Curie
temperatures, is sought through thin films of these materials. The project
focuses on several objectives: 1) to demonstrate the growth of thin films of
Sb2Te3, Bi2Te3, and Bi2Se3 -as well as alloys and superlattices of these binary
compounds-doped with transition metals; 2) to explore the upper limits of
incorporation of the magnetic impurities (phase diagram) in these hosts; and 3)
pursue a comprehensive program of characterization of the structural, magnetic,
and transport properties of the obtained DMS (dilute magnetic semiconductor)
films. The role of the magnetic impurities in the tetradymite semiconductors and
their impact on properties will be studied employing electrical conductivity,
magnetoresistance, thermopower, thermal conductivity, specific heat, Hall
effect, magnetization, and magnetic susceptibility measurements from
temperatures of 2K to 300K and in magnetic fields of 0 to 9 T. The project is
expected to advance basic knowledge of diluted magnetic semiconductors and
thereby help lay groundwork for future spintronics applications. Since the
crystal structure and the magnetic ions utilized in the proposed materials are
distinctly different from traditional diluted magnetic semiconductors such as
Mn-doped III-V or II-VI compounds, the project may shed new light on fundamental
issues of magnetism in semiconductors, and possibly of magnetism generally. The
highly anisotropic environment of the tetradymite-type crystal structure with
its pronounced octahedral coordination of atoms may play a key role in the
development of magnetic order; this is in contrast to the cubic environment of
Mn-doped zinc-blende or wurtzite structures with their distinct tetrahedral
bonding.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses basic materials and
condensed matter physics research issues in a topical area of materials science
with technological relevance, and places emphasis on the integration of research
and education. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the
synthesis, processing, and characterization of electronic/magnetic materials.
Training of graduate and undergraduate students in the areas of MBE growth,
semiconductor physics, and magnetism provides special opportunities for them in
research and education, and a sound investment in the future workforce. The
project is jointly supported by the DMR Electronic Materials and Condensed
Matter Physics programs.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;