* 0305199
* Collaborative Research: Structure-Property Relationships of Novel Rare Earth-Ultraphosphate Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Gaya Marasinghe, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 285,699.00

A multi-disciplinary collaboration between the Physics Department at the
University of North Dakota (UND) and the Ceramic Engineering Department at the
University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR) will develop and characterize new rare earth
(RE) phosphate glasses that possess interesting optical and magnetic properties
which make these glasses candidates for high-energy lasers, optical- and
magneto-optical sensors, and other applications. Preliminary structural studies
indicate an unusual dependence of rare earth coordination environment on the
glass composition, especially for glasses containing less than 25 mol% rare
earth oxide. Changes in RE coordination environment of these glasses appear to
have a significant effect on their physical and optical properties. However, the
exact nature of the relationships between these properties and the atomic
structure of these glasses is poorly understood. The researchers at UND will
obtain detailed information about the atomic structure, especially the
coordination environments of the RE ions, using X-ray absorption spectroscopy,
high-energy X-ray and neutron diffraction techniques, and IR/Raman spectroscopy.
The UND team will investigate the magnetic properties as well. The research team
at UMR will prepare optically active glasses (including Nd- and Er-phosphate
compositions) and glasses with potentially large magnetic susceptibilities
(e.g., Dy-phosphate compositions) using techniques to minimize contamination by
water and transition metals. Optical characteristics, including absorption
spectra, fluorescence spectra and fluorescence lifetimes, will also be
characterized at UMR. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As mentioned above, the new family
of rare earth phosphate glasses mentioned above appear to be a potential
candidate for important practical applications such as high-energy lasers,
optical- and magneto-optical sensors. However, scientists and engineers planning
to develop such applications need additional information on the atomic
structure-property relationships of these glasses. The multi-disciplinary
project described herein is designed to provide this important information. This
project will bring together a group of science students/faculty from UND and a
group of engineering students/faculty from UMR to work on a challenging research
project. Such cross-disciplinary research opportunities are rare, especially at
the student level, and quite beneficial to all researchers involved.&lt;br/&gt;