* 0305194
* Study of Binary Physisorbed Films by Combined IRRAS and Ellipsometry
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* George Hess, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2008
* USD 345,000.00

This surface physics project will study physical adsorption of small molecules
on graphite in the monolayer to few layer regime, with emphasis on binary
mixtures. Substrate interactions and dimensionality effects, especially near
critical points, make the films different from 3-D fluids. In addition there is
the possibility of displacement of one component from the surface or segregation
between layers. Extensive computer simulations have been done for simple model
systems but experimental results for real binary systems are so far limited,
particularly for cases of solution, due primarily to the difficulty of measuring
the coverage and state of each component separately. Here, the total coverage is
determined by ellipsometry, while the vibrational spectra of suitable molecules
is simultaneously determined by infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy. For
model solute molecules with strong IR absorption bands, such as CF4, CCl4, or
SF6, together with a solvent that may be IR-active or not, this combination of
techniques allows determination of the concentration of each component on the
surface. In addition, IR line shifts distinguish whether the solute is phase-
separated or dispersed. For less symmetric molecules the IR technique also
provides information on molecular orientation. Graphite serves as an ideal
uniform substrate from atomic to micrometer scale. Molecular level understanding
of the behavior of binary films on a uniform substrate should provide a basis
for fundamental understanding of such films on less ideal substrates. This is
likely to be relevant to problems in lubrication and adhesion, and less directly
to lithography, corrosion-protection, and flow in porous media. Graduate,
undergraduate, and post-doctoral students working in this program gain
experience in application of a variety of physical principles and techniques,
which provides good preparation for careers in industry, government labs, and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate
adsorption of binary mixtures of small molecules on graphite, at coverages of
one to a few molecular layers. The result may be that one component displaces
the other from the surface; or one component adsorbs on top of a layer of the
other component; or they form a solution within each layer. Extensive computer
simulations have been done for simple model systems but experimental results for
real binary systems are so far limited, especial for cases other than
displacement. This is due primarily to the difficulty of measuring the coverage
and state of each component separately. Our apparatus allows measurement of
total film thickness by an optical technique and simultaneously the vibrational
spectra of suitable adsorbed molecules by infrared absorption spectroscopy. This
gives sufficient information to determine the concentration of each component on
the surface. In addition IR absorption line shifts distinguish whether the
solute is dissolved or phase-separated. For asymmetric molecules the IR
technique also provides information on molecular orientation. Graphite serves as
an ideal uniform substrate from atomic to micrometer scale. Molecular level
understanding of the behavior of binary films on a uniform substrate should
provide a basis for fundamental understanding of such films on less ideal
substrates. This is likely to be relevant to problems in lubrication and
adhesion, and less directly to lithography, corrosion-protection, and flow in
porous media. Students working in this program gain experience in physical
principles involved in adsorption, as well as infrared spectroscopy, vacuum, low
temperature, and optical techniques, and computer interfacing, which provides
good preparation for careers in industry, government labs, or
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;