* 0305954
* An Interactive Learning Environment for Introductory Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Kenneth Goldman, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2007
* USD 514,996.00

0305954 Kenneth Goldman Washington University An Interactive Learning
Environment for Introductory Computer Science $499,996 This is a unique,
possibly risky, proposal based on outcomes of research into a new software
system development paradigm. The scope of the project is to develop a system
that supports a novel programming environment for introductory programming
courses that treats software development as an application domain rather than a
text-centric encoding activity. The project is in keeping with research outcomes
in software development that address the next step after current Object-Oriented
approaches. As an improvement to Integrated Development Environments (IDEs), the
programming environment transferred into the undergraduate classroom by this
project is based on a fresh approach to supporting the programming process and
several related research innovations. The approach is to raise the level of
abstraction by treating the programming process as an application domain. This
elevates the unit of discourse for software construction by providing direct
manipulation of semantic elements, so that programming abstractions become the
primitives of expression. In turn, this enables a transition from loosely-
coupled umbrella IDEs to tightly integrated development environments (TIDEs), in
which awareness of program structure creates opportunities for ensuring program
consistency and supporting truly live software development. The thrust of this
project's research is to treat programming as an application domain, amenable to
the same human-computer interface design principles that have been applied
successfully to other types of applications. Central to these principles is
direct manipulation of domain-specific entities. Research in visual languages
has produced systems supporting direct manipulation of program entities, but the
emphasis of that research has been on finding new ways to think about
computation that are particularly well-suited for visual expression. In
contrast, the goal of this project is to provide application-level support for
already widely accepted programming practices. Rather than create new languages,
this project aims to leverage years of evolution in programming language design
by applying human-computer interface design principles to the problem of
providing domain-specific support for programming in existing high-level
languages. Computer science departments in colleges and universities are
continually faced with difficulties in effectively communicating deep
intellectual content in introductory courses, recruiting a diverse population
into the field, and reaching out to students in other disciplines who could
benefit from computer science background. The educational impact of this
proposal will be to address these difficulties by introducing into the
undergraduate classroom a new learning environment that makes software
development more tangible.

