* 0305994
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Matthew Hahn, Hahn, Matthew W
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and
training plan is entitled "A population genomics approach to studying selection
on regulatory sequences." Many computational, statistical, and theoretical tools
necessary to investigate selection on whole genomes in a population genetic
framework are not yet available. This study extends previous computational work
on selection throughout unicellular genomes against spurious transcription
factor binding sites by developing the informatic tools needed to study
selection on eukaryotic genomes.&lt;br/&gt;