* 0305027
* CAREER: A Career Plan for Research and Education in Smart Materials and Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/12/2002,02/28/2007
* Gangbing Song, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 02/28/2007
* USD 277,001.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal is aimed to develop a smart
materials and structures academic program at The University of Houston. This
proposal includes four major components: 1) Conduct innovative research in smart
materials and structures. The PI will focus on: (1) Compensation of hysteresis
in smart actuators using neural networks and sliding-mode based robust
controller. (2) Precision tracking control of Shape Memory Alloy (SMA)
actuators. (3) Position control of SMA actuators without a position sensor. (4)
Active control of a composite plate with embedded SMA wire actuators. (5)
Precision shape control using piezo patch actuators. (6) Vibration damping using
controllable backlash. 2) Develop a state-of-art Smart Materials and Structures
Laboratory to support research. 3) Establish a novel smart materials and
structures curriculum, including new courses and a teaching laboratory. 4)
Integrate research, lab development and the curriculum with undergraduate
teaching, minority programs, women engineering programs, and outreach programs.
The significance and impact of this Career Development Plan are multifold: 1)
Contribute to the advance of technology development in smart materials and
structures. Hysteresis exists in almost all smart actuators. The proposed
control approach has potential to compensate for hysteresis and significantly
increase control accuracy and stability of smart actuators and widen their
applications. The elimination of the position sensor in a SMA servo system will
dramatically decrease its cost and widen SMA's application. The proposed active
shape control will significantly increase accuracy and robustness of precision
system such as space reflectors. The smart composite beam with embedded SMA
actuators will enable many potential applications for active shape control and
vibration damping. Vibration damping using controllable backlash can be applied
to many cantilevered flexible structures. 2) Strengthen research and teaching at
The University of Houston. 3) Benefit underrepresented students to participate
engineering research. 4) Benefit high school students to pursue higher education
and careers in engineering. 5) Benefit local industries and government agencies
by supplying students with knowledge of this emerging technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;