* 0306935
* Ibero-American Digital Library Joint Project Development Symposium
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Johann van Reenen, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 03/31/2004
* USD 24,327.00

The Americas Program provides supports for this US-Brazil Digital Library Joint
Project Development Symposium organized by Drs. Johann van Reenen and Ramiro
Jordan of the University of New Mexico and Dr. Mauro S. Miskulin of the State
University of Campinas (UNICAMP). The workshop will be held in conjunction with
the Brazilian International Conference on Information Policies in Digital
Libraries at UNICAMP, in Campinas, Sao Paulo and reflects a collaboration among
the Ibero-American Science and Technology Education Consortium (ISTEC), UNICAMP,
FAPESP, BIRIME, UNESP, and USP. Two sessions will be devoted to developing joint
research projects. The workshop will also focus on underutilized intellectual
property residing in theses and dissertations at the region's
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is similar to US-Europe digital
libraries workshops that have been held for many years. These gatherings make it
possible for researchers in various countries to share their digital library
tools and to learn about each other's work. This workshop creates an opportunity
for US and Latin-American digital-library researchers to learn from each other
and develop joint initiatives with computer scientists and other academic and
industrial researchers. The proceedings will be available on at least two
Internet web sites, resulting in broad dissemination. The synergy created by
having computer scientists, engineers, and librarians interact in this workshop
is likely to lead to novel and creative collaborations between Latin American
and US researchers.&lt;br/&gt;