* 0306070
* GOALI: Collaborative Education and Research on Stochastic Process Models in Telecommunication
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Harold Kushner, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 09/30/2007
* USD 188,954.00

This project develops two mathematical methods for the analysis of problems in
communications. The first is the large deviations analysis of occupancy models.
Occupancy models provide a simple, generic probabilistic construct that has
found use in many fields. The proposed large deviations approach is different
from and complementary to much of the previous analysis of such models.
Motivated by problems from both wired and wireless communications, the research
program will develop explicitly computable large deviation asymptotic
approximations, and will also develop methods such as importance sampling to
provide accurate results even in the non-asymptotic regime. The second topic is
the design of stochastic adaptive algorithms for mobile communication. This area
of application is narrower in scope, being of particular interest to engineers
of next generation, high-rate wireless access systems. However, within that
scope, the activities are general and fundamental in nature. The emphasis here
is on the development of methods for the analysis of scheduling algorithms in
wireless, and on the development of new algorithms. This project will develop
mathematical methods for two important areas in modern telecommunication, with
an emphasis on a broad university/industrial training of graduate students. A
key component of the research program is the joint supervision of graduate
students between Bell Labs and Brown University. For the graduate students that
are involved, there will be summer internships at Lucent Technologies, which
will supplement the more traditional training in a number of ways. Both research
areas of focus, namely occupancy models and wireless scheduling, are challenging
intellectual problems that are motivated by developing commercial technology. In
addition to working with specific industrial mentors, the students also have the
opportunity to attend talks, seminars and generally benefit from exposure to a
wide variety of current problems and solution methods whose development is in
progress. The proposed collaborative research and associated seminar series will
help to strengthen the ties between Bell Labs and Brown University, invigorating
the intellectual climate at both institutions. The goal of the proposed research
is to provide solid, fundamental mathematical foundations for solving problems
of current interest, in a framework that will likely be applicable to problems
of the future.