* 0306494
* First-Class Genericity for Java
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2009
* Robert Cartwright, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2009
* USD 270,000.00

CCR-0306494 Robert Cartwright William Marsh Rice University

The Java platform has won acceptance as a superior vehicle for building software
applications, but it is still in the early stages of evolution. Its most serious
deficiency is a crude type system which does not support generic types,
separates primitive types from object types, and includes the null pointer in
every object type. As a result, programmers cannot express many important
program invariants in the type system. An improved Java type system could
simplify the structure of many Java programs and enable programmers to catch
more bugs at compile time.

The next major release (1.5) of the Java platform will support a restricted
formulation of generic types. While this extension represents a major step
forward, restrictions on the use of generic types will prevent them from being
used in many important object-oriented coding patterns.

In this project, we propose to design and implement a compatible extension of
Java 1.5 with a more advanced type system in which generic types can be used
anywhere that conventional types can. The extended Java language will enable
programmers to express important new data abtractions, to eliminate most type
casts, and to catch more bugs at compile time--without compromising program
performance.

