* 0306473
* Improving the Robustness of Cluster-based Network Services Using Peer-to-peer Design Principles
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Kai Shen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 07/31/2007
* USD 249,941.00

Cluster-based network servers are a cost-effective platform
for&lt;br/&gt;constructing &lt;br/&gt;large-scale network services. However,
service clustering presents&lt;br/&gt;significant &lt;br/&gt;challenges to
system designers. Many components of the clustering&lt;br/&gt;support are
&lt;br/&gt;often implemented using centralized or hierarchical architectures,
in&lt;br/&gt;order to &lt;br/&gt;meet desired performance, consistency, and
policy requirements. The&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness&lt;br/&gt;of these approaches
has been demonstrated under well-
controlled&lt;br/&gt;environments,&lt;br/&gt;but customized enhancements are
often needed to deal with transient&lt;br/&gt;component &lt;br/&gt;failures and
fluctuating service loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peer-to-peer systems are
distributed systems without any centralized&lt;br/&gt;control&lt;br/&gt;or
hierarchical organization, and with functionally equivalent
software&lt;br/&gt;running&lt;br/&gt;at each node. The primary goal of this
project is to improve the&lt;br/&gt;robustness of&lt;br/&gt;cluster-based
network services using peer-to-peer system
design&lt;br/&gt;principles.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this effort exploits three
main principles of peer-to-peer&lt;br/&gt;system&lt;br/&gt;design: functionally
symmetric architecture, slow-scaling overhead, and&lt;br/&gt;non-determinism.
This project covers various components in
service&lt;br/&gt;clustering&lt;br/&gt;support, including service location
lookup, membership management,&lt;br/&gt;cluster-wide&lt;br/&gt;resource
management, and replication consistency support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques
investigated in this project can greatly benefit
network&lt;br/&gt;service&lt;br/&gt;designers, for whom it can offer significant
improvements in system&lt;br/&gt;robustness.&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context,
this research complements the ongoing efforts
of&lt;br/&gt;building&lt;br/&gt;global-scale peer-to-peer systems and services.
In addition, this&lt;br/&gt;project&lt;br/&gt;directly benefits systems-area
instruction improvement at the PI's&lt;br/&gt;institution.&lt;br/&gt;