* 0306523
* Dynamical systems theory and singular perturbation analysis for patterns, bubbles, and chemical reduction methods
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Tasso Kaper, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 194,956.00

Kaper 0306523 This project concerns systems with multiple length and time
scales, with the goals of analyzing recent experiments, of improving
computational methods, and of establishing new mathematical theory for such
systems. First, in the area of chemical patterns with multiple length scales,
the recently-discovered phenomena of self-replicating spots and pulses has posed
new challenges for modeling and for stability analysis of solutions of partial
differential equations. The investigator and collaborators build on their
analysis of the dynamics, time scales, and mechanisms responsible for self-
replication to study the underlying bifurcation hierarchies that organize the
self-replication regime, to further examine the zero-pole cancellation
phenomenon in the nonlocal eigenvalue problem stability analysis, to extend the
renormalization group technique to establish the fully-nonlinear stability of
pulses, and to develop extensions to systems with more than two length scales.
Second, in the increasingly-important area of reduction methods for large
systems of chemical reactions with multiple time scales, the validity and
accuracy of certain methods are analyzed, with special focus on the
computational singular perturbation method of Lam and Goussis. Third, the
investigator analyzes the Oya-Vallochi model of subsurface bioremediation.
Bioremediation is a process in which microorganisms, in the presence of electron
acceptors, degrade environmentally-harmful organic compounds. The investigator
studies traveling waves of biomass activity and advection versus dispersion.
Fourth, he conducts fundamental studies of nonspherical deformations of gas
bubbles in Newtonian fluids. Finally, a challenging open problem concerning the
existence of self-similar, blow-up solutions of the nonlinear Schroedinger
equation in spatial dimensions between two and four is attempted. This project
concerns mathematics for problems of significant current interest in biology,
chemistry, engineering, and physics, which exhibit both fast and slow dynamical
processes. First, with collaborators and a doctoral student, the investigator
analyzes computational methods used to simulate large, complex systems of
reactions in biochemistry, combustion, and air pollution engineering. These
processes, such as the production of certain proteins, the burning of natural
gas, and the formation of nitrous oxides in the atmosphere, typically involve a
few hundred species, each of which participates in several reactions, with the
reaction times ranging from nanoseconds to milliseconds, even to minutes.
Methods that reduce the system complexity, while retaining a desired accuracy,
are critical for modeling these processes. The investigator aims to show that
there is a highly accurate method that can be used to improve the accuracy of
other widely-used methods, which are embedded in major computer codes. Second,
the investigator and a doctoral student study mathematical models of
bioremediation, in which microorganisms are used to degrade environmentally-
harmful organic compounds. Mathematics provides an advantageous approach to
determine important quantities, such as the wave speed with which the
biologically-active zone propagates through a wet soil column and how this speed
depends on the many physical parameters. Third, fundamental research is
conducted on the dynamics of gas bubbles in water. Deformations of spherical
bubbles lead to oscillations on time scales much shorter than that on which the
spherical mode itself oscillates, and the main goal is to model the nonlinear
transfer of energy between the spherical and nonspherical modes that can lead to
bubble cavitation and the attendant production of underwater sound by turbine
blades, for example. Finally, the investigator develops further theory for self-
replicating chemical patterns and for a prototypical equation that governs
nonlinear wave propagation.