* 0306516
* Analysis of Nonlinear Systems Modeling Partially Ordered Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2008
* Daniel Phillips, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2008
* USD 230,000.00

The goal of the proposed research is the analysis of mathematical models for
partially ordered materials. The focus is on electro-magnetic, electro-optical,
and electro-mechanical interactions, emphasizing ferroelectric and piezoelectric
responses in smectic liquid crystals and elastomers and flux pinning in
superconductors. Understanding these interactions is central to the design
process where one strives to make smaller, faster, and more accurate devices.
Liquid crystals and elastomers are used to make optical switches, nano devices,
and displays. They have also been used by physicists to model artificial
muscles. Superconductors are used for power transmission and to make extremely
strong magnets. A hierarchy of mathematical problems will be considered for each
material taking into account increasingly complex interactions. Special emphasis
will be given to scaling-up from meso-scale models where the physical
interactions are delineated to macro- scale models used in applications. The PI
seeks to find qualitative features of solutions for the models. In
superconductivity the PI will try to exhibit solutions with large stationary
currents (pinned currents). One reason for the interest in smectic liquid
crystals is the dramatic decrease in switching times between optical states
relative to those for dielectric liquid crystals . A major goal here is to
estimate these switching times for the models considered. Techniques from
mathematical modeling, partial differential equations, and finite elasticity
will be employed.

The proposed research centers on the study mathematical models for electro--
mechanical and electro-optical interactions in liquid crystals and models
describing the electro--magnetic properties of superconductors. With regard to
liquid crystals, the applications that we address are motivated by optical and
biological systems and focuses on the design of optical switches and
nanodevices, including detectors, actuators, and valves. These applications are
found in a wide range of products such as artificial muscles and liquid crystal
displays for monitors. The development and analyses of analytic models for these
materials serves as an important complement to experimental investigations
carried out by materials scientists and physicists. An example of the phenomena
we are addressing is switching times in liquid crystal displays. Recent studies
using smectic liquid crystals show a dramatic decrease in switching times
between optical states, relative to those for standard (nematic) liquid
crystals. We study a hierarchy of mathematical problems for these materials,
taking into account increasingly complex interactions with the goals of
capturing the correct physics and to accurately estimate and compare the
switching times for the models considered.