* 0306140
* EI:  Can We Teach Object-Oriented Design to Beginners?
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Stephen Wong, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Krishna Kant
* 07/31/2009
* USD 420,000.00

0306140 Robert Cartwright William Marsh Rice University EI: Can We Teach Object-
Oriented Design to Beginners? $420,000 This project involves the development of
a curriculum for teaching 'truly' Object Oriented Design (OOD) at the
introductory level with the support of a unique tool suite. A current
educational trend is to teach OO design as early as possible. However, this
trend may entail a potentially higher risk of pedagogic failure than an object-
based approach because computing educators lack a proven curriculum for teaching
OO design to beginners. This project explores how sophisticated OOD concepts
might be simplified and distilled for beginners. The proposers set forth two
reasons for presenting OOD at the introductory level. First, the growth of
object-orientation has been fostered by breakthroughs in the understanding of
the OO design process. Computing researchers have assembled a comprehensive
catalog of OO design patterns that form the conceptual vocabulary for
constructing OO programs. These design patterns are templates codifying data
abstraction mechanisms that exploit polymorphism to simplify control structure,
eliminate replicated code, and facilitate subsequent program extension. They
provide detailed, prescriptive guidance on OO design that can be made accessible
to novice programmers. Second, the investigators have successfully taught OO
design at the CS2 level, supported by a pedagogic programming-environment that
provides a simple, transparent interface and simplifies clerical issues involved
in writing programs. This change enables instructors to focus attention on
teaching program design. The outcomes of this project are expected to be a
curriculum, plus supporting tools and materials, for a new introductory
programming sequence (CS1/CS2) that focuses on OO program design. The curriculum
will teach the principles of OO design using a series of progressively more
expressive sub-languages of Java. These sub-languages are supported by a new
edition of DrJava, an open-source project available on the web. An introductory
programming curriculum focusing on OOD could have a dramatic impact on the
preparedness of the nation's workforce in designing object-oriented systems.