* 0306602
* Complexity of algorithms in low-dimensional topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Joel Hass, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 139,460.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal concerns computational aspects of the study of surfaces
in three &lt;br/&gt;dimensional space. The Knot Recognition Problem, a key
example of such problems, &lt;br/&gt;seeks a procedure to determine when two
curves in 3-space can be deformed to one &lt;br/&gt;another. Its computational
complexity, the number of steps required to run such &lt;br/&gt;an algorithm, is
still not completely understood. Investigations into this &lt;br/&gt;problem
have revealed intriguing and unexpected connections between complexity
&lt;br/&gt;theory, low-dimensional topology, the question of how much area is
required of a &lt;br/&gt;surface spanning a curve (a problem in differential
geometry), and questions &lt;br/&gt;concerning how to construct surfaces with as
few triangles as possible (part of &lt;br/&gt;computational geometry). The
investigator plans to show that this problem, &lt;br/&gt;already known to be in
a class of problems called NP, is also in a class called &lt;br/&gt;coNP. He
further aims to improve both upper and lower bounds on the running
&lt;br/&gt;times known for this and related problems, and to explore connections
to &lt;br/&gt;computational and differential
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three dimensional manifolds and the
surfaces contained in them model objects &lt;br/&gt;that are found in the world
we live in. Their mathematical theory is both &lt;br/&gt;natural and widely
applicable. Computational issues are playing an increasing &lt;br/&gt;role in
investigations in these areas. Computational complexity, a field in theoretical
&lt;br/&gt;computer science, studies algorithms and their running times. Many
important &lt;br/&gt;algorithms have geometric components, and geometric methods
can lead to insights &lt;br/&gt;into efficient computation. Techniques
originating in topology and geometry have led &lt;br/&gt;to improved algorithms
in computer graphics, visualization, medical and molecular &lt;br/&gt;modeling
and image recognition. The problems considered in this proposal concern the
construction of algorithms to analyze the nature of geometrical objects, and the
analysis &lt;br/&gt;of the computational complexity of these algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;