* 0306074
* Symplectic Topology of Link Surgery 4-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Stefano Vidussi, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2006
* USD 91,730.00

The area of research of this project is the topology of closed
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;manifolds of dimension 4. A symplectic 4-manifold is a
smooth manifold&lt;br/&gt;endowed with a closed and non-degenerate (symplectic)
2-form. Symplectic&lt;br/&gt;manifolds arise naturally in various areas of
mathematics, and their study has&lt;br/&gt;relevant consequences also in physics
and engineering. Kaehler manifolds are&lt;br/&gt;natural examples of such
manifolds, and until 30 years ago it was an open &lt;br/&gt;question whether
other examples exist. Since then, wealth of other&lt;br/&gt;constructions have
appeared, and important results (often arising from&lt;br/&gt;the interaction of
physics and mathematics) have started to unveil the&lt;br/&gt;richness of this
class of manifolds. This project investigates the properties
of&lt;br/&gt;certain natural submanifolds of a symplectic $4$-manifold, namely
lagrangian&lt;br/&gt;submanifolds (where the restriction of the symplectic form
vanishes) and&lt;br/&gt;symplectic submanifolds (where the restriction of the
symplectic form is again&lt;br/&gt;symplectic). The common theme underlying the
various parts of the project is the&lt;br/&gt;use of a technique, developed by
R.Fintushel and R.Stern, that allows one to&lt;br/&gt;construct symplectic
$4$-manifolds and study their submanifolds. The first goal&lt;br/&gt;is to study
symplectic representatives of the canonical homology class of
a&lt;br/&gt;symplectic manifold; it is known, by a result of C.Taubes, that
such&lt;br/&gt;representatives exist, but little is known about their topology.
The author wants&lt;br/&gt;to show that there exist manifolds whose canonical
class admit several&lt;br/&gt;representatives distinguished by the number of
components. This would lead to a&lt;br/&gt;better understanding of how to define
invariants of a symplectic manifold starting&lt;br/&gt;from the study of its
canonical. The second goal is to analyze the existence of&lt;br/&gt;lagrangian
submanifolds that are homologous but not isotopic, i.e. connected by
a&lt;br/&gt;sequence of embeddings. Results of this kind have been obtained in
the past for&lt;br/&gt;symplectic submanifolds, but little is known in the
lagrangian case. The third&lt;br/&gt;goal is to study the relation between
certain symplectic invariants (recently&lt;br/&gt;introduced by P.Seidel for a
particular class of symplectic manifolds) and the&lt;br/&gt;Seiberg-Witten
invariants. Other applications of these techniques to other&lt;br/&gt;problems
of symplectic and smooth topology of 4-manifolds are
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic manifolds of dimension 4 lie at the
intersection between two areas&lt;br/&gt;of research. Both the first, the
topology of low dimensional manifolds, and&lt;br/&gt;the second, symplectic
topology, are traditional areas of investigations that in&lt;br/&gt;the last 20
years have experienced a tremendous progress. This progress is due&lt;br/&gt;to
new and exciting interaction with theoretical physics, that has served as a
&lt;br/&gt;source of models and conjectures, and a renewed relation of topology
with other &lt;br/&gt;areas of mathematics that has produced in both directions
fruitful applications &lt;br/&gt;and consequences. Topology in dimension 4
attracts great interest from both &lt;br/&gt;mathematics and physics as it
investigates the dimension of the space-time; &lt;br/&gt;symplectic topology
involves the properties of certain manifolds that appear&lt;br/&gt; naturally in
the description of problems arising from physics and&lt;br/&gt;engineering. A
growing number of researchers, with original and
stimulating&lt;br/&gt;approaches, is increasing in a spectacular way our
comprehension on the&lt;br/&gt;subject, verifying or disproving old conjectures,
and suggesting new relations&lt;br/&gt;with other areas of mathematics and
physics. The investigator wants to continue&lt;br/&gt;his research in this
field, using techniques of topology that originate from&lt;br/&gt;classical
results in theory of knots, in conjunction with modern tools as
the&lt;br/&gt;invariants of 4-manifolds introduced by the physicists Seiberg and
Witten.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the aim of the research is to better understand
the submanifolds&lt;br/&gt;of a symplectic
4-manifold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;