* 0306624
* Non commutative geometry, microlocal analysis, and symplectic geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Boris Tsygan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 139,500.00

The aim of this project is to extend the study of non-commutative
&lt;br/&gt;differential geometry of deformation quantization algebras, and to
apply it &lt;br/&gt;to symplectic geometry. A deformation quantization is a new
multiplication &lt;br/&gt;law on an algebra of function on a manifold which
depends on a formal &lt;br/&gt;parameter. When the value of the parameter is
zero, then this product &lt;br/&gt;becomes the usual product of functions. All
such deformation quantizations &lt;br/&gt;were classified by Kontsevich. The
simplest examples of them arise from &lt;br/&gt;algebras of differential
operators on manifolds. In our previous work, we &lt;br/&gt;computed for all
deformed algebras basic invariants of non-commutative &lt;br/&gt;differential
geometry (Hochschild and cyclic homology, etc.). We applied &lt;br/&gt;these
results to prove generalized Atiyah-Singer index theorems. Our main
&lt;br/&gt;tool was what we call non-commutative differential calculus, which is
an &lt;br/&gt;extension of classical algebraic constructions with forms and
multi-vectors &lt;br/&gt;to non-commutative setting. The new project is aimed at
developing both &lt;br/&gt;non-commutative geometry and algebra of deformation
quantization, in &lt;br/&gt;particular a theory of modules over deformation
quantization rings, and at &lt;br/&gt;applying them to symplectic geometry, in
particular to the Fukaya theory of &lt;br/&gt;Lagrangian intersections and to
mirror symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main aim of this project is to develop
what we call non-commutative &lt;br/&gt;differential calculus. By this we mean
an extension of the clasical &lt;br/&gt;multi-variable calculus to the case when
the variables no longer commute, &lt;br/&gt;i.e. when the value of the product
is no longer independent of the order of &lt;br/&gt;factors. Such situations
arise very naturally in mathematics and physics; in &lt;br/&gt;quantum
mechanics, the non-commutativity expresses mathematically the
&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty principle of Heisenberg. We intend to apply the non-
commutative &lt;br/&gt;calculus to so called deformation quantization, a
geometric setup very much &lt;br/&gt;motivated by quantum mechanics. Our
previous work in this direction yielded &lt;br/&gt;new proofs and
generalizations of classical theorems about solutions of &lt;br/&gt;partial
differential equations; our new project aims at applications to
&lt;br/&gt;geometric questions of mathematical physics, such as string theory,
mirror &lt;br/&gt;symmetry, and Lagrangian intersections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;