* 0306091
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Natalia Belfiore, Belfiore, Natalia M
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Reconstructing the past using
current technological and computational methods: studying population genetic
change using 100-year-old museum specimens." This research project will develop
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genetic markers to study pocket gophers
(Thomomys bottae) that have been collected over the past 100 years. The project
will also show whether historic samples provide insight into genetic change in
populations. Published SNP databases will assist in designing SNP experiments to
best understand gopher population dynamics.