* 0306726
* Fractional Cointegration, Tapering and Estimation of Misspecified Models in Long Memory Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Willa Chen, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 107,483.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project considers several problems on the most recent topics in
long memory time series including fractional cointegration, data tapering and
estimation of misspecified long memory models. The first line of research
develops and implements new statistical methods for fractionally cointegrated
multivariate time series. The focus is on separating the space of cointegrating
vectors into subspaces yielding different memory parameters. The second main
research topic focuses on data tapers and their applications. A data taper
generating algorithm is introduced. The proposed algorithm can easily generate
data tapers of any order. This class of new tapers has better variance
properties and the resulting periodogram is shift-invariant, a desirable
property in estimating parameters of long memory processes. The third line of
research addresses the problems of estimating misspecified long memory models
and their implications. A study of the frequency domain maximum likelihood
estimators of misspecified long memory models suggests that even if the long
memory structure of the time series is correctly specified, misspecification of
the short memory dynamics may result in parameter estimators which are less than
root-n-consistent and non-Gaussian. These nonstandard asymptotic results lead to
a study of asymptotically efficient model selection and Efficient Method of
Moments (EMM) estimation for long memory processes, because both procedures
assume that a misspecified model has been estimated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of ongoing development of a new initiative in Social Science and
Statistics at Texas A&amp;M University. A major component of this initiative
involves interaction between psychology, economics, political science and
statistics to study issues where techniques in time series play the key role in
advancing science and decision making.&lt;br/&gt;