* 0306004
* A Workshop on Deep-Time Paleoclimatology, to be held May 16-17, 2003, Arlington, VA
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Judith Parrish, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2005
* USD 36,690.00

A Workshop on Deep-Time Paleoclimatology
(EAR-0323841)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gerilyn Soreghan, Christopher Maples, Judith
Parrish-
Jones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth's
"deep-time" rock record preserves the results of multiple large-scale
experiments in environmental change, and extends well into its &gt;4 billion-
year history. Although studies of recent climate states can capture a resolution
commonly lacking in deep-time studies, they fail to capture the breadth of
climate-system behavior. In contrast, deep-time studies showcase environmental
disturbances unknown from Earth's modern or recent (&lt;2,000,000 yr) record, as
well as feedbacks that occur on longer time scales, and in response to different
perturbations, than those observable from the recent. Furthermore, significant
advances in analytical techniques applicable to deep-time climate studies are
enabling researchers to make great strides in our understanding of climate-
system behavior. Funds are requested to convene a workshop to discuss the
science of deep-time paleoclimatology in order to define those fundamental
climate-system problems that can be uniquely studied and understood in deep
time. Although some of the processes that can be studied in deep time may exceed
human time scales, through feedbacks and thresholds, they can affect those
climate processes that do operate on human time scales. Until we can understand
these processes, gaps in our ability to understand climate on shorter time
scales will remain, contributing to climate-prediction uncertainty. This
workshop will contribute to our ultimate understanding and characterization of
climate-system dynamics on Earth by initiating a dialogue and recommendations
for the future pursuit of deep-time paleoclimatology.&lt;br/&gt;