* 0306497
* Asymptotic Equivalence of Statistical Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Michael Nussbaum, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2009
* USD 373,735.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0306497&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael
Nussbaum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Asymptotic Equivalence of Statistical
Experiments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An experiment is a family of probability
measures; a distance can be defined between these objects such that the
information they contain about an unknown parameter is similar if this distance
is small. This basic deficiency pseudo-distance (or Delta-distance) is well
known; it generalizes the concept of sufficiency: if experiments are equivalent
via sufficiency then their Delta-distance is zero. The idea of data reduction
which is at the heart of the concept of sufficient statistics can be combined
with limit theorems of probability, resulting in an approximation of general
statistical models by Gaussian location or Poisson families. These families
allow explicit expressions for risk bounds in many instances, and these risk
bounds then become valid in an asymptotic sense in the approximated models. It
is proposed to extend the scope of approximations for nonparametric experiments
of independent data from Gaussian to infinitely divisible experiments, including
the Poisson case. Furthermore, a class of stochastic process experiments will be
studied with regard to asymptotic equivalence. More insight is also sought into
the connections to statistical information theory, and in a longer term
perspective, to other topics in statistical inference which seem mathematically
challenging such as e.g. differential geometry of probability measures and
quantum statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus the principle is to approximate a
given statistical model by another which is better known or more tractable. In
the widest sense, this is related to the familiar approximation of the mean of a
simple random sample by a normal or Z-distribution (also known as Bell curve),
taught in elementary statistics courses, but complex mathematical problems arise
when one has to deal with data or parameters of very high or even infinite
dimension. Two Ph. D. students will be constantly associated to the project; the
aim is to educate young statisticians with distinctly mathematical interests who
promise to be future leaders in academic research. This project is anchored in a
mathematics department that has a major research tradition in statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;