* 0306800
* Statistical Methods for Gene Mapping Based on a Confidence Set Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Shili Lin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* grace yang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 172,684.00

Multiple testing is an important but difficult statistical issue in many areas
of genetic research. One particular multiple testing problem arises when many
markers are screened throughout the genome for their linkage or association with
a disease locus, which is the focus of this project, with a broad long-term
objective of developing methods applicable in various areas of genetic and
genomic research. The main thrust of the proposed approach lies in its
formulation of the hypotheses for linkage. Traditionally, hypotheses for linkage
are usually set up with the null hypotheses being no linkage and the alternative
hypothesis being linkage. In the new formulation, the null and alternative
hypotheses are being ``reversed'', with the null hypothesis being tight linkage
and the alternative hypothesis being loose linkage or no linkage. Two of the
fundamental advantages with this new paradigm are: first, multiplicity
adjustment is unnecessary for the number of tests performed in a genome-scan
study, and second, the location of a disease gene can be narrowed down to a
small genomic region, even at the stage of a preliminary genome-scan study. The
first specific aim is to develop methods for constructing confidence sets of
markers or confidence regions (intervals) of disease gene locations based on
parametric tests of the hypotheses. Single-marker and multiple-marker approaches
will be developed for data from general pedigrees. The second specific aim can
be viewed as a non-parametric counterpart of the first aim. Methods will be
developed for constructing confidence sets/regions based on non-parametric tests
using allele-sharing statistics. A wide variety of allele-sharing statistics and
data types, ranging from simple structures (sibships, relative pairs) to general
pedigrees, will be considered.

With the completion of the Human Genome Project, and the development of high
throughput technology for genotyping, it is now a routine matter to search up to
thousands of genetic markers distributed throughout the genome to look for
disease susceptibility genes. This project aims at developing statistical
methods suitable for probing each of these markers without compromising the
power of finding nearby susceptibility locus. As the number of participating
families increases, the rate of falsely implicating a marker not located within
a short distance from a disease gene will eventually go down to zero. This would
not only increase the chance of successful identification of disease genes, but
would also save tremendous resources by reducing the chance of going after
"ghost" genes. Thus, the methods developed can be a valuable tool to the gene
mapping community. In particular, it is expected that the methods developed in
this project will be applied to data from projects, on which the investigator is
collaborating with medical doctors and other researchers, on a range of
autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus and multiple
sclerosis.