* 0306152
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Pavel Sumazin, Sumazin, Pavel
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields. The research and training plan for this
fellowship is entitled "Algorithms for motif recognition." This research is
generating software for the recognition of promoter-transcription-factor binding
sites and conserved patterns in protein sequences from microarray and genomic
data. Identifying these sites can lead to the discovery of new transcription
factors and co-regulated genes whereas discovering new conserved regions of
proteins leads to new information on protein function and sites of interactions
with other proteins and ligands.