* 0306306
* Factorial Designs, An Indicator Function Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Kenny Ye, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 137,150.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0306306&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kenny Ye&lt;br/&gt;Title: Factorial
Designs, An Indicator Function
Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Recent researches show that
indicator functions are very effective tools for studying theoretical properties
of factorial designs. Initially proposed by Fontana, Pistone and Rogantin (2000)
and later modified and generalized by the investigator and his collaborators,
indicator functions provide a unified representation for all factorial designs,
regular or non-regular, two-level, multi-level or mixed-level. The aliasing
structure of a factorial design could be clearly revealed by expanding its
indicator function with respect to an orthogonal polynomial basis. An important
application of this approach is to study geometric structures of orthogonal
arrays, which are essential for response surface methodology but have been
largely overlooked in the past. The proposed research seeks not only in depth
understanding of factorial designs but also discovery of many new efficient
designs. The project pursues three main tasks. First, continue development of
theoretical foundation of the indicator function approach and apply it to
different types of designs including blocked designs and split-plot designs.
Second, generalize minimum aberration criteria to all factorial designs. The
criteria should be based on the intrinsic structure of a design but not on a
priori specified models. Links to design efficiency and estimation capacity will
be thoroughly studied, both theoretically and empirically. Third, develop and
apply a sequential algorithm to construct a complete catalogue of non-isomorphic
orthogonal arrays of small run sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Factorial designs are
vital for investigations in both life and physical sciences, as well as in
agricultural and industrial studies. Non-regular designs have an advantage over
regular designs at the screening and exploration stage of an investigation.
Besides many traditional areas that factorial designs are applied, one
particular area that will benefit is biomedical research, in which exploration
and screening investigations are pervasive, especially with new technologies
such as microarrays. Many new, more efficient designs are to be generated in the
proposed research and be disseminated through interdisciplinary collaboration
with other members of the scientific communities and interactions with
industries. An integrated part of the proposed research is to adopt the
indicator function approach in the curriculum of standard experimental design
courses. Such change from current curriculum will promote the future
applications of non-regular designs in practice. The investigator is also
committed to involve students in the proposed research, especially those from
underrepresented groups. In addition, the proposed research is expected to open
interdisciplinary communication between algebraic geometricians and
statisticians.&lt;br/&gt;