* 0306141
* New Strategy for Minimizing two Costs in Control Optimal Problems: Application to Underwater Vehicles
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Monique Chyba, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2007
* USD 248,441.00

In the design of controllers for governed physical processes, a central problem
is to minimize a given quantity (time, amount of fuel, etc.) and to find a
systematic way to characterize optimal trajectories. Due to technical and
computational difficulties, it is impossible in most cases to find the optimal
trajectories for a given criterion. In addition, often the situation is
complicated by the existence of more than one quantity to be minimized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project investigates a new approach to such
minimization problems with two costs to be minimized. We do not try to find an
optimal synthesis for a given cost. Instead, we start with the set of all
extremals for one cost, say time, as guaranteed by the maximal principle. Then,
using higher order necessary conditions coming from the maximum principle,
coupled with differential geometric techniques, we reduce the set of candidate
extremals to optimality for this cost to some significantly smaller set of
extremals. We then minimize the other cost, say energy, over this smaller set of
candidate time minimizers. We focus our method to apply to the very important
class of controlled mechanical systems. The Lie algebra generated by the vector
fields describing such systems possesses commutativity properties that make our
computations possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major application of our theory
is the control of robotic underwater vehicles, which is an area of intense
current interest among oceanographers, geophysicists, et al. The strategy
described above is based on promising results previously obtained on controlling
the motion of such a vehicle. The methods under development will be incorporated
into a working vessel through collaboration with the University of Hawaii
College of Engineering Autonomous Systems Laboratory. The results of the project
will provide enhanced research tools to scientists in a wide variety of
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotic underwater vehicles are intended to be
versatile and reliable tools designed, for instance, to intelligently and
independently detect and monitor oceanographic phenomena, to collect samples, or
to work on minesweeping where human intervention would be too risky. Unmanned
underwater vehicles can be sent on long duration missions, can take measurements
over large distances and variations in depth, and are not dependent on human
skill for realization of mission goals. This research project develops
mathematical control theory for direct application to improvement of robotic
underwater vehicle capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;