* 0306317
* Partial Support for the ACS Polymer Division Symposium:  The Polymer Science of Everyday Things; New Orleans, LA; March 22-24, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Kenneth Wynne, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

This award will provide partial support of the ACS Polymer Division symposium
"The Polymer Science of Everyday Things" Symposium and K-12 Long Distance
Workshop. This symposium will be held at the National ACS Meeting, New Orleans,
LA, March 22-24, 2003. The goal of the symposium and workshop is to explain how
things that people encounter and use everyday depend on polymer science for
their ubiquity. "The Polymer Science of Everyday Things" information to K-12
science teachers will be presented during a half-day symposium (Saturday
afternoon) which will be followed by a corresponding two-day symposium (Sunday
and Monday) designed for scientists. Teachers teaching teachers about the use of
polymers is a primary goal of this workshop. This workshop is an extension of
POLY K-12 educational activities that have provided in-service workshops to K-12
science teachers since 1990. We anticipate that this will be a model for future
activities that bring active research scientists and research managers into a
setting that will impact K-12 education. NS funds will be used primarily to
facilitate attendance of then K-12 teachers and "Polymer Ambassadors" who are
specially chosen and trained high school teachers. In addition, a small portion
of the funds will be used to defray the cost of "We Broadcasting" to the
University of Akron and the University of Arizona. At these remote sites,
regional K-12 teachers will participate in the live broadcast.