* 0306158
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Kenneth Angielczyk, Angielczyk, Kenneth D
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Quantification and removal of
distortion in fossils using geometric morphometrics". Many fossil specimens have
been deformed by geological processes, resulting in "noise" that can mislead
morphological analyses. The goal of this project is to develop a geometric
morphometrics method to quantify and remove the effects of distortion in
fossils. The technique will be broadly applicable and will use evolutionary
studies of groups such as dicynodont therapsids and conodont vertebrates.