* 0306242
* Directions in Index Theory and Riemannian Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* John Lott, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 138,228.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DIRECTIONS IN INDEX THEORY AND RIEMANNIAN
GEOMETRY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal concerns geometric questions about
various&lt;br/&gt;types of spaces, namely smooth Riemannian manifolds,
measured&lt;br/&gt;metric spaces, singular spaces and noncommutative
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;The questions about smooth Riemannian manifolds
concern&lt;br/&gt;curvature conditions, such as when a compact manifold-with-
boundary&lt;br/&gt;can admit a metric having nonnegative scalar curvature on the
interior&lt;br/&gt;and nonnegative mean curvature on the boundary, and when a
closed&lt;br/&gt;manifold can admit a metric with positive p-curvature
tensor.&lt;br/&gt;The questions about measured metric spaces concern
possible&lt;br/&gt;extensions of the Ricci tensor to such spaces.
The&lt;br/&gt;questions about singular spaces concern elliptic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;The questions about noncommutative geometry concern local
proofs&lt;br/&gt;of the general foliation index theorem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
mathematics and physics have evolved, the concept of space has
also&lt;br/&gt;evolved. Some evident examples from physics are the evolution
from&lt;br/&gt;flat space to curved space, and the evolution from the classical
phase&lt;br/&gt;space to the quantum mechanical Hilbert space. There have also
been&lt;br/&gt;reasons intrinsic to mathematics that lead one to
extend&lt;br/&gt;the notion of space. Of course, one does not want to make
arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;definitions, but one rather wants to consider concepts that
arise&lt;br/&gt;naturally from real problems.&lt;br/&gt;A more recent notion of
space falls under the heading of&lt;br/&gt;``noncommutative geometry'', in which
a traditional space is&lt;br/&gt;first considered to be defined in terms of the
functions on it, and then&lt;br/&gt;the ring of functions is generalized from
the commutative case to allow&lt;br/&gt;for a noncommutative ring of
``functions''. Noncommutative geometry&lt;br/&gt;is rooted in the branch of
geometric analysis called index theory.&lt;br/&gt;Sometimes problems about
ordinary ``commutative'' spaces, such as&lt;br/&gt;foliations, can be translated
into&lt;br/&gt;problems about noncommutative spaces and attacked from that
angle.&lt;br/&gt;Many of the questions considered in this&lt;br/&gt;proposal
have their roots in physics. Throughout the years there has&lt;br/&gt;been much
fruitful interaction between mathematics and physics, and&lt;br/&gt;the proposed
work will hopefully contribute to this interaction.&lt;br/&gt;In particular,
questions about positive scalar curvature arise in&lt;br/&gt;general relativity
theory, and noncommutative geometry touches on many&lt;br/&gt;areas of modern
theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;