* 0306746
* Hybrid Physical-Chemical Vapor Deposition of MgB2 Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Xiaoxing Xi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2007
* USD 464,000.00

This research focuses on the in situ deposition of epitaxial MgB2 superconductor
thin films and multilayers by hybrid physical-chemical vapor deposition (HPCVD).
MgB2 is a conventional superconductor with a high transition temperature of 39
K, promising Josephson junctions like the low-Tc superconductor junctions but
operating at 25 K. The PIs have developed the HPCVD technique and grown
epitaxial MgB2 films with excellent superconducting and transport properties.
This project will further improve the HPCVD technique to make it more
controllable and compatible to multilayer deposition for Josephson junctions.
The research will model the HPCVD growth conditions, test various reactor
configurations, and address various materials issues in the growth mechanism,
the suitable tunnel barrier material, and the deposition of multilayer
structures. A demonstration of a 25-K Josephson junction suitable for
superconducting integrated circuits and a large scale processing technique will
have a significant impact on the microelectronics industry. Students trained in
this project will be exposed to both physics and materials science and acquire
skills important for their careers in materials research in both academic and
industrial environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the thin film deposition of the newly-
discovered MgB2 superconductor. Unlike the unconventional high-Tc
superconductors, MgB2 is a conventional superconductor with a high transition
temperature of 39 K. This makes it more promising to produce MgB2 Josephson
junctions, the most elemental devices for superconducting integrated circuits
for ultrafast digital processing. To achieve MgB2&lt;br/&gt;Josephson junctions
and integrated circuits, a thin film technique compatible with multilayer
depositions is required. The PIs have developed an innovative technique, hybrid
physical-chemical vapor deposition (HPCVD), to grow epitaxial MgB2 films with
excellent superconducting and transport properties. However, the technique is in
its very early stage of development and needs improvements. This project will
use theoretical modeling to guide the HPCVD improvement, address various
materials issues in the film growth, and develop multilayers for Josephson
junctions. The success of the project will have a significant impact on the
microelectronics industry. Students trained in this project will be exposed to
both physics and materials science and acquire skills important for their
careers in materials research in both academic and industrial
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;