* 0306108
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration:  Modeling and Testing the Effects of Texture and Plastic Deformation on the Magnetic Properties of Polycrystalline Ferromagnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2008
* M. Sablik, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 298,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration project develops and tests magnetic
hysteresis models that describe the effect of texture and plastic deformation on
magnetic properties of polycrystalline ferromagnetic materials. The project
brings together groups led by Martin Sablik, Southwest Research Institute, and
Carlos Gutierrez, Southwest Texas State University, in the US and Fernando
Landgraf, Institute for Technological Research (IPT), and Ivan Falleiros,
University of Sao Paulo, in Sao Paulo, Brazil. A related effort on the evolution
of texture during plastic deformation of electrical steels is carried out by R.
Doherty and colleagues, Drexel University, in collaboration with the Brazilian
group. Topics addressed in this project include changes occurring in coercivity,
remanence, hysteresis loss, and maximum permeability when the material is taken
point by point from elastic deformation, then plastic deformation, and then back
to a new elastic state that is now deformed from the original state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration includes exchanges of senior researchers
and students between the participating institutions in the US and Brazil.
Students will particularly benefit from the interactions among various
laboratories. The US researchers will benefit from the experimental expertise on
the effect of microstructure on magnetic properties of steels of the Brazilian
counterpart. This award is supported by the Division of Materials Research, the
Office of International Science and Engineering, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;