* 0306492
* Information Disclosure and Environmental Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Troy Abel, University of Wisconsin-Green Bay
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 306,842.00

This project examines how the collection and disclosure of information about
toxic chemical releases in the United States affects local communities and
businesses. Environmental information disclosure has been strongly supported by
citizens and policymakers. It is also increasingly considered to be an important
supplement to environmental regulation. Yet how well such information is
communicated to citizens and the effects that it has remain unclear, as does the
best way to design such programs to help ensure that they will be effective.
Focusing on the federal Toxics Release Inventory managed by the U.S. EPA, this
research seeks to improve understanding of how such information reaches
citizens, local government officials, and industry representatives; what effects
it has; and how it changes the way environmental decisions are made. The study
will compare information disclosure and decision making within communities
across the country to improve knowledge about the factors that contribute most
to development of innovative strategies to reduce pollution and improve public
health. Specifically, we seek to learn why some companies do more to reduce
pollution than others and why some communities encourage such pollution
reduction more than others.

Methods to be used in the study include a comprehensive quantitative analysis of
national data from the Toxics Release Inventory and the risks that such releases
pose to public health. Other technical, demographic, and economic information
about local communities and businesses will be analyzed as well. Such data will
come from the U.S. Census Bureau and other federal agencies; surveys of industry
representatives, public officials, and citizens in a sample of three dozen
communities from around the nation; analysis of media coverage of local
pollution information; and interviews with industry representatives, public
officials, and citizens in ten communities to be studied in depth. Such
knowledge has important implications for the design and implementation of a new
generation of environmental policies that can be more flexible, community-
oriented, and effective than conventional approaches to regulation. In
particular, it can help to maximize the potential of using information
disclosure to reach national goals for environmental protection and public
health.

This award emerged from a FY2002 competition, "Decision Making and Valuation for
Environmental Policy," sponsored by NSF and the US Environmental Protection
Agency.