* 0306594
* Geometric rigidity for maps, foliations, and boundary structures of nonpositively curved spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Christopher Connell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 82,416.00

DMS 0306594- PI: Christopher
Connell&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GEOMETRIC RIGIDITY
FOR MAPS, FOLIATIONS, AND BOUNDARY STRUCTURES OF&lt;br/&gt;NONPOSITIVELY CURVED
SPACES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to establish rigidity results for
manifolds, foliations, and&lt;br/&gt;quasiconformal structures associated with
nonpositively curved spaces.&lt;br/&gt;There are two main components of this
project. The first is to broaden&lt;br/&gt;the scope of Mostow rigidity by
giving new characterizations of locally&lt;br/&gt;symmetric spaces of noncompact
type. Our proposed methods focus on&lt;br/&gt;expanding the sharp relationship
between volume, entropy and the degree&lt;br/&gt;of maps initiated in its
current form by work of Besson, Courtois and&lt;br/&gt;Gallot. We then wish to
extend weaker forms of this relationship to spaces&lt;br/&gt;admitting
nontrivial maps into nonpositively curved targets. The
second&lt;br/&gt;component involves understanding the connection between
quasiconformal&lt;br/&gt;structures and special geometric measures which live on
the boundary of&lt;br/&gt;most Hadamard spaces. The initial steps toward this
goal also play an&lt;br/&gt;important role in the first component. In the effort
to establish these&lt;br/&gt;results, we aim to significantly enhance our
understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;interaction between the geometry, topology and
geodesic dynamics of such&lt;br/&gt;spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on a long
standing principle, researchers have come to expect that&lt;br/&gt;the most
efficient solutions to analytic problems are often achieved by&lt;br/&gt;those
objects which have the most symmetry. For instance, the modern&lt;br/&gt;version
of a conjecture by Pappus of Alexandria asserts that the circle
is&lt;br/&gt;"rigid:" any other curve enclosing a region of the plane with the
same area&lt;br/&gt;must have longer length than the circle. This was finally
proved in 1841.&lt;br/&gt;In higher dimensions, the analogous result turns out
to be true for the&lt;br/&gt;spheres of constant positive curvature. We can ask
related questions about&lt;br/&gt;nonpositively curved spaces; these have the
property that the sum of the&lt;br/&gt;angles of any small triangle does not
exceed 180 degrees. We propose to&lt;br/&gt;show that most nonpositively curved
spaces with a sufficient amount of&lt;br/&gt;symmetry exhibit similar rigid
behavior, but of a more intrinsic nature.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, we expect many
nonpositively curved spaces which are not&lt;br/&gt;symmetric to also exhibit a
sort of weak rigidity. From such results, we&lt;br/&gt;can partly determine the
rough shape of many asymmetrical spaces,&lt;br/&gt;regardless of curvature, and
even draw some purely algebraic conclusions&lt;br/&gt;related to their
underlying structure. This naturally leads to dynamical&lt;br/&gt;information
arising, for instance, from the physical interpretation of&lt;br/&gt;these
objects as phase spaces.&lt;br/&gt;