* 0306105
* Mainstreaming Cybersecurity Research and Practice into Undergraduate Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Dennis Heimbigner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2008
* USD 539,999.00

0306105&lt;br/&gt;Shivakant Mishra&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;Mainstreaming Cybersecurity Research and Practice into
Undergraduate Education&lt;br/&gt;$539,999&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a very
timely project that addresses the education of undergraduates about the field of
cyber-security. Included in the project activities are the creation of a "cyber-
security house", an applied cyber-security course, and a cyber-security
repository for broad dissemination of the materials and results from the
project. While national security is critically dependent on a continuous and
correct functioning of modern computing systems, current, state-of-the-art
computing systems typically do not meet the stringent requirements of security,
availability, fault-tolerance, and high performance. The 2001 Computer Crime and
Security Survey from CSI/FBI describes two disturbing characteristics:(1) The
number of computer crimes and security breaches are increasing, and (2) The
total financial loss due to computer crimes and security breaches is increasing.
One possible reason for this weakness of modern computing systems is that there
is a severe shortage of skilled security professionals, resulting in a large
number of computing systems being constructed by people who do not have adequate
understanding of basic security principles. A fundamental reason for the
shortage of security practitioners is that the principles and practices of
security are typically not well covered in undergraduate education and only a
handful of undergraduate programs in the USA even offer a course on computer
security. The PI hypothesizes that fundamentally new mechanisms, which go beyond
traditional classroom settings, are needed to address the current weaknesses
associated with cyber-security technology and education. The overall goal of the
project is to prepare a work force that is aware of system vulnerabilities, as
well as a cadre of professionals that are knowledgeable about the recognized,
best, and latest principles and practices available in security and information
assurance. This project focuses on six activities: 1. Development of a "cyber-
security house" to permit undergraduate students to learn and experiment with
security principles and practices throughout their undergraduate career. This is
intended to provide students an opportunity to learn and experiment with the
latest cyber-security technology, keep up with the fast pace of change in cyber-
security technology, and interact with other undergraduate students at different
stages in their undergraduate careers. 2. Development of a new undergraduate
course on applied cyber-security. This course provides hands-on experience with
using the latest security tools, and designing and implementing secure systems.
3. Development of a repository of cyber-security education-related materials,
making them available via the Web. The goal is to provide useful materials that
are beyond course syllabi and lecture notes. 4. Dissemination of the results
from this project to the CISE community. The methods for dissemination includes
collaborating with faculties and students from other institutions via workshops,
a TA training program, making course materials available on the Web, and
publication and participation in CISE education-related conferences. 5.
Increasing participation in the project activities of underrepresented groups by
involving faculty and student from historically black colleges and universities,
and other minority institutions. 6. Evaluation of the project results at regular
intervals, and making modifications or extensions a needed. This evaluation will
be based on the inputs from the students who take the new course and participate
in the cyber-security house, industry who employ these students, and the
instructors who teach the new course or supervise student in the cyber-security
house. An important aspect of this project is the inclusion of survivability as
an integral aspect of the educational topics proposed. Rather than focusing on
the more traditional attack/detection paradigm, students are taught how to
design software systems that are less vulnerable to attack and that are designed
to survive such attack and provide some level of continuing service.&lt;br/&gt;