* 0306665
* Geometric Structures in Poisson Geometry and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Ping Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 196,781.00

DMS-0306665&lt;br/&gt;Ping Xu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the
study of Poisson geometry, with the goals of&lt;br/&gt;understanding various
geometric structures in connection with Poisson&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, and
studying their applications in analysis, integrable&lt;br/&gt;systems,
quantization and other related areas in mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;One of
the main tools is the theory of Lie groupoids and Lie algebroids.&lt;br/&gt;In
particular, the investigator will apply his previously
developed&lt;br/&gt;theory of Morita equivalence to investigate a geometric
model of unified&lt;br/&gt;momentum map theory. He will also study stacks and
gerbes from the&lt;br/&gt;viewpoint of differentiable geometry, and investigate
their relationship&lt;br/&gt;to Lie groupoids. He plans to continue his study of
twisted Poisson&lt;br/&gt;structures, and also the universal lifting conjecture.
The latter&lt;br/&gt;implies many non-trivial results in Poisson geometry
including the&lt;br/&gt;Karasev-Weinstein symplectic realization theorem and the
integration&lt;br/&gt;theorem for Lie bialgebroids of Mackenzie and the
investigator. This&lt;br/&gt;project also involves the study of deformation
quantization. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator will continue to study quantization of
classical dynamical&lt;br/&gt;r-matrices using his previously developed
deformation quantization&lt;br/&gt;techniques. Also, he will study quantization
of Dubrovin Poisson&lt;br/&gt;structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poisson geometry
is largely motivated by physics, and is in fact a&lt;br/&gt;mathematical tool
used to give a theoretical framework encompassing&lt;br/&gt;large parts of
classical mechanics. Lie groupoids are useful tools in&lt;br/&gt;studying the
symmetry of various geometric problems in Poisson
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;Quantization is developed in order to gain a better
understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;relationship between classical mechanics and
quantum mechanics. At&lt;br/&gt;present, there are various applications of
Poisson geometry including&lt;br/&gt;control theory, machining automation, and
robotic manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;