* 0306729
* Wave Turbulence and Mixing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Esteban Tabak, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 129,999.00

This collaborative effort addresses two closure problems arising in fluid
systems: the description of turbulent energy transfer through a large number of
wave modes, and the determination of the amount of mixing at internal breaking
waves in a stratified environment. The methodology proposed includes the
asymptotic reduction of complex partial differential equations to simpler
systems, the numerical simulation of dynamic equations, the critical analysis of
physical principles, and the comparison of theory and computations with physical
laboratory experiments. We anticipate that the work will yield both physical
insights and interesting new mathematics.

Turbulent energy transfer, dissipation and mixing are key processes in fluid
dynamical problems ranging from the wind generation of water waves to climate
dynamics. Ocean mixing ultimately determines the sea--surface temperature,
which, in turn, affects atmospheric winds, temperature and humidity. Mixing by
upward propagating breaking waves is known to play a significant role in the
exchange of momentum between the lower and the upper layers of the atmosphere.
In the ocean, turbulent wave action is responsible for the transfer of energy
from the very large scales of storms to the small scales at which dissipation
takes place. It is expected that the research proposed here will contribute to
the understanding of fundamental physical mechanisms behind these important
phenomena, and hence improve our capability to predict and quantify climate
changes. This proposal will also have a strong educational impact, through the
training of graduate students, the development of a research seminar for
undergraduate students, the teaching of challenging undergraduate classes, and
by having undergraduate students participate in summer projects focused on the
research.