* 0307817
* Disk and Wind Accretion to Magnetized Stars
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Marina Romanova, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2006
* USD 246,938.00

Lovelace, Richard V. AST 0307817

A wide range of stars has significant magnetic fields. They typically represent
either very early stages of stellar evolution (so-called T Tauri stars), which
carry important information about the formation of stars and protoplanetary
disks, or end stages of evolution (white dwarfs, neutron stars), which consist
of exotic matter and carry information about the evolutionary paths of stars in
our Galaxy. The observable properties of these stars strongly depend on the
accretion rate of material to their surface, on the pattern of matter flow in
the magnetospheres around them, and on the interaction of magnetic field lines
with the surrounding matter. Observations, however, are not sufficient to
understand the processes in these systems because the spatial details remain
unresolved. Nor can the problem of disk or wind accretion to a magnetized star
be solved analytically. Thorough two- and three-dimensional simulations are
necessary to understand the physics of plasma flow around magnetized stars. In
this project the investigators are concentrating mainly on three dimensional
simulations of several problems which are important for the understanding of the
observations. These include simulations of disk accretion to a star with a
dipole magnetic field at different inclination angles of the magnetic pole,
different rotation rates of the star, different mass accretion rates, and
simulations of accretion directly to a strongly or weakly magnetized star. The
simulations will supply the necessary models to interpret observations of
different astronomical objects.

Broader impact: This research continues to attract many undergraduate and
graduate students. Training students is considered an important part of the
overall project. Typically, four to six undergraduate students work on different
parts of the project, and one to two graduate students work on longer-term
projects gaining experience with scientific research. They learn
magnetohydrodynamics and programming, perform simulation runs with different
parameters, and learn how to analyze data using different tools including
visualization and animation. The developed methods and numerical codes also have
general value and are applicable in other areas of science: planetary science,
geophysics, magnetosphere science, solar science, and in engineering.

