* 0307610
* NSF Tri-National Workshop - Advances in Micro and Nano Technologies for Sensing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/2002,11/30/2004
* Dinesh Sood, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 11/30/2004
* USD 71,635.00

The next generation of engineered systems and enabling materials are desired to
have bio-mimetic attributes such as thinking, self organizing, self healing,
self powered, multifunctional and reconfigurable, on demand information-to-
knowledge conversion, application specificity, etc. Novel sensing capabilities
are required to achieve highly sophisticated actuation and system control
functions. To deliver such diverse attributes to today's device and system
platform, advancements in micro and nanotechnology area are essential and
timely. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NSF Review Criterion 1-Intellectual Merit of the
Proposed Activity: Innovations in micro and nanotechnology are essential to
develop the devices, enabling materials and advanced systems, which can foresee
and anticipate the important events rather than providing merely an after-event
diagnosis. In the context, of the above subject it is imperative that the
"discoveries and innovations in micro and nano technologies for sensing" need to
be shared and discussed by eminent scientists and engineers on the international
dais due to complexity and wide range applicability of the subject. Hence, the
objective of this proposal is to call for such a focused workshop in conjunction
with a large conference on "Smart Materials, Nano- and Micro- Smart Systems"
sponsored by SPIE (http://spie.org/info/au) in Melbourne, Australia. The goal is
to invite leading researchers in the related areas from America, Australia, and
Japan to discuss and develop the subject through presentations and panel
discussions, which will lead to further findings, recommendations and focused
research programs/linkages between research groups on an international level.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NSF Review Criterion 2- Broader Impacts of the proposed
activity: The economy of several countries depends on the synergy between
various technologies via the important common features of "sensing" techniques,
"sensing" devices and "sensor" control systems. Principal research funding
agencies such as National Science Foundation in USA, Australian research Council
in Australia and Japanese Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS) in Japan can
play an important role of enabler to bring American, Australian and Japanese
teams of researchers together to provide an impetus to the advancement of
sensing technologies to build integrated micro- nano- and macro systems. It is
proposed to invite about 20 specialists from USA, about 15 from Japan and about
10 from Australia to participate in this workshop dedicated to novel and
practical "sensing" applications. The efforts of a PI from USA and two co-PI's
from Australia and Japan are being put together to plan and execute this project
of international importance and relevance. The outcome of the workshop will be a
detailed report and a book to be published by a leading publisher in USA.
Attendance by industry champions may lead to collaborative projects to
commercialize novel products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;