* 0307212
* FIBR Planning:  A Systems Approach to Study Redox Regulation of Functions of Photosynthetic Organisms
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Himadri Pakrasi, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2005
* USD 50,000.00

Redox chemistry is central to the functions of oxygenic photosynthetic organisms
such as cyanobacteria and plants. In this project, research will be initiated on
a SYSTEMS analysis of the impact of cellular redox status on the overall
function of cyanobacteria, with future applications to plants. The focus is on
four cyanobacterial species, each with a completed sequenced genome. Two
species, Synechocystis 6803 and Anabaena 7120, are amenable to high-throughput
genome level manipulations. Although the inventory of genes, transcripts and
proteins are available for these organisms, they are inadequate to comprehend
the organizational hierarchy of the complex functions of these cyanobacteria.
The project will involve a multidisciplinary approach. Expertise of the project
team spans molecular biology, biochemistry, bioinformatics and systems approach
in engineering, including nonlinear modeling and control, estimation and
statistical analysis. Experimental research experience of the team spans model
systems in cyanobacteria, non-vascular (moss) and vascular plants (Arabidopsis).
Multiple network models will study interactions between molecular components of
cyanobacterial cells, formulate working hypotheses, and data from such
hypotheses will refine the model. This process will generate fundamental
insights into the organization and function of the redox control network in
these organisms. This approach to model a network in cyanobacteria, then to
apply it to plants, will highlight the nature of processes during the evolution
of land plants.

During this planning period, (a) the team will participate in monthly meetings;
(b) a workshop will be organized; and (c) the plan for a full-length FIBR
project will be formulated. Undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral trainees
will participate in these activities.