* 0307875
* Traveling Exhibit on Technology, Imagination and the Future Using the Fantasy Technologies in the  Star Wars Movies as Examples
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Lawrence Bell, Museum of Science
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Ucko
* 08/31/2006
* USD 2,738,060.00

Over a three year period, the Museum of Science, Boston will develop a national
traveling exhibition and associated programs that will support the goals and
standards for technological literacy that were recently articulated in reports
by the National Academy of Engineering and the International Technology
Education Association. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The exhibit
will take advantage of the widely known characters and images of future
technology from the Star Wars movies to attract visitors and to engage them in
learning about potential technologies that may impact our lives. It incorporates
new and adapted interactive devices that will involve visitors in inquiry-based
learning about technologies related to frictionless land vehicles, robotic
mobility mechanisms, and habitats for living underwater and in
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The exhibition will reach a large
national audience by traveling to the members of the Science Museum Exhibit
Collaborative as well as other institutions. Use of popular culture, science
fiction and futuristic technology will help attract those who may not be
traditional science center visitors. Educational impact will be extended through
programming for the public and school groups, including materials for
institutions that do not host the exhibition, along with a website. &lt;br/&gt;