* 0307267
* Impurity Locations and Mechanisms of Charge Compensation in Stoichiometric Lithium Niobate and Lithium Tantalate Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Galina Malovichko, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 353,870.00

This proposal is on a technologically important class of materials, Lithium
Niobate(LN) and Lithium Tantalate (LT), of great potential in electro-optics.
These materials are of analogous significance to the electro-optics industry as
pure Silicon is to the electronics industry. The project will concentrate on
studies of defect structures in single crystals of pure and doped versions of
these materials as well as on the mutual influence of intrinsic and extrinsic
defects studied through Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) and Electron
Nuclear Double Resonance (ENDOR). Systematic studies will be carried out at
Montana State University in a newly purchased Bruker EPR spectrometer. The
samples will be obtained from crystal growers worldwide and through a
partnership with local company, Scientific Materials, Bozeman, MT. Participation
of graduate and undergraduate students including women and members of
underrepresented groups will be given priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal deals with a class of materials that have great potential for
applications in electro-optics i.e. the manipulation of light with an electric
field. Two materials of relevance in this context, Lithium Niobate and Lithium
Tantalate will be studied in their crystalline form. Questions to be addressed
include the degree of perfection that these crystals can reach and if they are
not perfect what is the nature of the defects in them? These questions will be
answered using a resonance technique where the electrons in the material will be
excited in a magnetic field. A company close to the investigators' university
will be involved in producing the requisite crystals for the study. The
principal investigator will emphasize the participation of women and minorities
in the project.&lt;br/&gt;