* 0307914
* CAREER:  Interface Science of Functional Perovskites
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,03/31/2008
* Susanne Stemmer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2008
* USD 352,294.00

The objective of this CAREER project is a comprehensive education and research
program aimed at the development of next-generation devices using functional
perovskites by providing atomic-level understanding of interface properties
relevant for practical applications. Materials science research will be pursued
research toward: (a) mixed ionic-electronic conducting (MIEC) perovskite oxides
for electrochemical devices, and (b) ferroelectric thin films for capacitors and
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). In these devices, interface structure and
properties play a key role in determining materials and device properties.
Providing a fundamental understanding of transport mechanisms across interfaces
will enable more energy-efficient, cost-effective devices, and aid the design of
thin film electrochemical devices. Ferroelectric perovskites have a host of
properties that enable further development of technologies such as
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). The physical properties of ferroelectric
perovskite thin films are drastically different from those of bulk materials,
for reasons that are currently poorly understood. Establishing the role of
interfaces in observed behavior is expected to allow development of optimized
microstructures for applications in MEMS and electronic devices. The method
developed in this project will concentrate on interfaces with known atomic
arrangements and defect chemistry. These will be obtained by controlled thin
film growth experiments and by utilizing unique capabilities of high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy in combination with electron energy-loss
spectroscopy. Macroscopic measurements of transport properties of oxide
interfaces and of the physical behavior of ferroelectric thin films is being
studied to establish fundamental limits of interfacial properties, relevant for
all applications of functional perovskites. In addition, this research is
intended to set the stage for atomic level calculations that will need the true
atomic structure as input. Part of the research on thin film electrochemical
devices will involve an established collaboration with industry, as well as
interdisciplinary research with national and international university
researchers in the areas of electrochemical transport and electrical
characterization. An important feature of the project is the training of
students in interdisciplinary, industrial and international collaborative
activities, in technologically important research areas. A main goal of the
project is to thoroughly integrate research into educational activities.
Emphasis will be placed on (a) participation of undergraduate students in
research early in their studies (b) interdisciplinary and international
training, and (c) mentoring of students of underrepresented groups with the goal
to encourage them to pursue graduate studies in materials science and
engineering. Course development plans include strengthening the core curriculum
to emphasize conceptual understanding of the course material for a broad
interdisciplinary audience, and to incorporate new technologies. Conceptual
testing as a method to evaluate the success of the educational activities will
also be developed. %%% The project addresses fundamental research issues in a
topical area of materials science having high technological relevance. The scope
of the project will expose students to challenges in materials synthesis,
processing, and characterization. An important feature of the project is the
strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education. ***