* 0307410
* Structural and Microstructural Studies of Ti/Zr- and Al-Based Quasicrystals, Approximants and Metallic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Kenneth Kelton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2007
* USD 380,002.00

The primary purpose of this grant is to develop a better understanding of the
role of local structure and long-range diffusion on glass formation and
crystallization. Representative glasses will be chosen from four technologically
important families (Al-based, Ti/Zr-based, Fe-based and Mg-based). Amorphous
structures will be studied with wide-angle x-ray scattering, 3D atom probe,
EXAFS, and variable coherence (or fluctuation) dark-field transmission electron
microscopy (TEM). Plausible amorphous structures will be constructed from a
Reverse Monte Carlo analysis of the measured x-ray structure factor. The
influence of long-range diffusion on nucleation and growth will be studied with
energy filtered TEM, atom probe and small angle scattering, and the kinetics
will be determined from differential scanning calorimetry and TEM measurements.
These data will be fit to a new model for diffusion-influenced nucleation
developed at Washington University. A second goal of the grant is to continue
hydrogenation studies of Ti/Zr/Hf/Mg-based quasicrystals and glasses that have
technologically relevant features, such as a high storage to weight ratio. %%%
The insight gained from the coordinated measurements and modeling in glasses
will clarify the mechanisms responsible for nanostructure formation during glass
crystallization that will lead to improved control of nanostructure production.
In addition to producing new information of basic and technological interest,
this research has a significant educational importance. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will receive training in theoretical and experimental
methods in materials science and condensed-matter physics. Presentations of this
and related research will be given in local secondary schools, providing
information for potential scientific careers and allowing opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students to help with science education. ***

