* 0307604
* Analytic Formation of Dark Matter Halos: Confrontation with Simulations and Observations
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Arif Babul, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2008
* USD 507,509.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AST-0307604&lt;br/&gt;Williams&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
physics governing the formation of the equilibrium structure of dark matter
halos that host galaxies and clusters of galaxies is currently one of the great
challenges of theoretical cosmology. This is a comprehensive research program to
identify the main dynamical processes that determine the properties of the
observed dark matter halos. It involves an innovative approach using ultra-high-
resolution numerical N-body studies and a physically insightful analytic halo
formation model building on the seminal work by Ryden &amp; Gunn. Using these
complementary approaches in tandem, the researchers will focus on the connection
between cosmological initial conditions and key physical processes, explore the
role of the local environment (such as tidal torques), study rare halos forming
from atypical but allowed conditions, and attempt to reverse engineer halo
formation to sort out which initial conditions and dynamical mechanisms are
responsible for real, observed halos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To try to encourage
understanding of dark matter halos at all levels of education and research, all
of the programs developed for the analytical procedure will be made publicly
available, which should represent a powerful educational opportunity. In this
way, students will be encouraged to develop a physical intuition about somewhat
obscure notions in dynamical analysis. The involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students in the actual research is eagerly
supported.&lt;br/&gt;***