* 0307487
* Collaborative Research:    New Standard Stellar Population Models
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Guy Worthey, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 07/31/2008
* USD 302,540.00

Award: AST-0307487&lt;br/&gt;PI: Guy Worthey&lt;br/&gt;Inst: Washington State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Guy Worthey of Washington State
University, with collaborators Eddie Baron of University of Oklahoma
(AST-0307323) and Brian Chaboyer of Dartmouth College (AST-0307407), will
prepare a new set of stellar populations models that provide both isochrones and
predicted colors and spectra for integrated populations. Their new models will
incorporate the capability to model different abundance mixes, allowing, for the
first time, variations in He/H, C, N, O, the alpha-elements, and an overall
scaling factor for heavy element abundances. The models will include the most
recent advances in model atmospheres, opacities, and stellar evolutionary codes.
Using these models, they plan to demonstrate that absolute ages to 10% are
achievable, and to derive ages for a sample of local galaxies. They will also
derive a suite of elemental abundances for these galaxies, enabling strong new
constraints on nucleosynthetic enrichment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new
models will impact almost every field of galactic and extragalactic astronomy,
from studies of nearby stellar clusters and dwarf galaxies, to computing
evolutionary corrections for high redshift galaxies. The PI's will make
available, in both catalog form and through a web-based tool, the integrated and
stellar photometry in all major filter systems, line strength indices, and both
synthetic and empirically-derived spectra. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;