* 0307644
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Endocrine Correlates and Fitness Consequences of Variation in Mothering Behavior in Wild Yellow Baboons (Papio cynocephalsu)
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Jeanne Altmann, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 01/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Extensive adaptation for the care of young infants has been a major, defining
characteristic of human and non-human primate evolution. In fact, despite
obvious differences in patterns of infant care in humans and other primates,
many of the biological factors underlying variation in parenting behavior are
probably very similar in humans and other anthropoid primates. Research on the
biological causes and consequences of variation in parenting behavior in non-
human primate species, especially those phylogenetically closest to humans, i.e.
Old World monkeys and apes, can yield new perspectives, information and insight
into the origins of variation in human parenting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endocrine
correlates and fitness consequences of variation in mothering behavior will be
investigated for 45 females of known behavioral and demographic history in five
groups of wild yellow baboons (Papio cynocephalus) in Amboseli, southern Kenya.
Using patterns of behavior, noninvasive fecal hormone sampling, and the Amboseli
long-term database, this study will examine the extent to which (1) differences
in the mother-infant relationship are predictable from differences among mothers
in the profiles of four steroid hormones over late pregnancy and early lactation
and (2) differences in the mother-infant relationship predict variation (a) in
mothers' future reproduction and (b) infant
survivorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on and considerably
extends previous research on this topic in non-human primates, which have
primarily been constrained to a few individuals of a few species, captive
populations, one or two hormones, and invasive hormone sampling. This project
represents one of the first rigorous investigations of the biological forces
underlying variation in mothering behavior in a wild nonhuman primate
population. In focusing on one of the most socially complex and closely related
animal models, this project will enhance our understanding of human origins and
yield new information and insight into the origins of variation in human
parenting while avoiding many of the logistical and ethical difficulties often
entailed in studying humans. Furthermore, this study will enhance our
understanding of variation in the mother-infant relationship in wild populations
and will make important contributions to a comprehensive analysis of life-
history variation in wild primates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In supporting this
project, NSF is supporting a major part of the Ph.D training of the co-PI, Nga
Nguyen, a first-generation Vietnamese American and the first of her family to
receive post-secondary school education. Nguyen has received sponsorship for her
research in Kenya through the Institute of Primate Research (IPR), National
Museums of Kenya. Nguyen will present preliminary findings of her study in Kenya
at IPR and will produce a variety of technical publications spanning several
appropriate disciplinary areas, including behavioral ecology, behavioral
endocrinology, and biological anthropology. A section of the publicly available
Amboseli Baboon Project website (www.princeton.edu/~baboon) will be devoted to
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;