* 0307872
* Workshop on Ergodic Theory; Chapel Hill, NC
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Idris Assani, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2004
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT: Prop 0307872 (Conference on Ergodic Theory) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a follow up of the successful workshop we
organized on June 08-09 2002, we are&lt;br/&gt;planning a workshop on ergodic
theory at the Department of Mathematics at UNC Chapel Hill on February 14-16,
2003. This academic year coincides with the retirement year of Prof. Hillel
Furstenberg. Hence the main topic at the 2003 workshop will be on problems
related to the nonconventional ergodic averages he introduced in his famous
ergodic proof of Szemeredi's theorem on arithmetic progressions. We expect to
bring together 20 invited speakers and 10-15 graduate students, Post Doc and
junior faculty .Each speaker is expected to give in his/her talk a mix of new
results and surveys. Such talks allow junior researchers to be introduced
smoothly to active and well known research areas in ergodic theory. We will also
have talks in other areas of ergodic theory such as bifurcation theory, finite
rank systems and topological dynamics. The list of those having already
expressed their desire to participate includes Prof. H. Furstenberg, V.
Bergelson, A. Leibman, B. Kra (Junior faculty), A. Tempelman to name a few. As
in the first workshop, proceedings of the conference will be published with
Contemporary Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt; The workshop will be advertised broadly to
the mathematics community. Advertisements have been made at Howard University.
Others will be posted on the NAM and AARMS lists and web sites. We expect
interested mathematicians from underrepresented groups to participate.
&lt;br/&gt; The workshop is partially supported by the Department of Mathematics
at UNC &lt;br/&gt;Chapel Hill. &lt;br/&gt;