* 0307203
* Improved Simulations of Cosmic Plasmas: Measurements and Modeling Studies of Thermal Energy Charge Transfer in Support of Ground-Based Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Daniel Wolf Savin, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2006
* USD 251,706.00

AST 0307203 Savin

It has long been recognized that thermal energy charge transfer (CT) of singly-
and doubly charged ions with atomic hydrogen plays an important role in
determining the ionization structure, thermal structure, emission spectrum, and
absorption spectrum of planetary nebulae, H II regions, Lya clouds, the
intergalactic medium (IGM), and shocks in supernova remnants and Herbig-Haro
objects. Ground-based spectroscopic observations of these sources are used to
address many fundamental questions in astrophysics such as the primordial He
abundance, the chemical evolution of the universe, the shape of the metagalactic
radiation field as a function of redshift, galactic chemical evolution, and
stellar nucleosynthesis. Of particular importance to address these issues are
reliable thermal energy CT rate coefficients for singly- and doubly-charged ions
of C, N, and O. The majority of thermal CT data used in astrophysics has been
calculated with the Landau- Zener (LZ) method. Dr. Daniel Wolf Savin's
laboratory results have demonstrated that LZ calculations of thermal CT cross
section can be off by up to an order of magnitude. A few state-of-the-art
molecular orbital close-coupling (MOCC) calculations also exist. But laboratory
work has shown that without benchmark measurements, MOCC thermal CT cross
section calculations can be off by up to a factor of 3.

Dr. Savin and colleagues will carry out a combined program of laboratory
measurements and modeling studies for CT of C2+, N+, N2+, O+, and O2+ on atomic
H at thermal energies. They have already carried out such measurements for C+.
The new measurements will be carried out using the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
ion-atom merged-beams apparatus which is the only existing facility capable of
carrying out the proposed thermal energy cross section measurements. The results
will be used to benchmark state-of-the-art MOCC calculations. The measurements,
in combination with benchmarked theory if needed, will also be used to produce
CT rate coefficients with an estimated accuracy of 20%. The group will publish
simple fits to derived rate coefficients so that the astrophysics community can
use the new data in their studies of cosmic plasmas. Concurrent with the
measurements, they will carry out modeling studies using CLOUDY to investigate
the astrophysical implication of the new data as well as the implication due to
any inferred uncertainties in the unmeasured CT data for other ions. Some of the
issues to be investigated include the role that CT plays in determining the
ionization correction factors used to infer the primordial He abundance from H
II regions. The group will also study the role of CT in Lya clouds and the IGM,
observations of which are used to constrain the chemical evolution of the
universe and the shape of the metagalactic radiation field as a function of
redshift.

A large portion of this research project will be carried out by a Columbia
University graduate student in partial fulfillment of the requirements for
her/his Ph.D. Teaching and training of the student will be overseen by Dr. Savin
and collaborators at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), the University of
Kentucky, and the University of Georgia-Athens. The research will thereby result
in the education and training of a student to be a future scientist. In addition
this work will enhance the Columbia/ORNL infrastructure for research and
education which Dr. Savin has recently established with his collaborators at
ORNL. The measurements will be carried out in collaboration with ORNL scientists
using a unique ORNL facility. Lastly, to enhance scientific and technical
understanding the group will broadly disseminate the results at conferences and
publish them in the appropriate scientific journals. ***