* 0307000
* Theoretical Study of Growing Metal and Semiconductor Nanostructures on Molecule Corrals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Feng Liu, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 225,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education to
explore a novel approach for growing metal and semiconductor nanostructures
using a unique class of templates called molecule corrals. Research will focus
on three areas: (1) quantitative determination of the kinetic and thermodynamic
growth parameters from first-principles theory; (2) computer simulation of
growth morphology and dynamics inside molecule corrals; and (3) development of
fundamental theories of growth modes and nanostructure formation on the
molecule-corral templates. Theoretical and computational techniques will be
applied to tackle the proposed problems at both the microscopic and macroscopic
level. Multiscale (electronic-atomic-continuum) theories will be developed to
investigate growth mechanisms of nanostructures on molecule corrals. These
include: (1) atomistic calculations of adatom adsorption, diffusion, and
interaction with corral step edges using first-principles total-energy methods;
(2) atomistic simulation of two-dimensional (2D) island formation, morphological
evolution, and growth dynamics inside molecule corrals using kinetic Monte Carlo
method; (3) mesoscopic modeling of strain effects on 2D growth inside molecule
corrals, in particular the formation of nanoscale quantum platelets, rings, and
disks, within the framework of continuum elastic theory; and (4) electronic
energy calculation of stability of metallic nanodisks and nanomesas within the
electronic growth model. Large-scale atomistic simulations will be performed on
local Beowulf clusters and on parallel supercomputers at NSF supercomputing
centers. A scientific objective is to provide new insights into the
understanding of heteroepitaxial growth on patterned substrates and of
integration of dissimilar classes of materials (metals vs. semiconductors) on
the same platform and to obtain fundamental knowledge for establishing a novel
and versatile approach for growing nanostructures. The specific goals are to lay
the groundwork for understanding the growth mechanisms of metal (Au and Ni) and
semiconductor (Si) nanostructures on the unique templates of molecule corrals
and to establish the optimal template structures, growth conditions, and
materials combinations for growing nanostructures with controlled size, shape,
and density. &lt;br/&gt;This project will involve students in the research as
part of the educational experience. The computational part of the project will
help to enrich a new graduate-level course, "computational materials science---
atomic simulations," developed recently by the PI for Materials Science and
Engineering majors. Some computational codes developed in this project will be
made available as shared resources for research and education. Efforts will be
made to broadly disseminate the work and to educate the general public about
Nanoscale science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education to explore a novel approach
for growing metal and semiconductor nanostructures using a unique class of
templates called molecule corrals. Research will focus on three areas: (1)
quantitative determination of the kinetic and thermodynamic growth parameters
from first-principles theory; (2) computer simulation of growth morphology and
dynamics inside molecule corrals; and (3) development of fundamental theories of
growth modes and nanostructure formation on the molecule-corral templates.
Theoretical and computational techniques will be applied to tackle the proposed
problems at both the microscopic and macroscopic level. Multiscale (electronic-
atomic-continuum) theories will be developed to investigate growth mechanisms of
nanostructures on molecule corrals. Some of the work will involve large-scale
atomistic simulations, which will be performed on local Beowulf clusters and on
parallel supercomputers at NSF supercomputing centers. The scientific objective
is to obtain fundamental knowledge for establishing a novel and versatile
approach for growing nanostructures. The specific goals are to lay the
groundwork for understanding the growth mechanisms of metal and semiconductor
nanostructures on templates of molecule corrals and to establish the optimal
template structures, growth conditions, and materials combinations for growing
nanostructures with controlled size, shape, and density. &lt;br/&gt;This project
will involve students in the research as part of the educational experience. The
computational part of the project will help to enrich a new graduate-level
course, "computational materials science---atomic simulations," developed
recently by the PI for Materials Science and Engineering majors. Some
computational codes developed in this project will be made available as shared
resources for research and education. Efforts will be made to broadly
disseminate the work and to educate the general public about Nanoscale science
and technology.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;