* 0307319
* U.S.-Czech Space Research on Propagation and Non-Linear Properties of Plasma Waves
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Donald Gurnett, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2009
* USD 35,694.00

The goal of this U.S.-Czech research project between Donald A. Gurnett of the
University of Iowa and Ondrej Santolik of Charles University in Prague is to
apply state- of-the-art analysis techniques to wave measurements in space
plasmas. The European Space Agency's recently launched Cluster mission consists
of four identical spacecraft equipped with instruments designed for measurements
of plasma waves, fields and particles in Earth's magnetosphere and adjacent
regions. The resulting high-quality wave measurements require advanced methods
for interpretation and analysis of the underlying physical processes. To analyze
this new Cluster data and data from two earlier missions (Polar and Cassini),
the US-Czech team will employ various methods such as wave distribution
functions, higher order spectra, and correlative methods for multi-point/multi-
scale measurements. Their research plan builds upon U.S. strengths in wave
instrumentation and Czech expertise in satellite data analysis and
interpretation of wave observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together the
researchers intend to determine the: 1) properties of nonlinear phenomena in the
auroral region and near the bow shock, 2) sources and propagation of plasma
waves in the whistler mode observed near the magnetic equator and in the auroral
region, and 3) wave particle interactions responsible for generation of these
plasma waves. Results should lead to a better understanding of basic physical
processes occurring around Earth, many of them related to the Sun-Earth
connection in which waves play a fundamental role. Furthermore, findings should
be useful to follow-on multi-spacecraft missions when planning more
sophisticated investigations designed to answer questions posed by theorists and
modelers about stellar and terrestrial plasma wave environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe
to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S.
and Czech students to the international space research community through work at
partner institutions and direct involvement in the project's advanced data
analysis and modeling techniques.