* 0307594
* Localized Electronic States in Amorphous Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* P. Craig Taylor, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 360,571.00

The electronic, optical, and structural properties of amorphous, chalcogenide
(Group VI) semiconductors are of increased interest because of their use in
reprogrammable optical storage devices (phase change memories), optical fibers,
and other electro-optical devices. Many of these devices are plagued by
optically induced changes in the local structural order, which are ubiquitous in
these semiconductors. Optical and magnetic resonance experiments and tight-
binding calculations are directed at understanding both the local order and the
metastable, optically induced changes. This understanding, which will apply to a
wide range of amorphous semiconductors, has the potnetial to greatly improve the
performance of many devices.&lt;br/&gt; Graduate students are trained in the
most advanced optical and magnetic resonance techniques. Special emphasis is
placed on the active recruitment of women at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. An outreach effort with a predominantly undergraduate institution has
attracted several undergraduate women. Summer employment is offered to high
school students identified as especially talented and motivated. Undergraduate
students are encouraged to present talks at scientific meetings. In response to
recent developments within the scientific community, a new course on Scientific
Ethics is being developed at the advanced undergraduate/graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In the standard semiconducting materials, such as
those used for computer applications, the individual atoms are arranged in space
like cubes stacked in a box. If this regular geometry does not exist the
semiconductors are called "amorphous". The properties of a particular class of
amorphous semiconductors, namely those that contain atoms from Group VI of the
periodic table, are of special interest because of their use in optical fibers.
These momories and fibers are plagued by deleterious changes in performance that
are induced by light. The research is aimed at understanding these changes and
ultimately at curtailing these deleterious effects.&lt;br/&gt; In the course of
performing the experiments undergraduate and graduate students are trained in
the most advanced optical and magnetic resonance techniques, whose medical
analogs include laser eye surgery (Lasik) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Special emphasis is placed on the active recruitment of women. Outreach efforts
include close collaboration with local colleges and high schools. The scientific
community has recently witnessed prominent breaches in ethical standards. In
response to these developments a new course on Scientific Ethics is being
offered at the University of Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;