* 0307352
* SGER:  Improving Ruthenium Isotope Ratio Measurements: Preparing to Test for Time Dependence of Fundamental Constants
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Judith Hannah, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2004
* USD 29,608.00

Hannah&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0307352&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The possibility of time
dependence of fundamental constants, including the weak interaction constant,
has been long debated in the physics community. One approach to documenting time
dependence is to seek variations in the decay constants for radioactive
elements. The mineral molybdenite (MoS2), which takes in significant
concentrations of rhenium (Re), permits measurements based on two decay
constants. 187Re decays to 187Os by emitting a single b particle. 100Mo decays
to 100Ru by emitting two b particles. The rate of b decay is mathematically
dependent on the weak interaction constant. For double b decay, that dependence
is squared. We can take advantage of this difference in mathematical dependency
to search for changes in the weak interaction constant over time by comparing
the two decay constants. We propose to use the well-established Re-Os
geochronometer to determine precisely the ages of molybdenites spanning several
billion years of earth history. We will then measure the accumulation of 100Ru
in those same mineral samples to determine the decay constant for 100Mo, which
is currently not well known. If the weak interaction constant has varied over
the last several billion years, the calculated decay constant for 100Mo will
vary relative to that of 187Re. Our goal in this project is to test new
laboratory methods in order to improve the precision of our 100Ru measurements.
Given sufficient analytical precision, we will then extend the study to perform
measurements on molybdenite samples of varied ages.&lt;br/&gt;