* 0307282
* NSF-Europe: Development of Efficient Three-Photon Materials based on Theoretical Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Paras Prasad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 449,440.00

This is an internationally collaborative project between the Institute for
Lasers, Photonics and Biophotonics at the State University of New York at
Buffalo (UB) and the Center for Advanced Molecular Materials (CAMM) in Sweden.
Project goals are to develop efficient 3-photon absorb-ing materials for
photonic applications. The Swedish group will conduct theoretical modeling to
provide design criteria that will be used in Buffalo to synthesize novel
3-photon chromophores, characterize them and explore applications. Using their
expertise in synchrotron research, the Swedish collaborator will also conduct
synchrotron-based spectroscopic studies of these materials. The aim is to
achieve greater understanding of structure property relations so as to identify
those features of molecular structures that lead to enhanced 3-photon
absorption. Recent suc-cesses in reaching a substantial enhancement of 2-photon
absorption (2PA) in new molecular structures have created interest in exploring
3-photon (3PA) based applications. For the 3PA process, a longer excitation
wavelength such as those for optical communications can be used. Also its cubic
dependence on the input light intensity provides a stronger spatial confinement
so that a higher contrast in imaging can be obtained. Recently UB reported
observation of a highly directional and up-converted stimulated emission,
produced by a strong simultaneous 3-photon absorption at 1.3 um in a new organic
chromophore solution. Two convergent approaches will be used. First,
experimental studies will investigate the 3-photon properties of a group of
systematically derivatized promising structures. Second is the molecular design
guided by theoretical stud-ies of the structure-property relationship by using
quantum chemical models of 3-photon absorp-tion (e.g. the few-state model) as
proposed by the Swedish collaborators. Anticipated project outputs include new
materials with strong 3-photon absorption wavelengths of 1.3-1.55-um and
exploration of their practical application for (1) optical fiber communication,
(2) optical power limiting and stabilization, (3) up-converted stimulated
emission and lasing, and (4) 3-photon ab-sorption based imaging and data
storage. %%% The project addresses fundamental research issues associated with
electronic and photonic mate-rials having technological relevance. An important
feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, with emphasis on
integration of research and education, including minorities, and an
international collaboration providing both scientific and educational benefits.
Short and long-term staff and student exchanges will supplement electronic
communications between the groups. The outcome of this research is expected to
stimulate rational development of materials, which utilizes 3-photon processes
for frequency up-conversion lasing; short pulse optical com-munications; optical
power limiting and stabilization; and bioimaging and biophotonics. This NSF
project is co-funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the Division
of Materials Research (Electronic Materials), and the International Office
(Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF
and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried out in collaboration with
the Center for Advanced Molecular Materials (CAMM) in Swe-den. ***