* 0307279
* The Age, Formation and Evolution of the Elements
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* John Cowan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 05/31/2007
* USD 220,064.00

AST 0307279&lt;br/&gt;Cowan, John J.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The P.I. is continuing
his research on the age, formation and evolution of the heavy elements,
specifically, those formed in the s(low) and r(apid) neutron-capture nuclear
processes, in the interiors of the oldest stars in our Galaxy. The detection by
the P.I. and his collaborators of the long-lived radioactive element thorium in
several, and uranium in one, of these Galactic halo stars has provided an
exciting, and perhaps unique, opportunity to directly determine the ages of the
oldest stars. Employing extensive, new and far more accurate data, the P.I. will
first extend and expand his studies of stellar radioactive ages by determining
the abundances for a number of metal-poor stars (i.e., old, with low levels of
elements such as iron). These new thorium and uranium detections will be
necessary to reduce any observational uncertainties and confirm earlier stellar
and Galactic age estimates. Utilizing the newly determined abundance
distributions in the metal-poor stars, the P.I. will calculate the initial
abundance values of the radioactive elements Th and U (also known as nuclear
chronometers or clocks) and make new age determinations of other low-metallicity
stars, based upon their observed (i.e., decayed) thorium abundances. These
studies result in more accurate age estimates for the oldest stars than
previously possible and will help to answer the fundamental questions of just
how old are the Galaxy and the Universe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Both graduate and
undergraduate students are involved in the research activities of the P.I.,
including female and underrepresented minority students who are being trained
and mentored by the P.I. The P.I. also teaches voluntarily in one of the local
elementary schools (sixth grade), and regularly gives public lectures on
astronomy to the general community.In addition, the P.I. maintains a web site
that includes research papers available to the community. Also included on the
web site are examples of technology innovation, such as how they are utilizing
the capabilities of the Internet 2 to transfer large amounts of astronomical
data. Educational images, produced to illustrate the results of NSF-supported
activities (such as the P.I.'s observations of supernovae and black holes), are
available on the site for students and the general public. Finally, the P.I.
includes and maintains databases on his web site that can be accessed by the
astronomical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;