* 0307791
* High Spatial Resolution Studies of the Exospheres of Io and Europa
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 236,817.00

AST 0307791&lt;br/&gt;Mendillo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A pilot program to promote
astronomical observations from a Defense Department/Air Force observatory was
conducted under a 2-year grant funded by NSF and the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research. The AEOS (Advanced Electro Optical System) facility has a
3.7 meter telescope on Mt. Haleakala, Hawaii, an ideal site for imaging
experiments to study the sodium and potassium exospheres of the jovian moons Io
and Europa. With the scientific goals of (1) investigating the latitude and
orbital phase dependence of jets of high speed Na from Io's anti-Jupiter
hemisphere, and (2) obtaining the first set of 2-D images of Europa's exospheric
appearance, several types of observing modes were tried. An extensive series of
observations are in hand from four separate runs at AEOS, and this project will
perform a comprehensive data analysis and modeling effort on those data. The
datasets to be examined include times with (a) adaptive optics (AO) on without
HDI (i.e., classic coronagraphic imaging), (b) with AO and HDI both being used
to see if HDI can improve images when AO cannot cope with poor seeing
conditions, and (c) with AO-off as a test of pure HDI on a large telescope.
Thus, there is a rich selection of data for signal processing algorithm
development and testing, as well as for state-of-the-art planetary science on
transient atmospheres and the sources of surface-boundary exospheres in the
jovian system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research group's commitment to
education and outreach activities is demonstrated through a new program of
observatory Open Night discussion sessions for the general public. They will use
researcher and student involvement in mini-lectures about HDI and Jovian science
as a way to promote informal education both in technology areas and about the
Solar System to the broad spectrum of visitors to the Boston University
Observatory each month.&lt;br/&gt;***