* 0307366
* Collaborative Research:    The Young Remnants of Massive Star Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2007
* Roger Chevalier, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 11/30/2007
* USD 208,800.00

Proposal ID: AST-0307366 / AST-0307256&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Virginia / North Carolina State University&lt;br/&gt;PI: Chevalier, Roger /
Blondin, John&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Roger Chevalier at the University of
Virginia and Dr. John Blondin at North Carolina State University are awarded
funds to model the young remnants of massive star supernovae. During their
lifetimes, massive stars undergo mass loss during various evolutionary phases.
When they finally end their lives as supernovae, the interaction depends on both
the mass loss processes leading up to the explosion and the structure of the
exploding star. Multi-wavelength observations of this interaction will be
modeled for various types of massive star supernovae. Realistic stellar models
will be used in hydrodynamic models of the interaction, including the effects of
inhomogeneous structure in the circumstellar material. The physical processes to
be investigated include the production of X-ray emission, electron heating in
fast shock waves, the production and evolution of relativistic electrons and
their emission, possible dust formation in a dense interaction shell, infrared
emission from collisionally heated dust, and spectral properties expected for
various interaction components. The mass loss properties of various kinds of
massive star supernovae will be determined and related to expectations from
evolutionary models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has broad implications for
astrophysics in that it is relevant to the late evolution of massive stars, the
return of heavy elements to the interstellar medium, and physical processes at
high energy densities. The research will build ties between the University of
Virginia, North Carolina State University, and Stockholm Observatory. This work
will also result in the training of a graduate student in computer simulation
techniques. A module describing the results of three-dimensional simulations
will be added to a public web site that already offers the existing code.
Finally, the research results will be integrated into undergraduate courses and
public lectures. &lt;br/&gt;