* 0307229
* Nonlinear Control, HJB Equations, and the Max-Plus Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* William McEneaney, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2008
* USD 150,000.00

The project focuses on the use of the max-plus algebra as a tool for the
solution of nonlinear control and estimation problems. The main classes of
problems addressed are those for which the associated dynamic programming
equation takes the form of a nonlinear Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman partial
differential equation (HJB PDE). The semigroups associated with such problems
are time-indexed operators which are max-plus linear. The max-plus linearity may
be exploited to develop numerical methods for HJB PDEs, which might be described
as (max-plus) spectral methods. These form a completely new class of numerical
methods for HJB PDEs. The project will also consider approaches where one can
construct complex operators in the semiconvex dual space from operators for
simpler problems such as linear-quadratic problems. This allows one to avoid the
curse-of-dimensionality in the most computationally intensive portion of the
computations in max-plus based methods for problems whose operators may be
approximated by such constructions in the dual-
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control Theory is useful for any system where one
desires to estimate the true state of the system and/or to control its future
behavior. The methods of control theory apply to a tremendous variety of real-
world systems such as aircraft dynamics, spacecraft dynamics, portfolio
optimization, option pricing, and collections of robotic vehicles. Although the
control of systems whose behavior is close to linear has been quite successful,
there are many problems where the system behavior may be highly nonlinear, and
the number of such problems is on the rise. The solution of nonlinear control
problems is quite difficult, and not computationally tractable for systems whose
states are described by more than just two or three scalar variables. The
solution of such problems is most often obtained by the solution of an
associated partial differential equation. The most common approach has been to
adopt finite element methods (often used to solve problems such as fluid flow)
in order to solve such partial differential equations, and consequently, the
control problems. However, the computational requirements grow exponentially
fast as a function of the number of scalar state
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is commonly referred to as the curse-of-
dimensionality. Due to this exponential growth in computational cost, we cannot
hope that faster computers will lead to solution of reasonably large problems in
the foreseeable future. Therefore, we must explore alternative approaches to the
solution of such problems. In this project, we apply a new class of methods to
such nonlinear control problems. These methods exploit the fact that these
nonlinear problems are linear over a different set of algebraic operations known
as the max-plus algebra. By employing this max-plus linearity, one can obtain
new numerical methods that appear to provide computational savings. Although one
cannot hope to completely remove the curse-of-dimensionality, these methods
should attenuate its effects.&lt;br/&gt;