* 0307536
* Geometric Tools for Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Santosh Vempala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Title: Geometric Tools for Algorithms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a set of general algorithmic tools&lt;br/&gt;based on
geometry and randomness. Four specific approaches will be&lt;br/&gt;investigated
-- geometric random walks, convex relaxations, random&lt;br/&gt;projection and
spectral projection. There are basic problems that can be&lt;br/&gt;solved by
each technique (i.e., yielding efficient algorithms). These&lt;br/&gt;include
convex optimization, approximation algorithms for NP-hard problems&lt;br/&gt;and
learning mixtures of distributions. The solutions to these
problems&lt;br/&gt;lead to several questions about the applicability and
efficiency of these&lt;br/&gt;techniques (e.g. What functions can be sampled
efficiently by the random&lt;br/&gt;walk approach? How quickly can the volume be
computed? Is there a&lt;br/&gt;relaxation refinement method that improves the
integrality gap? What are&lt;br/&gt;the limits of the spectral method?). The PI
plans to address these&lt;br/&gt;questions and use the answers to tackle basic
open problems in algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;Geometric insights and approaches play an increasingly central
role in the&lt;br/&gt;discovery of polynomial-time algorithms for fundamental
problems. At a&lt;br/&gt;time when the field of algorithms is growing rapidly,
such tools will be&lt;br/&gt;crucial in crystallizing a theory of algorithms
that will deepen our&lt;br/&gt;understanding as well as advance the field by
aiding in the solution of&lt;br/&gt;key open
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact:&lt;br/&gt;The problems this
proposal sets out to explore are of a basic nature, and&lt;br/&gt;originate from
a variety of areas, including combinatorial optimization,&lt;br/&gt;machine
learning, information retrieval, and Euclidean geometry. Progress&lt;br/&gt;on
these problems, in addition to its potential practical impact, is
sure&lt;br/&gt;to unravel combinatorial/geometric structure, and is likely to
yield new&lt;br/&gt;analysis tools. The research results will form the basis of
an&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate course on combinatorial optimization as well as two
graduate&lt;br/&gt;courses; course notes for all of these will be available
online.&lt;br/&gt;