* 0307475
* US-France Cooperative Research (INRIA):  Approximate Boundary Conditions for Computational Wave Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Jan Hesthaven, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2007
* USD 35,614.00

0307475&lt;br/&gt;Hesthaven&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this three-year U.S.- France
cooperative research project, researchers at Brown University, the New Jersey
Institute of Technology (NJIT) and the French National Institute for Research in
Informatics and Applied Mathematics (INRIA), focus on the development and
analysis of approximate boundary conditions for wave dominated problems. These
problems are universally important and involve developing new computational
techniques and improved methods for efficient and robust modeling in such
diverse areas as climate and weather and optical communication and high-speed
electronics. Problems and models that absorb boundary conditions and effect
boundary conditions will be emphasized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S.- French
interdisciplinary team consists of Jan Hesthaven (Brown University), Peter
Petropoulos (NJIT) and their graduate students and Elaine Becache, Houssem
Haddar and Patrick Joly (all from INRIA Rocquencourt). They bring to this
collaboration complementary expertise in applied and computational mathematics
(Hesthaven and Petropoulos) and numerical analysis (INRIA team). This combined
effort is required to develop the proposed new computational techniques and to
understand properties and limitations of the proposed models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of a joint proposal to
NSF and INRIA. NSF provides funds for visits to France by US investigators and
students. INRIA supports the visits of French researchers to the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;