* 0307247
* A New Scheme for Monolithic Integration of III-V and Si for High Capacity Optical Communication and Networking
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Silvanus Lau, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 276,000.00

0307247&lt;br/&gt;Yu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, the PI will
study a relatively unexplored scheme for monolithic integration of III-V
compounds and silicon using a metallic layer, intended for relieving the thermal
mismatch and to provide linear electrical connections across the bonding
interface. Introducing a metallic layer interfacing between heterogeneous
materials will open new device concepts due to the different nature of carrier
transport. Bonding layers, which provide low resistance contact at the bottom of
optoelectronic devices located on a silicon chip, can readily facilitate current
injection, and can increase light output efficiency by reflection. Furthermore,
vertical electrical connections minimize the number of interconnections, and
reduce thermal resistance to heat-sinks. The importance of combining light-
emitting semiconductors with silicon integrated circuits on a single chip has
long been recognized. This is because of the potentially tremendous improvement
in speed, and efficiency of high-speed communications circuitry as a result of
integration. Previous approaches towards monolithic integration such as
epitaxial growth and wafer bonding face the difficulty of fundamental materials
mismatch issues hindering full-scale wafer integration. This proposed research
addresses the critical bonding issues of integrating dissimilar materials for
enhanced performance of opto-electronic devices on Si chips.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation of compliant bonding for devices by
studying a class of bonding reactions that involves transitions from liquid to
solid to relieve thermal mismatch as bonding occurs. The reactions of the
bonding system lead to low-resistance contact across the interface of the bonded
pair. The bonding of GaAs and Si will be emphasized with exemplary devices as
case studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program emphasizes fundamental
materials and devices issues related to technology for very high capacity
optical communication and networking. It also fosters collaboration with
national and industrial laboratories, as well as training of students and
modification of the graduate and the undergraduate curricula with research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;