* 0307083
* Miniconferences on Harmonic and Real Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Jack Brown, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2008
* USD 15,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT: DMS 0307083&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: G Soares de Souza/
Jack Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inst: Auburn
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;'Miniconferences on harmonic and Real
Analysis'&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1984, a total of 33 one and two-
day conferences in harmonic&lt;br/&gt;analysis, real analysis, and related areas
have been organized, primarily at Auburn University. More recently, two of the
meetings were held at the University of Louisville and California State
University at San Bernardino. The main purpose of these meetings was to enable
mathematicians and students in the vicinity of the universities where the
meetings were held to interact with each other and with mathematicians and
students from outside the region. The meetings also afforded mathematicians in
the fields the opportunity to present recent mathematical research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of these conferences has increased with each
passing year, and we have recently averaged around 20 to 40 participants from
other institutions at each meeting. Of course, we always have participation by
about 30 local university faculty and graduate students. The meetings are
relaxed and informal, include hour lectures by leading experts, plus many
contributed talks. Time is also available for discussion and initiation (or
continuation) of collaborative research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current grant will enable us to continue this series for another three years.
The planned schedule is to hold three meetings at
Auburn&lt;br/&gt;University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Miniconference on Real
Analysis, March 28-29, 2003. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Highlighted Topics: Gauge
integrals and fractal measures, Applications of set theory to topology and real
analysis, Continuous restrictions to compact sets, plus other topics. See
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
http://www.auburn.edu/~brownj4/~RAmini03.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;for
additional information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Miniconference on Harmonic
Analysis, 2003-2004 Academic Year&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Miniconference on
Harmonic and Real Analysis, 2004-2005 Academic Year&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To view
the history of the entire series, including listings of
Invited&lt;br/&gt;Speakers, schedules, and some pictures, visit the web
pages&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
http://www.auburn.edu/~desougs/haminis.html&lt;br/&gt;and&lt;br/&gt; http://www.
auburn.edu/~brownj4/raminis.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;