* 0308930
* Cleaner Workshop Three:  Collaborative Large-Scale Engineering Assessment Network for Environmental Research
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2003,07/31/2004
* J. Jeffrey Peirce, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 07/31/2004
* USD 50,016.00

0308930 Peirce The objective of CLEANER Workshop Three is to build on the
accomplishments of two previous NSF workshops to better understand and organize
the science, engineering, technology, and administration of emerging
capabilities in sensor technologies, communications, and computation to protect,
maintain, and restore the water, atmosphere and soil
environments.&lt;br/&gt;During the past year the academic and NSF vision of
CLEANER has become targeted: to provide a network of field and laboratory
facilities in a collaboration among engineers, scientists, policy makers and
community groups to protect public health and the environment. The need exists
for a timely immediate CLEANER Workshop Three to continue these past discussions
and to narrow discussions to such topics as environmental cyberinfrastructures
and management plans.&lt;br/&gt;CLEANER Workshop One hosted and chaired by
Professor Richard Luthy at Stanford University in December 2001 provided a forum
for initial discussions on the vision, concept, vocabulary, content and
management options for CLEANER. &lt;br/&gt;CLEANER Workshop Two hosted and
chaired by Professor Patrick Brezonik at the University of Minnesota in October
2002 provided a larger group of participants with opportunities to learn about
CLEANER and learn about the successes and challenges faced during the planning
and operation of efforts somewhat similar to CLEANER including NSF's Long Term
Ecological Research (LTER's), Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation
(NEES), National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), and the Consortium of
Universities for the Advancement of Hydrological Science, Inc.
(CUAHSI).&lt;br/&gt; Workshop Three to be co- hosted at Duke University in
February 2003 by Professor Jeff Peirce (Duke University) and Professor Mike
Aitken (University of North Carolina) will build on the accomplishments of these
two previous workshops while continuing those discussions and narrowing
discussions on CLEANER to such topics as environmental cyberinfrastructure and
management plans. Workshop Three will follow the successful format of Workshop
Two with invited participants arriving at Duke for a Sunday evening dinner and
introductory discussions followed by two days of general and breakout meetings
with presentations and reports of workshop activities.&lt;br/&gt;