* 0308403
* A Fully Three-Dimensional Tomography Study of Upper Mantle Structure Beneath Eastern Asia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Li Zhao, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 168,147.00

Zhao&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0308403&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the PI plans
to conduct a regional three-dimensional (3-D) tomography for the anisotropic
shear-wave velocity in the mantle beneath Eastern Asia. This study will be
carried out by taking advantage of a wide distribution of moderate-sized
(magnitude 5-6) earthquakes in most parts of Eastern Asia, an increasing number
of permanent seismic stations and the latest developments in the methodology for
regional tomography. The data to be inverted will include the frequency-
dependent travel-time and amplitude perturbations measured on intermediate-
period (20-100s) three-component seismic records of surface waves, mantle-
turning body waves and ScS reverberations. Moreover, these measurements obtained
from regional, intermediate-period seismic waves will be inverted using accurate
and realistic full 3-D Frechet kernels computed by a normal-mode coupling
algorithm. The model parameters will include the 3-D radially-anisotropic shear-
wave velocity and the topographies of the upper-mantle transition-zone
discontinuities. In most parts of the region under study, the upper-mantle
structure will be resolved on a horizontal scale of ~500 km and a vertical scale
of ~100 km. Issues affecting tomography models, such as source-receiver
coverage, inversion procedures, velocity-topography trade-off, anisotropy, and
attenuation will be examined. This is the first application of full 3-D regional
tomography approach to a continental region. It is also the first study in which
the perturbations in velocity and discontinuity topography are jointly inverted.
The results will provide constraints for the geodynamic evolution of Eastern
Asia and its relation to surrounding tectonic regions. Broader impact: The PI
works closely with graduate students on this and related regional tomography
studies and methods and data and software will also be made available to the
wider seismology community. The techniques developed here can be an ideal choice
for other regional tomography studies, for example the mantle structure under
the USArray.&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;