* 0308934
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Invasion Risk in the Great Lakes: Estimating Propagule Pressure with Molecular Tools
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* David Lodge, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* James T. Morris
* 05/31/2004
* USD 11,986.00

Abstract DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Invasion Risk in the Great Lakes: Estimating
Propagule Pressure with Molecular Tools Lodge DEB-0308934

Biological invasions by organisms transported in ship ballast water are an
increasing cause of environmental degradation and a significant source of
economic costs to society. In preliminary research, the P.I. have adapted
probabilistic models to estimate invasion risk from propagule pressures, and
enumerated adult organisms from samples of Great Lakes ship ballast water.
Though invasion risk from resting stages of invertebrates is generally believed
to be considerable, it has not yet been quantified due to the technical
difficulty of identifying resting eggs from morphological characters. Thus, the
goals of this research are to identify and enumerate resting eggs in samples
through a combination of molecular and statistical techniques. Pilot studies to
assess the feasibility of this approach indicated that high-quality quantitative
estimates of propagule pressure can be obtained through a four step process: (1)
extraction of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA; (2) separation of gene sequences
using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis; (3) identification of taxonomic
groupings based on gene sequences; and (4) estimation of species relative
abundance with statistical models. The proposed research will use this method to
provide estimates of propagules pressure from 20 ships and to conduct risk
assessments of invasion.