* 0308185
* Complex Reflectance, Texture and Shape:  Methods and Representations for Object Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* David Kriegman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 439,877.00

Proposal #: 308185 Title: Complex Reflectance, Texture and Shape: Methods and
Representations for Object Modeling PI: Belhumeur, Peter Columbia University

This research is to investigate techniques for modeling objects with complex
reflectance. Our aim is to develop methods for recovering both shape and
reflectance properties of natural objects -- objects that due to their inherent
complexity have proven elusive to traditional shape reconstruction techniques
such as binocular stereo, structure from motion, photometric stereo, and even
laser range finders. Understanding the interplay between shape and reflectance
is critical to object modeling and is in many ways central to the field of
computer vision. Yet this promising avenue of research has been overlooked in
the past, either due to acquisition and storage limitations or, perhaps, due to
a lack of appropriate techniques. Recently, the PI's have introduced and
prototyped two novel methods for shape reconstruction and reflectance recovery
that essentially exploit two neglected physical principles. These two methods,
named Helmholtz stereopsis and light field reconstruction, are able to recover
surface shape regardless of the object's reflectance (BRDF), and they offer
numerous advantages over conventional reconstruction techniques. The proposed
research includes new shape reconstruction techniques, methods for constructing
object models including their shape and BRDF on a point-by-point basis, and
applications of these models to image-based rendering. In addition, these
reconstruction techniques will serve as tools for a broad study of BRDF's in
general as well as 3-D textures whose appearance varies with viewpoint and
lighting.

Unlike current shape estimation techniques, the proposed methods will produce
object models with both geometric and BRDF data. This new capability in object
modeling technology will be beneficial in areas such as industrial design,
architecture, entertainment, robotics, and medicine. Estimation of the
reflectance function across the reconstructed objects, surface normals, and
shape, leads directly to new methods for image-based modeling and rendering for
computer graphics applications. These modeling techniques will be used to study
reflectance properties of 3-D textures and natural materials (including human
skin), and this will help to produce more effective generative appearance models
that can be used in security applications (e.g., face recognition), human
computer interaction applications, entertainment, learning through visual
simulation, communications, etc. In addition to the applications of the
resulting research and its dissemination through peer-reviewed publications,
funding will be used to support the training of two Ph.D. students over three
years.