* 0308637
* U.S.-Romanian Research on Soft Computing Approaches to Modeling Metal Chemistry for Catalysis Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Thomas Cundari, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 11/30/2003
* USD 18,543.00

INT 0077531&lt;br/&gt;Cundari&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Romanian
project between Thomas Cundari of the University of Memphis and Horia Pop and
Costel Sarbu of Babes-Bolyai University Cluj-Napoca features development and
testing of novel soft computing (SC) approaches for use in modeling of
transitional metal (TM) chemistry. The Romanian partners bring experience with
fuzzy set theory to the effort while the Memphis group contributes significant
expertise in development of traditional quantum and classical methods for
modeling TM chemistry. Their planned chemical research focuses on identification
of novel Ziegler-Natta catalysts for direct polymerization of functionalized
olefins and in so doing should serve as a test vehicle for improved methods for
SC analysis of chemical databases. Extensions to other chemical systems are
intended and include: a) transition metal-catalyzed oxidation of hydrocarbons,
and b) dinuclear TM catalysis for carbon-hydrogen bond activation. If
successful, results should lead to an improved means for designing inorganic and
organometallic materials for a variety of applications in areas such as
catalysis, advanced materials and environmental remediation of toxic metals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This chemistry project fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and
Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence. &lt;br/&gt;