* 0308782
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Reproductive Incompatibility by Compensatory Mutations.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Michael Lynch, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2005
* USD 11,962.00

The maintenance of populations at small sizes can lead to the accumulation of
deleterious mutations that undermine the fitness of individuals. However,
subsequent return to large population size can result in the fixation of
beneficial mutations at other loci that compensate for these negative effects.
Such an advantageous association can be disrupted during outcrossing, thereby
leading to a fitness decline in hybrids and representing a first step in the
formation of new species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research represents the
first experimental test of the role of compensatory mutations in the evolution
of reproductive incompatibility. Using the nematode model system C. elegans,
this project attempts to: 1) subject multiple lines to a regime of deleterious
mutation accumulation by maintenance at small population sizes with a knockout
of a key DNA mismatch repair gene; 2) initiate fitness recovery in mutationally
degraded lines via the accumulation of compensatory mutations under large
population sizes, thereby creating line-specific coadapted gene complexes and 3)
test for diminished fitness in hybrid progeny. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study
will test the role of inter-locus gene interactions in the evolution of
reproductive incompatibility, evaluate the validity of a key model of
speciation, and have implications for conservation management practices.
&lt;br/&gt;