* 0308474
* Dissertation Research: Hormonal regulation of immune function in seasonally-breeding birds
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* John Wingfield, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,388.00

&lt;br/&gt;DISSERTATION RESEARCH:&lt;br/&gt;HORMONAL REGULATION OF IMMUNE
FUNCTION&lt;br/&gt;IN SEASONALLY-BREEDING BIRDS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noah T.
Owen-Ashley &amp; John C. Wingfield&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of
Washington, Seattle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The steroid hormone testosterone (T)
is thought to have bidirectional effects on fitness in many vertebrates. T is
important in orchestrating reproductive and aggressive behavior in males, and
promoting the development of many secondary sex characters important for female
choice. On the other hand, high levels of T are thought to suppress immune
function. Many studies in birds have found that T suppresses some component(s)
of the immune system, but it is not known if this mechanism occurs through
direct or indirect pathways. The main goal of this research is to understand the
contributions of these pathways in regulating T-induced immunosuppression in the
Northwestern Song Sparrow (Melospiza melodia morphna) and the White-crowned
Sparrow (Zonotrichia leucophrys). Experimental elevation of T in many bird
species alters the levels of other hormones, such as corticosterone and
estradiol, which also regulate immunity. Therefore, avian immune function may be
altered through these intermediary hormones, rather than by testosterone
directly. A suite of experiments will be conducted on both species involving the
use of hormone implants and/or pharmacological blockers to tease apart these
direct and indirect effects on physiological and behavioral immune function.
These studies will provide new insights into hormonal regulation of immunity in
seasonally-breeding birds, and reconcile existing theories which assume a direct
role of T in regulating a tradeoff between immunocompetence and reproductive
success in male vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;