* 0308657
* Ultrafast Optical Modulation Using Single-Crystal Films of Organic Nonlinear Optical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Mrinal Thakur, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 262,081.00

The objectives of this project include: i) preparation of good optical quality
single crystal films of organic materials having exceptionally large second or
third order optical nonlinearity, ii) establishment of appropriate methods for
fabrication of special device structures using the films, iii) detailed
nonlinear optical measurements and iv) demonstration of devices. The approach
utilizes the "shear method" for preparation of single crystal films of organic
materials. Electro-optic effects will be measured in such films at various
wavelengths and used to assess modulator operability at high speed up to 100GHz.
In order to increase modulation depth, the interaction length will be increased
by using i) thicker films, ii) Fabry-Perot geometry and iii) a guided-wave
configuration. Demonstration of femtosecond all-optical modulation using single-
crystal films is anticipated. Measurements will be made by time-resolved
techniques with 150 fs pulses in single-pass or reflective mode operation and
also using a Fabry-Perot cavity. &lt;br/&gt;%%% The project addresses
fundamental research issues associated with electronic/photonic materials having
technological relevance. The project directly involves one graduate student and
a postdoctoral fellow. Additionally, the project has broader impact in training
undergraduate students, and developing and maintaining multidisciplinary
collaborations in this field. The PI teaches specific courses in senior
undergraduate and graduate levels that make use of the optics laboratory in
demonstrating fundamental principles to students. Because of the
multidisciplinary nature of the proposed research, students across disciplines
will be recruited to perform research tasks. Under-represented, minority and
undergraduate students will be involved to provide them with a broader and
stronger scientific and technological experience. The program is expected to
increase the skilled workforce in an important field of optoelectronics with a
special emphasis on enhancing participation of under-represented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;