* 0308595
* U.S.- Czech Materials Research on Dynamics of Adatoms and Nanostructure Formation
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Michael Tringides, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 09/30/2009
* USD 38,813.00

The goal of this U.S.-Czech materials research project between Michael Tringides
of Iowa State University and Zdenek Chvoj of the Institute of Physics, Academy
of Sciences, CR, is to study adatom dynamics and the role of surface diffusion
in epitaxial growth. This includes atomic diffusion mechanisms on (111)
surfaces, using primarily silver, Ag, as a model system. Specifically the
researchers intend to examine interlayer diffusion in epitaxy, the role of
adatom-substrate interactions, and the kinetics controlling the formation of
uniform height metal islands on semiconductor surfaces. Experimental work will
be done by the Ames group using high-resolution electron defraction and scanning
tunneling microscopy to obtain atomic images of the growth structures. Czech
partners will address theoretical aspects of the joint project using analytical
models and Monte Carlo simulations. Results are expected to refine the basic
context for understanding and manipulating the complex dynamics and growth modes
of metal adatoms on metal and semiconductor surfaces. Success would enhance our
ability to grow and control the formation of nanostructures, with potential
applications in the field of film growth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This materials
research project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S. and
Czech students to the international research community through work at partner
institutions and direct involvement in the project's advanced experiments and
modeling techniques.