* 0308921
* Experimental Mudstone Sedimentology: An Attempt at Reverse Engineering of Natural Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Juergen Schieber, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2007
* USD 215,483.00

EAR-0308921 &lt;br/&gt;Schieber, Juergen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental
Mudstone Sedimentology: An Attempt at Reverse Engineering of Natural Processes
(EAR-0308921)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Juergen Schieber and John
Southard&lt;br/&gt;Indiana University and
MIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mudstones are fine-
grained sediments that are very abundant throughout earth history. Their
minerals record the state of ancient weathering, past climates, and changes in
ocean chemistry. Because of their fine-grained nature they also are very
effective to seal in and preserve organic components, such as plant and animal
fossils. As such, mudstones contain the lion's share of information available to
us on recorded earth history. Despite of that significance, however, our
understanding of the processes that deposited the mudstones of the past is
rudimentary. Thus, understanding these processes and identifying them in the
rock record has to be an essential aspect of our attempts to read out of the
rock record the conditions of the past, such as climate, atmosphere and ocean
chemistry, and effectiveness of recycling of biologically important chemical
elements (e.g. carbon, sulfur, phosphorous). PIs will begin to fill this gap in
our understanding through a series of flume experiments where they subject mud
substrates to a range of influences in a laboratory flow channel. With the
proposed flume facility PIs plan to quantitatively explore the factors that
influence mudstone deposition, and the small-scale sedimentary features that
result from combinations of a variety of parameters. These parameters include
for example salinity, clay type, flow velocity, water content of mud, continuous
vs. episodic sediment supply, and wave action. The data collected in this study
will provide a baseline for interpreting the physical aspects of mudstone
deposition, and will also allow them to identify priority areas for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;