* 0308828
* SGER: The Development of Assessment Instruments for the Study of Quantitative Literacy:  Supporting the Importance of Baseline Data and Evaluation Capacity Building
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Jack Bookman, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 10/31/2004
* USD 99,922.00

Two parts of this project will contribute specific items of intellectual merit
for the evaluation community: the development of a new type of assessment tools,
and compilation of significant baseline data in a new area. In particular, the
assessment items to be developed as part of this study will be appropriate not
only for the study of QL, but for other areas that utilize multiple disciplines,
institutional centers, and other non-conventional forms of curricular
organization. Developing such assessment items will be challenging, but
essential to collecting data that are aligned with the goals and standards of
QL. New assessment items in combination with existing items from other projects
will create a rich resource for data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
baseline data will include the collection and evaluation of pilot data on QL
Centers at their institutions. These data will focus on curriculum and course
development, and faculty development. Because curriculum and faculty development
are common to many educational innovations, the data collected-and methods used-
will be directly transferable to other evaluation projects. However, the unique
multi-disciplinary, center-based nature of QL means that other non-conventional
endeavors will have new resources for data
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiences from curricular reforms in calculus
and other disciplines reveal that a supportive network can be used to promote
buy-in by all affected individuals and groups. Therefore, an important part of
the QL movement is the design and formation of the National Numeracy Network
(NNN) to assist locales in which efforts are underway to translate QL from
aspiration into educational practice, to disseminate promising practices, and to
exchange information among existing and potential network sites. Planned
activities of the network include professional development experiences and
opportunities to learn about QL for educators and others and a Web site through
which resources, information, and exchange of ideas regarding QL will be made
accessible to the broadest possible audience. However, critical to the success
of NNN are the development of standards for assessment of QL-both in terms of
student learning and institutional programs. This project will begin this
important process with the collection of baseline data necessary to judge the
effectiveness of QL programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on different
aspects of policy, practice, professional development, dissemination, and
assessment, the National Numeracy Network will provide a catalyst for
quantitative literacy, especially in grades 10 to 14. QL programs participating
in the network already are working with organizations that can directly
influence a wider audience to create public pressure for QL. NNN institutions
and organizations are developing QL course materials and programs to share
through professional development opportunities, the QL Resource Library, and the
QL Web site. This project will play an important role in providing the
information necessary to make QL education a reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;