* 0308414
* BE/CNH:  Modeling Complex Interactions of Overlapping River and Road Networks in a Changing Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2009
* Alan Covich, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/28/2009
* USD 1,703,500.00

The goal of this research is to develop and test the analytical tools needed to
understand and predict the interactions and feedbacks among humans and aquatic
species across complex landscapes. The central organizing principle is that
landscape patterns and changes in river and road network structure and function
are explained by energy and time optimizations of water flows, biota, and
humans. The importance of road and river network intersections in determining
dynamic changes to landscapes will be tested using individual/agent-based
simulation modeling that integrates field-based physical, biological, and social
models. The investigators will focus on the road-river linkages because river
ecosystems are vulnerable to human-related perturbations that are related to
road access, such as invasion by non-native species and over-harvesting of fish
and shellfish. The main overarching hypothesis is that an integrated,
individual-based model will more accurately predict environmental effects than
any single physical, biotic, or social model by reducing unexplained variation.
The mechanism generating this reduction in variance results from including
cross-disciplinary connections and corresponding agent feedbacks that otherwise
would be missing in the individual disciplinary models. In order to test this
hypothesis, the investigators will develop an integrated individual-based model
of physical, biotic, and social networks. Through analyses of a case study in
Puerto Rico, the investigators expect to demonstrate that river and road
intersections bring about interaction of aquatic species and visitors with
mutual feedbacks. Dynamic interactions are captured by interdependent functions
of each individual agent on each other and each subsystem. The approach
therefore will integrate multidisciplinary field studies in geomorphology,
engineering, aquatic ecology, and social science into a unified, individual-
based model that will evaluate different dimensions of interacting human and
natural systems. The experimental design and modeling will rely on an existing
natural continuum of land use, road densities, and road types within a network
structure that reflects a hierarchy of land uses as well as geomorphic and
riverine features.

The project will make theoretical, policy, and educational contributions to
societal understanding of biocomplexity. In terms of education, two high school
teacher workshops will demonstrate the use of web-based GIS models to actively
engage high school seniors (and their teachers) in Puerto Rico and Colorado. The
project will involve extensive participation by undergraduate and graduate
research assistants and multi-institution graduate seminars in biocomplexity
that will directly engage students, faculty investigators, and managers in the
implementation and integration of interdisciplinary research. Graduate students
at University of Puerto Rico will obtain field data on ecological and economic
values of rivers in Puerto Rico. The results will also provide information about
the consequences of building new roads and closing existing roads in tropical
rainforest settings. The findings regarding how individual/agent-based models
are effective in integrating and visualizing feedback from physical, biological,
and social network interactions will be disseminated. Results of this research
should increase understanding of the natural variability of large tropical
drainage systems, and the methods to be developed should have broader
applicability for coastal-montane ecosystems ranging from North America to New
Zealand. Furthermore, we will develop a deeper understanding of how network
theory enhances communication and insight across multiple disciplines. This
project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2003 special competition
in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
and Human Systems.