* 0308631
* Exploiting Spatial and Channel Diversity in Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2002,02/28/2007
* Samir Das, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 02/28/2007
* USD 229,991.00

Mobile ad hoc networks are multi-hop wireless networks, with dynamically
changing network&lt;br/&gt;topology. Evaluating network capacity is a hard
problem in such networks because of the shared&lt;br/&gt;nature of the radio
medium and possibility of spatial reuse. The latter is again influenced by
routes&lt;br/&gt;used and node mobility. On the other hand, understanding the
network capacity in terms of available bandwidth is crucial to design effective
routing protocols. The resarchers propose empirical techniques to evaluate the
network capacity. The techniques work in conjunction with a simulator and use
mobility and session-level traces to compute capacity that can be compared
against the network utilization reported by the simulator. Preliminary
experiments indicate interesting results that more capacity is available with
higher mobility; however common routing protocols fail to utilize the additional
capacity for better routing performance. Preliminary analysis indicates that
spatial diversity is not exploited enough by conventional protocols, indicating
that multipath routing protocols and distributing traffic over multiple paths
would be quite effective.&lt;br/&gt; While investigating better techniques to
evaluate capacity will be one component of the researchers work, they will also
expend substantial effort in developing multipath protocols and techniques to
achieve better load balance. For efficiency they will focus on protocols with an
on-demand nature. The researchers indicate in this proposal how multiple, link-
or node-disjoint, loop-free routes can be computed on demand without the use of
source routing, with minimal additional overhead. The researchers will further
development and analysis of such protocols. The emphasis will be on obtaining as
many multipath&lt;br/&gt;routes as possible. Our preliminary results already
indicate that such routing mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;reduce route discovery attempts,
thus improving both delay and throughput. We will also focus
on&lt;br/&gt;evaluating techniques to distribute load on multiple routes
effectively for a fuller utilization of the&lt;br/&gt;available
capacity.&lt;br/&gt; However, we point out that the dense nature of most ad hoc
networks will form multiple routes&lt;br/&gt;in radio vicinity. In that case,
topologically disjoint routes may still share radio medium. To&lt;br/&gt;achieve
diversity further, we propose using multiple channels in the underlying medium
access&lt;br/&gt;control (MAC) layer so that independent channels can be
assigned to neighboring routes. While&lt;br/&gt;individual channels may now have
less capacity, some preliminary results indicate that
significant&lt;br/&gt;performance gains are possible if the transmitter is
capable of transmitting on multiple channels&lt;br/&gt;concurrently. The
researchers wish to explore, among other things, channel selection issues for
individual links and paths when multipath routes are available.&lt;br/&gt; To
summarize, the overall goal in this project is to better our understanding of
the capacity of&lt;br/&gt;a mobile ad hoc network operating with real network
protocols; and to exploit spatial and channel&lt;br/&gt;diversity significantly
with a synergistic use of multipath routing and multichannelMAC protocols.