* 0308699
* Collaborative Research:    Imaging of Vortex Phases in Artificially Structured Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Stuart Field, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2007
* USD 291,000.00

This collaborative experimental condensed matter physics project explores the
fundamental physics of static and dynamic phases of spatially modulated states
in superconductors. The focus is on two important problems in this area: the
role of strong magnetic fields on quantum tunneling phenomena, and the dynamic
behavior of magnetic field-induced defects in superconductors in artificially
constrained geometries. One emphasis of the work is on direct spatial imaging of
modulated superconducting states using scanning Hall probe microscopy, a
technique that allows non-invasive mapping of the local magnetic field above
superconducting and magnetic structures. This project is a collaborative effort
involving two investigators with complementary expertise in magnetism and
superconductivity. A central part of the project is the training of both
graduate and undergraduate students in physics and materials research
techniques. The skills they will develop will position them to contribute to the
nation's scientific base in a variety of future career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate two important problems
in the field of superconductivity. A key technique used throughout the project
is that of scanning Hall probe microscopy, which allows non-invasive mapping of
the local magnetic field above superconducting and magnetic structures. In the
first study, the role of strong magnetic fields on the tunneling of electrons
between two superconductors will be investigated. The physics of this tunneling
in large fields is currently only partly understood. The Hall microscope will be
particularly a powerful tool in this study, as it allows for the direct imaging
of the flowing supercurrents. In the second area of investigation, the Hall
microscope will be used to image the static and dynamic behavior of vortices in
superconductors that have been structured using micro- and nano-lithographic
techniques. One such example to be studied is a novel "vortex ratchet", in which
vortices can be moved in precisely controlled steps. This ratchet may have
possible applications in high-precision metrology. A central part of the project
is the training of both graduate and undergraduate students in physics and
materials research techniques. The skills they will develop will position them
to contribute to the nation's scientific base in a variety of future career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;