* 0308780
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Experimental Selection for Cheating in a Mutualistic Symbiont
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* James Bull, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,212.00

This study experimentally examines the symbiosis between the upside-down
jellyfish and its algal symbiont. This mutualism, with infectious transmission
of symbionts, represents a class of symbioses for which symbiont cooperation
remains unexplained. A selection experiment addresses two opposing hypotheses
for the maintenance of symbiont cooperation: Partner fidelity, in which repeated
interactions between partners favors cooperators over cheaters and partner
choice, in which hosts can differentially reward cooperating symbionts and/or
punish cheaters. Symbiont transmission between hosts is experimentally
manipulated; one treatment enforces infectious transmission- between unrelated
hosts (selection for cheating ) and the other vertical transmission- between
parent and offspring (selection for cooperation). Fitness assays on
experimentally evolved hosts and symbionts will resolve whether partner choice
or partner fidelity stabilizes cooperation in this symbiosis and whether cheater
symbionts exist in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mutualisms with infectious
transmission of symbionts are an unsolved problem in biology. Theory states that
while vertical transmission of symbionts favors cooperation, infectious
transmission favors parasitism. Nonetheless, nature abounds with mutualisms in
which the symbionts are horizontally acquired. Furthermore, bleaching in
jellyfish and related corals represents an ecologically important, yet poorly
understood breakdown of this mutualism. This study promises to help unravel the
evolutionary maintenance of these poorly understood
symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;