* 0308977
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution, Development and Functional Morphology of Damselfish Oral Jaws
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Mark Westneat, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 07/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Dissertation Research: Evolution, development and functional morphology of
damselfish oral jaws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mark W. Westneat and W. James
Cooper&lt;br/&gt;The Field Museum of Natural History and The University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of new anatomical arrangements and
novel functional abilities involves alterations in how physical structures form
during development. Understanding the evolution of vertebrate feeding therefore
requires examination of the developmental changes that have produced skulls with
different biomechanical abilities. For marine fishes such as damselfishes
(Pomacentridae: Labroidei), evolutionary changes in skull development have
functional consequences for feeding larvae and juveniles. This research will
employ a combination of shape analyses, gene expression studies and
biomechanical modeling to describe developmental changes in the shape and
function of the skulls of damselfishes, a numerically dominant component of
coral reef fish faunas. A detailed examination of adult skulls from all
damselfish genera will provide the initial framework for determining how
developmental changes have contributed to damselfish morphological and
functional evolution. By combining the results of shape analyses with computer
models capable of predicting the biomechanical abilities of fish jaws (e.g. bite
force, biting speed, degree of jaw protrusion) we will be able to describe the
connection between skull shape diversity and oral jaw functional diversity
within this fish family. Several damselfish species will then be bred in
captivity so that their embryos may be collected for developmental study.
Examination of embryonic gene expression patterns will permit testing of the
hypothesis that differences in the location and timing of expression of selected
regulatory genes are correlated with differences in adult damselfish jaw
morphology and functional abilities. Embryos of the false clown anemonefish
(Amphiprion ocellaris), the spine-cheek anemonefish (Premnas biaculeatus) and
the Garibaldi (Hypsypops rubicunda) have already been collected for this
purpose. Hatched larvae of these species (and potentially other species as well)
will also be reared through successive larval and juvenile stages in order to
track changes in skull shape and biomechanical ability throughout development.
Aspects of the proposed research have been, and will continue to be,
incorporated into public school courses through collaboration with a local
teacher.&lt;br/&gt;