* 0308799
* Dissertation Research: Testing the Effects of Changes in Egg Size on Development Time and Juvenile Quality in Echinoderms
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Robert Podolsky, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 7,612.00

Dissertation Research: Testing the effects of changes in egg size on development
time and juvenile quality in echinoderms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robert D. Podolsky
and Jonathan D. Allen&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One important trade-off in life-history evolution is
between the size and number of offspring that a female produces. For free-
spawning marine invertebrates, many models of life-history evolution assume that
the fecundity gains of a reduction in egg size are offset by an increase in time
to metamorphosis or a reduction in juvenile quality. Experimental manipulations
of egg size are a powerful method for testing this assumption and confirming
that changes in egg size alone can account for the variation in life-history
strategies among marine invertebrates. The goal of this project is to test the
effects of an experimental reduction in egg size in four species of echinoid
echinoderms, which span a range of natural egg sizes. Blastomere separations
will be used to mimic the effects of a reduction in egg size for the following
species: Arbacia punctulata, Stongylocentrotus purpuratus, Dendraster
excentricus and Clypeaster rosaceus. At different egg sizes, reductions in
parental investment are predicted to have different effects on life-history
parameters. The results of these experiments will test important assumptions
about the relationships between egg size, development time and juvenile quality
in echinoderms. In addition, these experiments will help to clarify the role of
changes in egg size in life history transitions, such as the shift from obligate
to facultative feeding.&lt;br/&gt;