* 0308040
* Geometric Variational Problems and Rearrangement Inequalities
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Almut Burchard, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 71,688.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0308040&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Almut Burchard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two sets of problems are
proposed, one related with elastic&lt;br/&gt;curves, and the other with
rearrangement inequalities. The first&lt;br/&gt;set of problems concerns the
dynamics of an elastic curve moving&lt;br/&gt;in three-dimensional space, under
forces determined by its&lt;br/&gt;curvature and subject to the constraint that
it is inextensible.&lt;br/&gt;The main question is whether solutions starting
from sufficiently&lt;br/&gt;smooth initial data exist for all time, or whether
they may&lt;br/&gt;become singular in finite time. For the long-time evolution
of&lt;br/&gt;an infinite curve, solitary waves are expected to play
an&lt;br/&gt;important role. The boundary value problem for the tension
will&lt;br/&gt;be studied in detail, with the goal of obtaining sharp bounds
for&lt;br/&gt;the tension in terms of the position and velocity of the
curve.&lt;br/&gt;In the second set of problems, the PI proposes to settle
a&lt;br/&gt;conjectured quantitative version of the classical
rearrangement&lt;br/&gt;inequality for the Coulomb energy. Furthermore, the
cases of&lt;br/&gt;equality in the Brascamp-Lieb-Luttinger inequality for
multiple&lt;br/&gt;integrals will be investigated. In addition, the PI
participates&lt;br/&gt;in two interdisciplinary collaborations, on Statistical
Network&lt;br/&gt;Calculus and its applications to data traffic (with
colleagues&lt;br/&gt;from Computer Science and Systems Engineering), and on
the&lt;br/&gt;clustering of proteins on membranes within polarized cells
(with&lt;br/&gt;colleagues from Biology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The elastic curve
equations described above provide a simple&lt;br/&gt;example of a class of
nonlinear wave equations with geometric&lt;br/&gt;forces and geometric
constraints. The analytic difficulties&lt;br/&gt;encountered in this problem,
and the techniques used to overcome&lt;br/&gt;them, are expected to be relevant
for more complex mechanical&lt;br/&gt;systems with geometric forces. While the
work is geometrically&lt;br/&gt;motivated, the dynamics of elastic wires are
clearly relevant to&lt;br/&gt;structural questions in Mechanical Engineering.
The basic&lt;br/&gt;well-posedness questions addressed here could have
implications&lt;br/&gt;for the convergence of numerical solution schemes.
Rearrangement&lt;br/&gt;inequalities are among the few geometric tools for
minimizing&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear, non-convex functionals. The proposed work
strives to&lt;br/&gt;sharpen those tools and extend their applicability.
Implications&lt;br/&gt;include the stability of symmetric galaxy configurations
and&lt;br/&gt;other dynamical stability problems. A notable contribution
of&lt;br/&gt;the applied collaborations is that they expose researchers
in&lt;br/&gt;Biology and Engineering to the everyday use of simple,
but&lt;br/&gt;rigorous Mathematics. The Network Calculus results center
on&lt;br/&gt;questions of admission control and service guarantees in
large&lt;br/&gt;data networks. The biological work has implication for
the&lt;br/&gt;mechanics of protein sorting, which is crucial to the function
of&lt;br/&gt;the cell at a basic level.&lt;br/&gt;