* 0308958
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Endocrine Mediation of Alternative Reproductive Tactics in Anurans
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Rosemary Knapp, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 05/31/2005
* USD 13,067.00

Proposal 0308958 - Endocrine mediation of alternative reproductive tactics in
anurans &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Rosemary Knapp and Christopher J.
Leary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lay
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physiological mechanisms contributing to the
expression of alternative male mating tactics have been studied most extensively
in fishes and reptiles that typically advertise using visual signals. Less is
known regarding processes regulating vocal signal production in anuran
amphibians (frogs and toads), despite the pervasiveness of alternative tactics
in this group. For example, male toads typically vocalize to attract mates, but
some individuals adopt alternative non-calling "satellite" tactics. Satellite
males characteristically remain in close proximity to calling males and attempt
to intercept incoming females attracted to vocalizing individuals. Theory
predicts that these plastic adult behavioral phenotypes should be subject to
effects of hormones that mediate the expression of one behavior over the other.
In anurans, it is thought that alternation between calling and non-calling
behavior is related to a reciprocal interaction between circulating levels of
the "stress" steroid hormone corticosterone and sex steroids (androgens) that is
driven by depletion of energy reserves during vocalization. Preliminary data
support a relationship between corticosterone levels and depletion of energy
reserves during vocal bouts but indicate that alternation between calling and
satellite behavior is independent of androgens. The proposed studies will test
an alternative model to determine the physiological basis for male reproductive
behavior in toads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;