* 0308000
* Queueing Network-Model Human Processor (QN-MHP):  A Computational Model and a Simulation Technology for Analyzing Human Multitask Performance in Human-Computer Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Yili Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Comprehensive and computational models of human performance have both scientific
and practical importance to human-computer system design. This project will make
a significan contribution in the area of HCI modeling. The PI will expand a
computational model and a simulation technology (implementation) called Queueing
Network-Model Human Processor (QN-MHP) he has been developing. QN-MHP is unique,
in that it integrates two complementary approaches to cognitive modeling: the
procedure and production systems approach (exemplified by the MHP/GOMS family of
models, ACT-R, CAPS, EPIC, and SOAR), and the queueing network approach.
Procedure and production systems models have achieved great success in modeling,
and in generating the detailed procedures and actions that a person might take
in performing, a wide range of tasks; their shortcoming is that although they
employ mathematics to analyze specific aspects of their models, they lack
mathematical theories to represent the overall structure of their models. The
queueing network model is able to integrate a large number of influential
mathematical models of mental structure as special cases (such as Sternberg's
serial stages model, McClelland's cascade model, and Schweikert's critical path
network model), and is in general well suited for modeling dynamic and complex
tasks and architectural arrangements of processes; as a mathematical theory
alone, however, queueing networks cannot be used to generate detailed actions of
a person in specific task situations, lacking procedural knowledge a person may
employ in accomplishing his/her specific goals. QN-MHP integrates these two
approaches by expanding the three discrete serial stages of the MHP into three
continuous-transmission subnetworks of a queueing network, by defining each
server with procedure functions, and by using a GOMS-style method for task
analysis. In this project, the PI will use extensive driving simulator data as a
testbed to (1) study different methods of modeling concurrent tasks with QN-MHP;
(2) apply queueing network theory such as optimal network load balancing and
server scheduling in multitask modeling; (3) perform time-series modeling and
visualization of the relationship between queueing network indices such as
network sojourn time and server congestion with human performance data such as
time, error, and mental workload; (4) further develop QN-MHP to cover a broader
range of human performance such as providing certain servers with production
capabilities for problem solving; and (5) further develop the simulation
technology of QN-MHP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The QN-MHP simulator
is implemented in ProModel, a widely used software package that requires minimal
learning time and allows an analyst to visualize in real time the QN-MHP
internal network processes, in addition to the final statistical outcomes. These
features are valuable not only for interface analysis, but also for promoting
teaching and training in cognitive analysis and modeling. This software and
other research results will be made readily available by the PI to
practitioners, researchers, and educators. With the proliferation of life-
critical multimodal, multitask HCI interfaces such as in-vehicle and aviation
devices, QN-MHP will significantly impact system safety and product usability.