* 0308626
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Recovery of Value-added Fossil Resins from El-Maghara Coal in Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 29,822.00

0308626&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research project between Dr. Jan D. Miller, Department of
Metallurgical Engineering, University of Utah, Salt lake City, Utah and Dr.
Selim Mostafa, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI),
Helwan, Egypt. Coal is one of the principal sources of energy, and it has been
identified recently also as an important source for fossil resins. The
investigators will conduct a comparative research aimed at developing a
methodology for the recovery of the value added fossil resin from El-Maghara
(Egypt) coal and decreasing its sulfur content. El-Maghara coal contains organic
and inorganic sulfur usually as fossil resin and pyrite respectively. Technology
for the separation and extraction of resin will be developed based on advanced
characterization using x-ray micro CT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The use of
coal in thermal and power stations and during combustion produce large amounts
of sulfur oxides, which contaminate the environment, in addition to burning
large amounts of the fossil resins which have significant economic value. The
presence of resins in Maghara coal makes it potentially much more valuable once
a method for an economic recovery and extraction of resins from that coal is
developed, as this project is seeking. This will be of considerable benefit to
the Egyptian coal industry, and to similar coal-producing countries. This
project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides
grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these
cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;