* 0308333
* Development of a New Undergraduate Science Service Course to Attract Hispanic Students to Science: Geography, Resources, and Environment of Hispanic America
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Stern, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2006
* USD 69,992.00

&lt;br/&gt;Geology (42) We are designing a new lower-division science course,
entitled Geography, Resources, and Environment of Hispanic America. This course
is being adapted from a course entitled Geology &amp; Development of Modern
Africa developed in 1994 with CCLI support by Barbara Tewksbury at Hamilton
College. Her course was designed to attract African-American students to science
and increase the awareness of other students. Our adaptation is trying to
attract Hispanic students into science and geoscience majors. The course is
being designed as an interdisciplinary exploration of several examples of how
the physical environments of Mexico, Central America, South America, and the
Caribbean have influenced the prehistory, history, culture, and economy of Latin
America. This material is being presented as a series of six modules that stress
the role that the physical environment plays in determining culture,
development, and history. The course is being designed primarily to attract
Hispanic students to science and but is also serving to teach non-Hispanic
students about scientific issues related to Latin America, and is satisfying 3
of the 9 hour science requirement for UTD undergraduates. The course is writing
intensive and is requiring the student to&lt;br/&gt;partner with correspondents
in Latin American universities in a research project. Enrollment is being
limited to 30 students during the time that course development is supported by
this grant. The course is being developed, taught, evaluated, revised, taught
again, and revised again during this grant period. Evaluations are being
supervised by faculty from the UTD Department of Science Education. &lt;br/&gt;