* 0309967
* Experimental Study of Silver in High-Temperature Magmatic-Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Philip Candela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2007
* USD 330,000.00

EAR-0309967&lt;br/&gt;Candela&lt;br/&gt;Magmatic-hydrothermal ores, such as many
porphyry, skarn and related ores, as well as many epithermal deposits, are
related spatially and temporally to intermediate to felsic intrusive igneous
rocks. We propose to establish a preliminary baseline for the physical chemistry
of silver in magmatic-hydrothermal systems by examining the partitioning of
silver among coexisting melts, crystalline sulfide, metal and oxides phases.
These data will allow the estimation of a model activity ratio of Ag:Au:Cu in
high-temperature porphyry type fluids. Additionally, these data can be used to
estimate how the crystallization of Cu-Fe sulfides from a hydrothermal fluid
changes the ratio of Ag to Au in the fluid, and how the crystallization or
destruction of magmatic sulfide or oxide phases might modify the silver content
of high-level magmas. This will allow more quantitative testing of hypotheses
such as the suggestion that pulses of saline magmatic fluids into the epithermal
environment can supply significant quantities of silver, or that the gold and
silver budgets of porphyry type ores is controlled by the temperature dependent
partitioning of Ag and Au into Cu-Fe sulfides. Volatile phases will be trapped
in quartz fluid inclusions and analyzed by LA-ICPMS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
data will serve as a basis for the construction of exploration models for both
gold and silver deposits. Further, our group has a track record involving a mix
of high school, undergraduate, masters and doctoral students in our research.
All of our graduate students are involved in undergraduate teaching.
Furthermore, we actively participate in outreach in a variety of formats (e.g.
Partners in Education Program (PEP) sponsored by GSA; training for the Ranger
Interpreter Program in Yosemite National Park for the National Park Service; and
visits to elementary schools).&lt;br/&gt;