* 0309184
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: History and Consequences of Self-incompatibility in Solanaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Joshua Kohn, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2006
* USD 9,000.00

Different systems of mating can have profound consequences for
the&lt;br/&gt;adaptive potential of species. Despite the demonstrable genetic
advantages&lt;br/&gt;of outcrossing, a significant proportion of plant species
self-fertilize&lt;br/&gt;occasionally or habitually. This proposal aims to
accurately reconstruct&lt;br/&gt;the history of mating system variation in
Solanaceae, an economically&lt;br/&gt;important plant family. The proposal
identifies a new approach to&lt;br/&gt;reconstruction of mating system ancestry,
using a common genetic system&lt;br/&gt;involved prevention of self-
fertilization. This genetic system, called&lt;br/&gt;self-incompatibility,
prevents a hermaphrodite plants own pollen from&lt;br/&gt;fertilizing its
ovules. &lt;br/&gt; This proposal unites a framework of ideas from molecular
genetics,&lt;br/&gt;theoretical population biology, and statistical methods to
develop a tests&lt;br/&gt;of hypotheses of a) irreversibility of mating system
characters and b) the&lt;br/&gt;effects of a widespread mating system character
on species diversification&lt;br/&gt;rates. Thus, the ultimate goal of this
study is the understanding of how&lt;br/&gt;mating systems affect the
multiplication and survival of plant species,&lt;br/&gt;one of the most diverse
and important groups of terrestrial organisms.&lt;br/&gt;