* 0309686
* Integrated Mineralogic and Rock Magnetic Study of Silicate-Hosted Magnetization
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 365,403.00

EAR-0309686&lt;br/&gt;Renne&lt;br/&gt;This study will clarify the origin of
uniquely stable magnetizations associated with crystallographically oriented
inclusions of magnetite in silicates (COMIS). These feature are common in
several minerals in various igneous and metamorphic rock types, and previous
work shows that they preserve exceptionally robust information about Earth's
ancient magnetic field. This work will combine submicroscopic mineralogical
techniques, including scanning and transmission electron microscopy, electron
backscattered diffraction, atomic and magnetic force microscopy, to determine
how COMIS form. Rock magnetic analyses combined with magnetic force microscopy
will be used to determine the specific mechanisms by which these features
acquire their magnetizations. These studies will focus on samples from many
different geologic ages and environments. A suite of samples drilled from the
sea-floor will be used to evaluate the outstanding question of whether COMIS
could be responsible for oceanic magnetic anomalies, whose recognition led to
the theory of plate tectonics. A significant goal of the project is to perfect
methods for rock-magnetic analysis of individual silicate crystals, including
development of methods for determining the intensity and orientation of Earth's
magnetic field in the geologic past. Information about the evolution of the
magnetic field has implications for the evolution of Earth's core, where the
magnetic field originates. The study is also expected to yield an improved basis
for deducing plate tectonic movements of the lithosphere for times prior to 200
million years ago when the sea-floor record is nonexistent. The project will
involve a PhD student and collaboration with National Labs, National Facilities,
and colleagues at other academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;