* 0309680
* Timing and Kinematics of Deformation of the Kahiltna Terrane, South Central Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Donald Fisher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 03/31/2007
* USD 293,008.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will conducut a study of the timing and
kinematics of deformation in the Kahiltna terrane, a Jurassic- Cretaceous flysch
sequence that defines the enigmatic collision zone between the Talkeetna
superterrane (the Peninsular, Alexander, and Wrangellia terranes) with the pre-
Jurassic margin of North America. This study involves structural mapping of
bedding, cleavages, lineations, and fold axes. Incremental strain analysis of
syntectonic fibers associated with a regionally pervasive slaty cleavage will be
used to constrain the kinematics associated with early folds and penetrative
strain. Ultimately, he would like to characterize the spatial distribution of
strain magnitudes, orientations, and histories and evaluate these results in the
context of regional structural patterns. Analysis of porphyroblasts and fabrics
in contact aureoles of early Tertiary plutons will be used to evaluate patterns
of post-collision penetrative strain. He has successfully evaluated strain
within contact aureoles around plutons in the Clearwater Mountains but would
like to extend these analyses to other parts of the Alaska Range. He also plans
to use laser ablation 40 Ar/39 Ar dating of muscovite and biotite grains
observed in pressure shadows and in the necks of boudins that record syncleavage
deformation to assess the timing of fabric-forming events. The age of
deformation could be quantified by selectively dating syntectonic grains that
grew below the blocking temperature of argon. Such results could be compared
from area to area to determine if deformation was diachronous along the
collision or if fabrics are not regionally correlative. By combining studies of
penetrative strain and kinematics with dating of Mesozoic fabrics, he will
address a number of longstanding questions related to Cordilleran tectonics:
When did the penetrative strain occur in the Kahiltna slates? What is the
kinematics associated with this deformation? What is the kinematics of post-
collision deformation in the Tertiary? The PI will focus on four specific
transects across the Kahiltna terrane at different positions along the southern
Alaska orocline. In these areas, he has documented the ubiquitous occurrence of
fibrous incremental strain markers to be used for quantification of incremental
strain histories. At two localities (the Cantwell area and Peters Hills), he has
observed biotite and muscovite (suitable for 40 Ar/39 Ar geochronology) in
pressure shadows around pyrite clusters. All the areas where he proposes
detailed mapping and sample analysis are accessible by road or charter
flight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to support the
research of a Ph.D. candidate at Penn State,&lt;br/&gt;Sara Bier. Support is
requested for three geoscience undergraduates who will assist with fieldwork and
conduct research for their own undergraduate theses. The GIS compilation of
structural, lithologic, and geochronological data will provide an accessible
digital database to interested scholastic institutions (high schools, colleges,
and universities) and organizations (National Park Service, USGS, and the State
of Alaska Geophysical and Geological Surveys). Sara Bier will give presentations
and conduct workshops on aspects of this research at non-PhD.-granting
institutions including Juniata College and Ferrum College.&lt;br/&gt;