* 0309839
* A GPS Study of the Large-Scale Neotectonics of Northern Central America
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Dennis DeMets, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2008
* USD 169,263.00

This project is a five-year collaborative geodetic study of the large-scale
neotectonics of northern Central America, where the western end of the Caribbean
plate abuts both the Middle America subduction zone and Motagua-Polochic strike-
slip fault system. The scientific objectives are as follows: (1) Estimate the
magnitude and distribution of frictional coupling along the Cocos-Caribbean
subduction interface, (2) Measure the rate of strike-slip motion at one or more
points across the Motagua-Polochic fault system, (3) Measure extension across
the Central American "basin-and-range" south of the Motagua-Polochic fault
system, (4) Measure how quickly strain accumulates across faults in the Central
American volcanic arc that accommodate dextral forearc shear in response to
oblique subduction, (5) Test whether significant regional uplift occurs,
possibly in response to the hypothesized detachment of the slab subducting
beneath this region, and (6) Improve kinematic models of the Caribbean plate
geodetic reference frame. Work on the first objective is contributing to an
emerging understanding of the fundamental role of aseismic processes in
accommodating subduction. Progress on objectives 2-5 is advancing the present
poor understanding of the neotectonics and seismic hazards at the western,
trailing edge of the Caribbean plate. Work on the final objective benefits
multiple NSF-sponsored GPS studies of deformation around the complexly deforming
margins of the Caribbean plate. These objectives are being accomplished through
modeling of velocities determined from annual or more frequent occupations of
50-100 GPS sites distributed throughout Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador and
velocities at seven continuous GPS sites that are already operating in these
countries. Modeling is done using three-dimensional finite element code that
allows for a tectonically realistic representation of the study area, including
laterally- and vertically-varying material properties representative of an
ocean-continent subduction boundary. All measurements are made by local
scientists, except for the initial network reconnaissance and installation,
which were a collaborative effort.

The project is structured to benefit significantly the research careers of
Honduran, Guatemalan, and Salvadoran scientists with whom are collaborating. The
budget includes annual operating funds, GPS receivers, and travel funds for
Honduran seismologist and Guatemalan seismologists, and possibly an earth
scientist from El Salvador. Ultimately, progress on the goals above will improve
estimates of the likely frequency of significant earthquakes along a variety of
faults that present a seismic hazard in this extensive region.