* 0309870
* Volcanic Processes in Volatile-Rich Magmas:  Constraints From Phase Equilibria and the Role of the Fluid Phase
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Malcolm Rutherford, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2006
* USD 251,347.00

Volcanic processes in volatile-rich magmas: constraints from phase equilibria
and the role of the fluid phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; P.I. Malcolm J.
Rutherford, Geology Department, Brown
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; The research proposed here
involves three projects, all directed at developing a more complete
understanding of how processes such as magma mixing, crystallization, crystal-
melt separation, and degassing occur in subvolcanic gas-rich magma systems. The
tasks involve a range of analytical work on samples collected during field
study, and on samples prepared experimentally under controlled conditions. The
first project is an investigation of the pressure effect on hornblende-
plagioclase-melt equilibria with a major objective being an improved
geobarometer for hornblende-bearing volcanic rocks. A second objective is to
better understand magmatic processes and the role of a magma storage zone at
Mount St Helens. This volcano is one of the most active in the USA, and study of
this center represents a great opportunity to gain an understanding of how
volcanic processes work in such magma systems, given the variety and number of
eruptions at this center. The second research task in this proposal involves
experiments to investigate a theory regarding the possible role of a volcanic
fluid phase transfer as an explanation for the origin of oxidation and sulfur
enrichment in silica-rich magma systems. This task is one in which fundamental
data will be obtained on the composition of volcanic gases as a function of
magmatic conditions and the composition of coexisting crystals and melt. Data
such as this is fundamental in one of the main methodologies of volcanic
eruption prediction, that of monitoring the composition of the gases released.
The task is focused on how this process occurred at Mount Pinatubo in 1991, but
similar injections of basaltic magma into pre-existing silica-rich magma storage
zones appear to happen regularly, and it is often theorized that the mafic
intrusion triggers the eruption of the silicic magma. The process of two magma
interactions in a subvolcanic magma storage zone is one of fundamental processes
that might control the changes in behavior of an erupting volcano. The final
task is somewhat exploratory, building on observations that have recently been
made in studies of the Soufriere Hills eruption and the much older and larger
Fish CanyonTuff eruption. Cyclically zoned hornblende crystals in the eruption
products appear to record a recurring process in the pre-eruption magmas. The
composition zones carry information about the processes involved in their
formation and, potentially about the time span of their growth. The research
proposed is a preliminary attempt to extract this information using a detailed
compositional and modeling study of these crystals. The project will involve the
P.I., and three graduate students, two of whom are women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;