* 0309064
* Collaborative Research:  The Architecture and Paleoceanograpy of North Atlantic Sediment Drifts - Seismic Profiling, Swath Mapping, and Coring
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Gregory Mountain, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 02/28/2007
* USD 393,949.00

Mountain, Manley, Wright proposals&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0095254
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the world's deep ocean water
acquires its chemical and physical characteristics in the northern North
Atlantic and adjacent regions. Surface water sinks in the North Atlantic and
flows southward to mix with other sources of deep water in what is known as the
global conveyor belt. This deep water flow erodes sediment and ultimately
deposits it in large drift deposits. These deposits record the history of deep
water formation, which in large part reflects changes in the earth's
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project will undertake a detailed
study of the seismic architecture of two large drift deposits in the North
Atlantic. Specific aspects of the project are to obtain seismic reflection data
with which to interpret the early history of drift formation and to examine
modern processes that shape and modify the drift deposits. These data will
provide critical new information on these drifts and will also be used in
planning future drilling to sample drift sediments directly. This is a
cooperative study involving investigators at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory,
Rutgers University, and Middlebury College. Field data will be acquired on a
cruise of the RV Knorr in mid-2002.&lt;br/&gt;