* 0309086
* RUI:Preliminary Foraminiferal Porosity-Based Niobrara Paleoceanographic Investigation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Cynthia Fisher, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2005
* USD 47,641.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Significant progress has been made in understanding the water
column and circulation of the mid-Cretaceous Western Interior Sea by utilizing
planktic foraminiferal porosity of the species Hedbergella delrioensis as a
proxy for water temperature and relative density (Fisher et al., 2003 and Fisher
et al., in review). The water column was significantly stratified; thereby
inhibiting wind- mixing. Water mass mixing occurred along oceanic-fronts
resulting in the formation of endemic Western Interior waters. Fronts may
explain the paradox of a stratified, highly productive ocean, where nutrient
renewal to the photic zone should have been inhibited due to the density
stratification. Mixing along fronts provided nutrients to the central, more
normal marine waters, to stimulate and sustain the high primary productivity
recorded by the high organic-carbon accumulation found in the strata. Mixing in
the Western Interior Seaway produced relatively cool water that was exported out
of the sea to the south at depth (Fisher, 2002; Fisher, in review). As the
Greenhorn Sea evolved, the strata of the Hartland Shale and Bridge Creek
Limestone members indicate that the sea became more stratified by the addition
of warmer layers, some of which were produced within the seaway (Fisher, 2002;
Fisher, in review).&lt;br/&gt;Although much has been learned about the evolution
of this important epicontinental sea of the greenhouse Earth, much remains to be
learned. Due to the indurated nature of the limestones of the Greenhorn
Formation, no examination of the development of Milankovitch cyclicity has been
possible using the porosity method. Conducting porosity analyses on foraminifers
from the Niobrara Formation is expected to provide data that will assist in
understanding how the astronomical orbital cycles may have amplified terrestrial
processes such as increased runoff, delivery of detrital material to the sea,
and changed the mixing ratio of Tethyan-sourced versus Boreal-sourced waters.
This information could prove critical to a greater understanding of the
development of Cretaceous source-rock strata. An improved understanding of the
Cretaceous greenhouse ocean circulation could also assist in understanding how
future climate changes impact Earth. &lt;br/&gt;There are three goals to this
pilot project: 1) establish a new proxy species adequate for porosity analysis
in rocks younger than early Santonian (Hedbergella delrioensis has its global
extinction in the early Santonian (Caron, 1985) and therefore would not be
available for the entire duration of the Niobrara); 2) determine if there are
substantial differences in the temperature and water column stratification in
the Niobrara as compared to the Greenhorn; and 3) determine the feasibility of
investigating the origin of the bedding couplets found in the Niobrara. Results
of the pilot project should not only establish the feasibility of conducting a
large-scale geographic and stratigraphic porosity study of the Niobrara
Formation and equivalents that can be used to reconstruct circulation of the
Niobrara Sea through time; but should provide preliminary results about the
origin of couplet formation and provide important insights into the development
of the Western Interior Seaway over the longer time-frame of second-order sea-
level changes.&lt;br/&gt;This research will have an impact on teaching and
learning in that the investigation will be carried out by the PI and two
undergraduate research assistants over a period of one year beginning in June,
2003. The undergraduate students will be involved in every aspect of the work.
All will participate in sampling the Berthoud State No. 4 core at the Denver
United States Geological Survey Core Research Center. The students will be
involved in all aspects of data collection, including operating the new
Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope, interpreting the data and
disseminating results in professional presentations and publications. The
results of the research will be integrated into the West Chester University
Introduction to Oceanography laboratories on paleoceanographic reconstruction
and geologic proxies. The strong established record of involving
underrepresented groups in research will be continued. The selection for
undergraduate research assistants will take into account the under-
representation of women and minorities in the Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;