* 0309701
* Quantization for Signal Compression, Classification, and Mixture Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Robert Gray, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2007
* USD 637,863.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0309701&lt;br/&gt;Robert M. Gray&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research is about the theory and design of
systems for communicating and interpreting information bearing signals such as
images, video, and speech. The main focus is on methods for reducing the
complexity of signals while retaining or extracting essential information. The
algorithms typically quantize or compress the data efficiently into a simpler
signal that can be transmitted or stored efficiently and then used in place of
the original. They can facilitate identification of the data as belonging to
some class or type. Examples of such signal processing include analog-to-digital
conversion, speech and image coding, speech recognition, and segmenting images
into distinct regions of interest. The research involves the fundamental theory
of such systems and draws on ideas from information theory, statistical signal
processing, and statistics. It also involves applications, especially algorithms
for classifying and segmenting images and for content-addressable browsing
through image databases.&lt;br/&gt;The basic tools come from modeling, density
estimation, compression, coding, classification, and segmentation. They enable
both theoretical characterizations of optimal performance and associated
algorithms by which codes are optimized for specific applications, for example,
systems for compression and segmentation of images for communications, analysis,
and retrieval. Tools are drawn from four fundamental ideas of information theory
and signal processing: vector quantization, mixture models, relative entropy
(Kullback-Leibler information) measures of distortion or distance between
probability distributions, and universal coding. Of particular interest is the
theory of high rate vector quantization and its applications to statistical
image classification and segmentation. Specific applications of interest include
automatic&lt;br/&gt;segmentation of multimodal images and of categorizing images
taken internally in gas pipelines in order to quantify pipeline integrity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;