* 0309291
* Low-temperature Magnetism of Magnetite: Fundamental Processes and Paleomagnetic Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Michael Jackson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 152,273.00

EAR-0309291&lt;br/&gt;Moskowitz,
Bruce&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of magnetic
domain imaging, laboratory magnetic measurements, and numerical modeling studies
will be used to study the low-temperature (120 K) phase transition of magnetite.
The major goal of the proposed activity is magnetic imaging of micromagnetic
structures in magnetite particles below the Verwey transition. Low temperature
domain states will be imaged using (1) a dried Bitter method adapted for
cryogenic temperatures and (2) low-temperature magnetic force microscopy. A
unique aspect of this study will be to complement the domain imaging with in
situ crystallographic orientation of magnetite particles by electron back
scatter diffraction analysis. With the additional crystallographic information,
the relative importance of magnetocrystalline, magnetoelastic, and magnetostatic
anisotropies to micromagnetic structures at room temperature and below the
Verwey transition can be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
activity will improve our understanding of the magnetic behavior of magnetite
below room temperature. Further, the behavior of magnetic domain structures
during cooling or warming through the Verwey transition will provide insights
into the mechanisms responsible for the "permanent" magnetic memory of fine
(1-20 micrometer) particles of magnetite, the primary source of information
about past geomagnetic field behavior. Finally, the project will provide
critical experimental testing of theoretical micromagnetic models, provide new
and important data on micromagnetic structures and advance our understanding of
the physical basis of paleomagnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed work will provide professional training of a post doctoral student,
design and construct a new scientific instrument adding to research
infrastructure, and the furthering of research partnerships among collaborators
in geology, physics, and microbiology. Moreover, the research will likely lead
to new "tools" which can be exploited by other investigators, and produce data
that will be appropriate for inclusion in the rock magnetic database currently
under development.&lt;br/&gt;