* 0309276
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Interrelationships Among Perianth Size, Inbreeding, and Divergence in the Plant Boerhavia (Nyctaginaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Paul Manos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2006
* USD 10,180.00

This research concerns a group of approximately 22 plant species that has
diversified in the Sonoran and Chihuahuan Deserts, the genus Boerhavia. Species
of Boerhavia can self-pollinate, and also have very different flower sizes,
which affects how often insects visit and transfer pollen between plants. This
project tests whether species with smaller flowers have a greater amount of
genetic differentiation between populations that are highly inbred, because
pollen can not frequently flow between populations. Genetic fingerprinting
techniques will establish the proportion of seeds on a plant that are sired by
other individuals. This will be done for many individuals per population, for
all North American species. The same data will also provide estimates of the
differences between populations, and their level of inbreeding. Combining this
data with the evolutionary history of Boerhavia, it will be possible to test
whether species with smaller flowers exhibit populations diverging into
genetically distinct species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
training for N. Douglas in botany and population biology. Mexican botanists are
collaborating in this research. The project will estimate the total genetic
diversity of four extremely rare, unprotected species in the U.S. and Mexico.
Thus, it will find an audience among botanists, ecologists, and conservationists
in both nations. &lt;br/&gt;