* 0309038
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Linking Development with Evolution: Morphological and Ecological Consequences Associated with Walking Stick Limb Regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Douglas Emlen, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,428.00

Dissertation Research: Linking Development with Evolution: morphological and
ecological consequences associated with limb regeneration in walking
sticks.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Douglas Emlen&lt;br/&gt;Tara
Prestholdt&lt;br/&gt;University of Montana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Walking Sticks
(Order: Phasmida) are unique among insects in that they regularly shed and
regenerate lost legs. However, this developmental capacity comes at a price:
resources used to re-grow a leg come at the expense of other structures.
Depending on the species, walking sticks regenerating a leg may experience
decreased wing area (as in Sipyloidea sipylus - the pink winged walking stick),
decreased fecundity (as in Carasious morosus, the common walking stick), and/or
decreased weapon size (as in Eurycantha calcarata - the Giant spiny stick insect
that has enlarged hind legs used in male-male competitions). Developmental
tradeoffs associated with leg regeneration may have important performance and
fitness consequences for these animals in the wild (e.g. impaired flight ability
or decreased fighting ability). However, these animals remain almost entirely
unexplored in their natural habitats, and it is not yet known how often these
animals shed and regenerate limbs in their natural environment. This project
entails a rigorous study of the causes and consequences of walking stick leg-
regeneration in the wild. By (1) demonstrating how often leg-regeneration
occurs, (2) what the consequences of regeneration are, and (3) placing this
information within an explicit ecological context, we will increase our
understanding of how developmental processes (such as regeneration) impact
evolution. The concept of tradeoffs can be generalized, and the idea that
regeneration has measurable costs - and that these costs differ in predictable
ways - can help explain patterns associated with regeneration and the evolution
of regenerative capacities across a breadth of taxa.&lt;br/&gt;