* 0309644
* Development of Empirically Based Methodology for Comprehensive Verification of Radar Rainfall Products
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Grzegorz Ciach, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2007
* USD 281,026.00

0309644&lt;br/&gt;Ciach&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop new
methods for characterization of radar rainfall (RR) estimates in terms of their
relation to the physical truth. The proposed duration of this research is 3
years. The project will result in tools allowing systematic quantification of
the systematic and random uncertainties in different RR products over a broad
range of spatiotemporal scales. This research will include both the
reflectivity-based and polarimetry-based RR estimates. The analyses will be
based on unique ground reference (GR) facilities that have become available
recently. Four major tasks in this project are summarized below: Preparing an
empirical basis for the analyses. Large sample of accurate GR data from a super-
dense raingauge network will be collected and augmented with data from the
Little Washita Micronet and the Oklahoma Mesonet. Corresponding radar
reflectivity and polarimetric radar data will be acquired and used to generate
different RR products. Developing methods for statistical filtering of GR
uncertainties. They are necessary for quantitative evaluation of RR estimates
based on single-gauge GR. Using the accurate GR, we will test the methods and
assess their accuracy for different situations. Analyzing and modeling of the RR
uncertainty structure. We will develop an empirically based model of
statistical-functional relations between RR estimates, the true rainfall, and
the uncertainties. We will study scale dependences in the model. Developing
systematic methodology for verification of RR products. We will study the
meaning and importance of different performance measures from the perspective of
RR applications. The performance measures will be completed with their
confidence bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of this project are
summarized below: It will advance understanding of the physical meaning and
practical value of radar rainfall. This will promote development of improved
rainfall measurement techniques. The large sample of multiscale raingauge data
and different RR products will constitute a unique high-quality scientific data-
set that we will make available for the whole community through our ftp-site.
Quantitative information about the radar rainfall uncertainties can be
assimilated into the hydrological and precipitation forecasting models. This
will improve reliability of the forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will
directly participate in this research and in broad publicizing of its results.
This project will be a substantial part of their
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;