* 0309092
* Collaborative Research: Patterns of Diversity and Faunal Turnover at a Late Cambrian Trilobite Extinction Event: Testing for Phylogenetic, Stratigraphic and Environmental Biases
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Stephen Westrop, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2008
* USD 160,000.00

Collaborative Research: Patterns of diversity and faunal turnover at a Late
Cambrian trilobite extinction event: testing for stratigraphic, environmental
and phylogenetic biases&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stephen Westrop, Univ. Oklahoma
EAR-0309092&lt;br/&gt;Jonathan Adrain, Univ. Iowa
EAR-0308685&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the great
challenges of paleontology is to understand mass extinctions in the fossil
record - geologically brief episodes in which ecosystems collapsed and biotas
were decimated. Paleontologists are becoming increasingly aware that various
biases related to physical processes or errors in the classification of fossils
can distort the pattern of extinction, or even create the illusion of extinction
where none exists. For example, sea level changes influence our perception of
extinction events through erosion or non-preservation of fossils in critical
intervals of the rock record. Such biases must be stripped away before we can
get an accurate estimate of the magnitude of extinction and assess the processes
that might be responsible. This project evaluates biases and examines potential
extinction mechanisms in the record of Cambrian trilobites, a group of
arthropods that were among the dominant animals in marine environments about
half-a-billion years ago. The results are likely to throw new light on other
mass extinction events, particularly by providing a better understanding of the
impact of various biases on our recognition of such events. The project also has
a significant educational component through the participation of graduate
students at the University of Oklahoma and the University of Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;