* 0309571
* Molecular Diversity, Biogeography, and Species Concepts in Plankton Foraminifer
* GEO,EAR
* 11/18/2002,06/30/2004
* Richard Norris, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2004
* USD 77,900.00

9909658&lt;br/&gt;Norris &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleoceanographic and
evolutionary studies of planktic foraminifera depend upon an assumption that
individuals in morphologically-defined species share common ecologies and
evolutionary histories. We will analyze modern planktic foraminifera using
multiple genes to study the phylogeny and genetic variation in this widespread
group of pelagic organisms. Our objectives are to (1) estimate the genetic
biodiversity of living planktic foraminifera; (2) study the geographic and water
column distribution of the major genotypes of these taxa in relation to
hydrographic conditions, and (3) examine the morphological and stable isotopic
characteristics of the genotypes to assess their degree of ecological
distinctiveness. By integrating to the genetic analyses, ecological analyses of
the oceanographic data from the collected localities, as well as stable isotopic
analyses of the foraminiferal shells, we will be able to test the importance of
water-masses and/or depth habitat in the evolutionary history and species
distribution of planktic foraminifera. Our work will help adjust morphological
species concepts to better match the genetic and ecological subdivisions of
natural populations. This is a crucial requirement to create realistic
paleoclimatic analyses based on foraminifer distributions and paleoclimate
transfer functions as well as to understand the biodiversity and evolution of
pelagic organisms. &lt;br/&gt;