* 0309607
* An Investigation of Dynamic Capillary Pressure in Two-Phase Porous Media Flows
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Michael Celia, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2007
* USD 294,261.00

Celia&lt;br/&gt;0309607&lt;br/&gt;Models of multi-phase flow in porous media
typically include an equilibrium constitutive relationship between capillary
pressure (Pc) and saturation (S). Use of an equilibrium relationship implies
that time scales of dynamics between those variables are short (fast) relative
to time scales associated with other system dynamics. Practical guidance in the
soil science literature regarding time scales for equilibrium between Pc and S
indicates that an equilibrium relationship may not be justified. An alternative
formulation has been developed in which a dynamic, time-dependent relationship
between Pc and S is introduced. Initial investigations of data reported in the
literature indicate that dynamics in the Pc-S relationship exist, and associated
analysis shows that those dynamics can be captured within this dynamic
formulation. While this formulation is promising, there are a number of
significant aspects that need to be investigated, from the fundamental nature of
the underlying dynamics, to the ways in which the dynamics change as a function
of spatial averaging scale and degree of heterogeneity. To address the nature of
these dynamics, three hypotheses are posed, which form the basis for the
proposed work:&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 1: Viscous Effects at the Pore Scale lead to
a Dynamic Capillary Pressure. &lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 2: Dynamic Capillary
Pressure effects are progressively more important as averaging length scale
increases and as the degree of subscale heterogeneity
increases.&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 3: The dynamic coefficient in the new
formulation is not constant but a well-defined function of saturation
Sw.&lt;br/&gt;These hypotheses will be tested using computational models of
multiphase flow across a range of length scales. If these hypotheses are true,
then the way that two-phase flow problems have been described and modeled for
more than 50 years will need to be modified, with a fundamentally new parameter
introduced, and a concomitant new way of thinking about these
systems.&lt;br/&gt; This project will have broader impacts beyond the specific
porous media research. In addition to usual development of graduate students,
the project will include collaborations with colleagues at the University of
Bergen (Norway) and the Technical University of Delft (Netherlands), including
exchanges of graduate students between those institutions and Princeton
University. In addition, an international workshop will be convened at Princeton
during the third year of the project, to discuss the specific topic of new
constitutive relationships for multi-phase flow with a focus on dynamic
capillary pressure.&lt;br/&gt;