* 0309181
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Mechanisms for Successful Invasions: Yellow Starthistle (Centaurea solstitialis) in California, Central Argentina, and Turkey
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Ragan Callaway, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,992.00

Many plant species are not common in their native communities but reach
extraordinary levels of abundance when people transport them to new parts of the
world. This phenomenon has puzzled ecologists for decades. Yellow starthistle,
an annual herb native to Eurasia, has invaded grasslands worldwide, but varies
in invasive success. In California, yellow starthistle is one of the most
devastating invaders of annual grasslands. In central Argentina, it can also
create monocultures; however, in contrast to California, its dominance is short
lived and requires continued disturbance. The goal of this research is to gain
insight into why the same invader exhibits contrasting levels of success in
different recipient communities. This objective will be addressed by replicating
experiments in California, central Argentina, and in the homeland of the
invader, southern Turkey. These experiments will assess the role of climate,
local plant communities, and invader genotypes in this biogeographical pattern.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed comparative activities in such a global context
represent a novel approach to the study of introduced plants and have the
potential to shed light on one of the most difficult problems in ecology -the
mechanisms driving successful plant invasions. Our ability to ameliorate the
enormous environmental and economic harms caused by invasive plants largely
depends on understanding how these mechanisms work.&lt;br/&gt;