* 0309647
* Numerical Schemes for Multiscale Stochastic Bio-chemical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Muruhan Rathinam, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 125,377.00

Rathinam&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops efficient numerical
schemes,&lt;br/&gt;software, and theoretical analysis of these schemes for
the&lt;br/&gt;simulation of continuous-time discrete-state stochastic
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;systems that exhibit "multiscale behaviour." Examples of
such&lt;br/&gt;systems include chemically reacting molecular systems,
traffic&lt;br/&gt;models, and markets. In principle such systems can be
simulated&lt;br/&gt;exactly one "event" at a time. But the computational costs
are&lt;br/&gt;often prohibitive for large systems. Continuous
macroscopic&lt;br/&gt;models -- either stochastic or deterministic
differential&lt;br/&gt;equaitons -- often prove to be valid approximations to
such&lt;br/&gt;models and in that case several numerical methods exist for
their&lt;br/&gt;efficient simulation. However, some systems exhibit
"multiscale&lt;br/&gt;behaviour" in the sense that only parts of the system may
be&lt;br/&gt;approximated by such macroscopic models while the
remaining&lt;br/&gt;components need to be represented by a discrete and
stochastic&lt;br/&gt;model. Motivating examples are found in intra-cellular
gene&lt;br/&gt;transcription mechanisms, where the fluctuations of certain
key&lt;br/&gt;molecular species present in very small numbers have a
critical&lt;br/&gt;effect on the final state of the system. The investigator
aims to&lt;br/&gt;develop numerical schemes and theory that target such
multiscale&lt;br/&gt;systems. These schemes allow simulations to leap over
several&lt;br/&gt;events while maintaining required level of
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt; Computer simulation methods and their theory are
well&lt;br/&gt;developed for systems, such as a space craft in motion,
that&lt;br/&gt;follow a deterministic and continuous motion. However, in
some&lt;br/&gt;complex dynamic systems, such as chemical reactions inside
a&lt;br/&gt;cell, the behaviour of traders in a large market, and
the&lt;br/&gt;internet traffic of data, the entities change in small jumps
that&lt;br/&gt;occur randomly in time. The investigator develops important
new&lt;br/&gt;tools for the efficient computer simulation of such
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;phenomena. The impact of these tools is in the
scientific&lt;br/&gt;computation of biological, social, and economic systems.
This&lt;br/&gt;project also provides opportunities for graduate
and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students to develop their skills in modeling
and&lt;br/&gt;simulation of such phenomena, which are useful in
financial,&lt;br/&gt;pharmaceutical, and biotechnology
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;