* 0309129
* High-Resolution Records of Late Holocene Sea level from Southern New England
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2006
* USD 178,017.00

EAR-0309129&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faced with
expectations of accelerated sea-level rise due to anthropogenic warming of the
global climate system, decision makers, scientists and the general public have
become increasingly concerned about potential risks to coastal communities and
ecosystems. Gaining understanding of how changes in sea level may be linked to
changes in climate is important in order to project future changes and possibly
mitigate socio-economic impacts. In the northeastern United States geological
records generally suggest sea-level rise of about 1 mm/year or less for the last
few thousand years while instrumental records indicate rates of 2-3 mm/year over
the past 150 years. The apparent discord between long-term and short-term
records is often interpreted to indicate an increase in the rate of sea-level
rise in the last few hundred years that may be the result of the warming global
climate. Determining the timing of this apparent acceleration is crucial if we
are to understand the relationship between sea-level changes and fluctuations in
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Many previous studies
have exploited the narrow vertical habitat range of coastal wetland species to
reconstruct past sea levels, but most lack the dating resolution to resolve
historic sea-level changes. Well-constrained, high-resolution records of sea-
level change are necessary if we are to be able to link the geologic record with
the historic instrumental records. Reliable age estimates of sea-level
indicators are necessary in order to establish a history of sea-level change for
the historic period (last 400 years).&lt;br/&gt;Radiocarbon methods are useful
in this interval, but large uncertainties associated with calibration for
secular changes in atmospheric C-14 concentrations require that other dating
methods also be employed to help reduce these uncertainties. Dated stratigraphic
markers such as those attributable to anthropogenic landscape changes and
pollution can provide important constraints on the age of sea-level indicators
and can substantially reduce uncertainties associated with radiocarbon dating
methods. Some recent attempts to reconstruct high-resolution records of sea-
level changes in New England from coastal wetland sediments may suggest that the
recent apparent increase in the rate of sea-level rise may have begun in the
17th or 18th century A.D., predating the climate warming of the last 150 years
by several centuries. However, these studies have relied on non-basal samples
that may have been displaced vertically by autocompaction of the peat column.
Using an approach that recovers contiguous sections of basal marsh sediments
deposited over a glacial erratic and a combination of radioisotopic and
stratigraphic dating techniques, I have constructed a 1300-year sea-level
chronology from Barn Island, Connecticut that indicates the recent acceleration
in the rate of sea-level rise may have initiated in the late 19th century.
Reproducing the results from Barn Island and other locations is critically
important because changes in geomorphology that alter the tidal range at a site
can introduce local changes of sea level. Here, I propose to use the approach
described above to extend the instrumental record of sea-level change by
attempting to replicate the results of this initial study at another site at
Barn Island and two sites at Plum Island Marsh in northern Massachusetts. The
results will provide critical insight into how sea level has changed over the
last 1500 years and expand our understanding of the links between climate and
sea-level change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Coastal
resource managers and policy makers will be able to use the results of this
study to make informed decisions regarding appropriate management practices and
regulatory strategies. The results of this study would be extremely useful to
stakeholders: coastal zone managers; habitat restoration groups; land managers;
business interests concerned with managing risk; coastal property owners and
coastal scientists. With billions of dollars and human lives at risk, I see this
research as providing vital information for society. In addition, I am committed
to helping train the next generation of geoscientists by providing them with
practical, "hands on," interdisciplinary research experience and I plan to
include a graduate student and at least one undergraduate in this project. I
endeavor to recruit students from groups underrepresented in the geological
sciences whenever possible. In addition, the geological and ecological lessons
learned from this study, as well as the potential societal implications, will be
integrated into undergraduate and graduate coursework including seminars and
field trips. The results will be presented at a professional meeting and we will
publish our findings in one or more peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;