* 0309976
* Timing and Kinematics of Cenozoic of E-W Extension in Central Tibet Transition in the Strain Field of the Tibetan Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Daniel Stockli, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2008
* USD 250,951.00

0309976&lt;br/&gt;Stockli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cenozoic extension within the
Tibetan Plateau is expressed as a series of prominent&lt;br/&gt;N-S trending
rift valleys. Recent GPS studies show that these graben systems and associated
conjugate strike-slip systems accommodate a significant portion of internal N-S
shortening and E-W expansion of the Tibetan Plateau. The development of these
structures represents a significant shift in deformational style and marks the
transition to a constrictional strain field within the Tibetan crust.
Determining the timing of the formation of these structures is a critical step
in understanding the evolution of the plateau. In order to test existing
hypotheses proposed to explain these N-S trending rifts and to understand the
geodynamic significance of Cenozoic E-W extension in Tibet, the PI needs to
answer two fundamental questions. (1) What is the timing of initiation and
spatial distribution of E-W extension in Tibet? (2) What is the temporal and
kinematic interplay between conjugate strike-slip deformation and E-W extension
within central Tibet? A regionally synchronous versus diachronous onset of
rifting or progressive migration versus discrete episodes of fault initiation
have very different implications for the evolution of the intraplate strain
field and the driving forces responsible for rift formation. Currently, the
different geodynamic models for the Cenozoic evolution of Tibet are difficult to
evaluate due to the lack of sufficient temporal constraints on the onset of
rifting. The PI proposes to use an integrated approach, combining structural
mapping with apatite (U-Th)/He and fission track dating, to elucidate the timing
and magnitude of faulting associated with the Cenozoic strain pattern across
central Tibet. Thermochronological methods directly dating the cooling of rocks
in exhumed fault blocks will complement field-based kinematic analysis of the
rift systems and should help resolve outstanding questions regarding the timing
and geodynamic significance of the Tibetan rifts. This proposed study will have
far-reaching implications for our understanding of how the lithosphere behaves
during continent-continent collision. New data will yield insights into the
fundamental problem of how and when Tibet extended after thickening, information
that is critical for evaluating the many different tectonic models for this
entire region. Furthermore, results will shed light on the hotly debated
question of whether there is a temporal link between E-W extension and surface
uplift of the Tibetan plateau. Given the implications of the uplift of the
Tibetan plateau for regional and global climate, the PI expects his results to
be of interest to a wide spectrum of geoscientists. This project also has
substantial educational and societal merit. The proposed international
collaboration with scientists from the Chinese Academy of Science will permit an
exchange of scientific ideas and knowledge. This exchange will greatly benefit
KU students, exposing them to the classic Himalayan-Tibetan orogenic system. Two
KU graduate students will be deeply involved in several mapping expeditions and
will work closely with scientists from UCLA and the Chinese Academy of
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;