* 0309935
* Stable Isotope Constraints on Source, Contamination, and Alteration of Great Basin Igneous Rocks, and Implications for Metallogeny
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Greg Arehart, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 267,873.00

EAR-0309935&lt;br/&gt;Arehart&lt;br/&gt;Carlin-type deposits are amongst the
richest and most important hydrothermal gold deposits in North America and
appear to be associated in time and space with Eocene magmatism. In contrast,
older magmatic episodes do not appear to have generated similar deposits. To
better understand the interaction of ascending magmas, which were the driving
force for these hydrothermal systems, with crustal rocks through which the
magmas passed, measurements of stable isotopes of sulfur and oxygen will be made
of unaltered plutonic rocks in the Great Basin. These measurements will be
compared to similar isotopic measurements of crustal (cratonic basement, late
Proterozoic rift-filling sedimentary rocks, Phanerozoic sedimentary rocks) and
mantle materials that could have provided components to these igneous rocks.
These data, when combined with extant geological, geochemical and geophysical
data, will then be used to elucidate the crustal architecture of the region, to
understand its control on the development of giant hydrothermal systems. These
data will also address the question of why magmatism of different ages but in
the same region, apparently did not generate the same large-scale metal
redistribution in the crust that occurred in the Eocene.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will provide opportunities to students focused on developing careers in
mineral deposits research . The combination of applied science supported by both
industry and government will provide students exposure to multiple aspects of
mineral deposit research, and is critical in training the upcoming generation of
mineral geoscientists for positions in industry, academia, or government.
Support for this research will help to maintain and enhance the infrastructure
for research and education, including the Nevada Stable Isotope
Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;