* 0309054
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics of Mating Behavior in the Genus Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Daniel Hartl, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2005
* USD 9,274.00

Increasing evidence suggests that genes involved in male reproduction evolve at
an exceptionally rapid rate, but the biological basis for this acceleration is
unknown. One possibility is that rapid evolution is driven by differences in
mating behavior. For nearly 100 years geneticists have studied the insect
Drosophila to try to identify the genes that control mating behavior. A number
of key genes have been identified. This affords an opportunity to determine
whether genetic differences in these genes accounts for the great variation in
mating behavior among different species. The investigators will characterize
these genes among a broad sample of species and also study patterns of genetic
variation within populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How individuals find each
other and form mating pairs is a fundamental aspect of biology in all organisms
that have two sexes. Mating behavior changes through time and accounts for the
observation that individuals choose mates within their own species.
Understanding the genetic basis of differences in mating behavior has important
practical applications ranging from designing the optimal size and geometrical
layout of national parks and game preserves to breeding endangered animal
species in captivity.&lt;br/&gt;