* 0309006
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Ecology and Evolution of Distribution Patterns in Lasthenia fremontii
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Maureen Stanton, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The role of genetic processes in determining where plant species do or do not
grow remains largely unexplored, despite the importance of this issue for
ecological restoration and for efforts to conserve genetic biodiversity. This
study will identify both ecological and genetic factors that can limit the
distribution of Lasthenia fremontii, an annual plant restricted to California's
endangered vernal pool habitats. The specific objectives of this research are as
follows: (1) To identify ecological factors that set current population
boundaries for L. fremontii through a transplant experiment. (2) To examine the
interacting effects of natural selection, genetic variation and gene flow on the
fitness of L. fremontii at different depths in the pools by comparing the
success of transplants with controlled genetic backgrounds at different
elevations across the vernal pool gradient. (3) To describe patterns of gene
flow and genetic differentiation within and among vernal pool populations using
neutral DNA variation.

This project strives to incorporate genetic and evolutionary processes into our
empirical understanding of the mechanisms that influence the distributions of
species. While the effects of natural selection, gene flow, and genetic
variation on species range limits have been explored theoretically, empirical
studies of these processes are almost entirely lacking. Broader impacts of this
study will extend to the conservation of narrowly endemic species, especially
those restricted to vernal pool habitats, which are jointly threatened by
habitat destruction and biological invasion.