* 0309618
* High Rayleigh Number Convection in Laboratory Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,03/31/2009
* Clay Cooper, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2009
* USD 196,750.00

0309618 Cooper

Objectives: The objective of the proposed research is to determine the length
and time scales of evolving high Rayleigh number (Ra) thermal convection in
subsurface porous media. The specific hypothesis that will be tested is that
flow patterns have several interacting scales of motion occurring simultaneously
that influence each other. The smallest scales are individual plumes that peel
away from a thermal boundary layer, while the largest scales are on the order of
the size of the experimental apparatus. The length and time scales of motion, as
well as temporal heat transfer can be understood in terms of the local (boundary
layer) and global (system) Rayleigh numbers, the Nusselt number, the Peclet
number, as well as the heterogeneity of the media. Scientific merit: Thermal
convection is an important transport process that can result in high heat flow
rates in regions of the Earth's crust. While much focus in porous media has been
on the closed convection cells that result in confined media at low Rayleigh
numbers, little research, and no fundamental experiments, have been conducted in
parameter space where the cells themselves become unstable and transition to a
turbulent regime. Methods: A series of experiments will be conducted in a sand-
filled laboratory test cell with dimensions 1 m tall x 1 m wide x 2 cm thick.
Bedding patterns will be constructed using translucent silica sands of varying
sizes (100 ?m to 7 mm). An array of approximately 75 thermocouples will be
installed around the center of the cell to capture cm-scale temperature (hence
flow) motion. Large-scale motion will be visualized by dissolving thermochromic
liquid crystals in the working solution (water); these crystals change color
(red-green-blue) as a function of temperature.

Broader impacts: This research will form the dissertation portion of a Ph.D.
student's curricula at the University of Nevada, Reno. This research is part of
a larger goal of C. Cooper to develop methods to understand the importance of
subsurface fluid mechanics as a geologic agent.