* 0309627
* The Genetic Relationship of Garnet- and Gahnite-Rich Rocks to Broken Hill-Type Lead-Zinc-Silver Deposits in the Curnamona Province, Australia: Implications for Exploration
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Paul Spry, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 167,571.00

EAR-0309627&lt;br/&gt;Spry&lt;br/&gt;The Broken Hill deposit, Australia, is the
largest known concentration of lead, zinc, and silver in the world.
Understanding this deposit's origin is critical for developing new exploration
models. This project will determine the origin of garnet- and gahnite-rich rocks
in and adjacent to deposits in the Broken Hill and Olary Domains of the
Curnamona Province. Field mapping will be used to determine the stratigraphic
and structural relationships of these rocks to mineralization. This work will be
supplemented by ion microprobe (SHRIMP) U-Pb geochronology, and major- and
trace-element studies of garnet and gahnite using electron microprobe and laser-
ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance infrastructure for research and
education by supporting collaboration of US and Australian government agencies,
universities, and mining industry. It will also support graduate and
undergraduate students, and allow them to acquire knowledge for careers
involving mineral deposits in academia, industry or the government. Furthermore,
geochemical and geochronological data derived from the study will be
incorporated into databases made available to the public through the NSF-
sponsored Geosciences Network (GEON) and the chronostratigraphic database
initiative currently under development (CHRONOS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;