* 0309135
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Riparian Tree Dynamics: Learning How  to Restore Non-equilibrium Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* John Battles, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2004
* USD 11,950.00

River regulation in California's Central Valley has altered hydrologic
conditions and impaired reproduction of riparian tree populations that evolved
with pre-settlement cycles of flooding and summer drought. The goal of this
research is to develop a predictive understanding of recruitment and survival of
the cottonwoods and willow species that dominate the crucial initial phase of
riparian community development. Targeted field studies and controlled
experiments will be conducted to parameterize and validate a conceptual model of
hydrogeomorphic, phenologic, and ecophysiological factors driving cottonwood and
willow recruitment on the lower Tuolumne River, CA. The model integrates length
of seed release and viability periods, field conditions of water table dynamics
and soil moisture, and seedling survival thresholds in response to water table
recession. The studies will provide quantitative information necessary for
resource managers to model cost-effective strategies to restore natural
recruitment processes to Central Valley riparian woodlands. This project is
important scientifically because it tests a general conceptual model integrating
hydrology, ecology, and ecophysiology in a non-equilibrium system within a
field-based resource management context. Broader impacts of this project include
optimizing reach-wide flow restoration scenarios, evaluating current floodplain
restoration projects, disseminating results to agencies for restoration
planning, and mentoring undergraduates in research methods.

