* 0309803
* Pseudospectral Methods and Radial Basis Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Bengt Fornberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 215,000.00

Both pseudospectral (PS) methods and radial basis functions (RBFs) were first
proposed in the early 1970's, in connection with turbulence modeling and
cartography respectively. Only in the last few years have the two topics begun
to merge, in the area of high-accuracy solutions of partial differential
equations (PDEs). Superior performance of PS methods was demonstrated early on
in applications such as accurate long term integrations of wave- type equations
in very simple geometries. In contrast to usual spectral basis functions,
different RBFs are not distinguished by how rapidly they oscillate, but instead
by being different translates of one single function. Although certain
orthogonalities are lost, spectral accuracy not only remains, but can now also
be reached on complex domains with arbitrary node distributions. A new (and
counterintuitive) result tells that, in the limit of RBFs becoming increasingly
flat, the classical PS methods are recovered. Recently great progress has been
made in overcoming the high computer cost and numerical ill-conditioning that
earlier were thought to severely limit this approach. The observations above
point towards extensions and generalizations of almost all numerical methods
which, by tradition, have been polynomial-based. The challenge has changed from
exploring the potential of RBFs for arbitrary-geometry spectral methods for
PDEs, into exploiting it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most phenomena in science,
engineering, sciences, and society can be approximated by some kinds of
mathematical models. These often involve a construct known as partial
differential equations (PDEs). Equations of this kind can only rarely be solved
without resorting to computational methods. During the last century, a few main
classes of such solution methods have evolved. A quite new class -
pseudospectral (PS) methods - emerged some 30 years ago. Around the same time,
radial basis functions (RBFs) were invented in a quite different context. The
latter have still seen only exploratory use for PDEs. However, during the last
three-year period, the PI demonstrated that PS methods can be seen as a special
case of RBFs, with the latter approach greatly extending the PS methods' scope
and generality. Continuing research will expand on this fundamental result, with
the long-term goal of producing practical algorithms which are capable of
becoming routine tools for high-precision solutions of PDEs in irregular
multidimensional domains.&lt;br/&gt;