* 0309153
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Maintenance of a Flower Color Polymorphism in Mimulus Aurantiacus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Joshua Kohn, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,972.00

This study investigates the factors maintaining a spatially discrete flower
color polymorphism between coastal and inland populations of southern California
Mimulus aurantiacus. Coastal populations contain exclusively red flowers, while
approximately 30 km from the coast there is an abrupt transition to yellow
flowers. This pattern makes M. aurantiacus an extremely interesting system for
investigating whether this polymorphism has been influenced by historical
barriers to gene flow or whether (and how) natural selection has shaped it. We
will use a combination of molecular genetics, field observations, and
experimental studies to examine the degree of morphological, geographical, and
genetic differentiation between these morphs while attempting to describe the
relative roles of pollinator versus non-pollinator selection on the maintenance
of this polymorphism.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research program will be
important for increasing our understanding of the forces maintaining trait
variation in nature. Preliminary results implicate a strong role for natural
selection in preserving this polymorphism, but the selective forces remain
unclear. Proposed field and laboratory work will include the assistance of many
undergraduate researchers. Their involvement in these studies is crucial to its
success and provides for enhanced educational experiences. &lt;br/&gt;