* 0309838
* Continental Lithospheric Deformation Along a Major Strike-Slip Fault Zone: The Central North Anatolian Fault Zone, Turkey
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* George Zandt, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2009
* USD 484,381.00

Continental Lithospheric Deformation Along a Major Strike-slip
Fault:&lt;br/&gt;The Central North Anatolian Fault Zone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
1500 km long North Anatolian Fault Zone (NAFZ) is one of the world's largest
active continental strike-slip faults and forms the northern margin of the
Anatolian block or plate. All indications are that the NAFZ is a newly
coalescing continental transform plate boundary. This gives us an opportunity to
study a snapshot of lithospheric deformation in its evolution into a plate
boundary at the surface and at depth. Despite much geological work at the
surface, the deep structure of the NAFZ is relatively unknown. We propose to
study the central portion of the NAFZ using data from a 2-year, 40 station
portable broadband seismic deployment to address the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Is the NAFZ a lithospheric-scale transform fault and if
so, how does the lithosphere respond to the deformation? Is the NAFZ a thin
vertical fault at depth or a broad zone of deformation? Are the crust and upper
mantle deformation coupled or decoupled? (2) How does the deeper asthenospheric
flow signature relate to the crustal velocity field (as defined by GPS studies)
and westward tectonic escape model for the Anatolian plate? (3) Does the spatial
distribution and composition of magmatism along the fault zone in the last 10 Ma
relate to the deep structure of the fault? (4) How do the fault segments,
rupture segments and major splays interact along strike and at depth? What is
the depth of the seismogenic zone, and how does it relate to the segmentation
defined by the major earthquakes this century? We will use seismic tomography
(teleseismic, regional and local), receiver function analysis, modeling of
regional waveforms, surface wave dispersion, crust and mantle anisotropy
measurements, gravity modeling, and seismicity studies to address these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;