* 0309797
* RUI:    Using Communication Reduction Techniques to Improve Throughput in High-Performance Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* David Surma, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 07/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

RUI: Using Communication Reduction Techniques to Improve Throughput in High-
Performance Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop new techniques to improve throughput in High-Performance
Computer Networks by reducing the inherent communication overhead. To meet
growing computing needs high performance systems using multiple processors are
employed to reduce task latency. While using multiple processors has been
successful in reducing the computation time, the overall processing time has not
been reduced proportionally. This is due to the communication overhead that
occurs when data is exchanged between these processing elements. This research
will develop techniques to reduce this communication overhead (thereby improving
their throughput) by scheduling these message transmissions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected results include new scheduling techniques
that can be used in a variety of computing environments such as supercomputers,
networks of workstations, mobile networks, the Internet and other architectures
to improve overall performance. Additionally, this project will have a profound
positive effect on the Computer Science department at IUSB and specifically on
the training of its students. The department recently started a Master's degree
program and this project will provide the first support for a graduate student
and the initial equipment for a cluster of workstations laboratory. Recent
studies have shown that involvement in research efforts greatly enhances the
education of undergraduate students. With the support of this project,
undergraduate students at IUSB will now be given an opportunity to become
involved in an exciting research endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;