* 0309953
* Graph Orientations and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Xin He, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 206,000.00

Given a graph G=(V,E), an orientation O of G is an assignment of directions to
the edges of G. We may require that certain properties must be satisfied by O.
Varying the requirements, different orientations can be defined. The
orientations with special properties often result in interesting combinatorial
structures.

Recently, several orientations of planar graphs have been studied. They have
important and sometimes unexpected applications in fields such as graph drawing,
VLSI layout, computer graphics etc. These orientations often lead to elegant
algorithms, which either improve or simplify previously known algorithms.

The intellectual merit: The PI has recently obtained interesting results using
various orientations. The proposed research extends these results. The proposed
project will result in novel combinatorial concepts and constructions and new
algorithmic tools. This research will make both theoretical and practical
contributions. On the theoretical side, several important open questions in
graph theory and combinatorics are among the proposed problems. On the practical
side, many problems discussed in the proposal are motivated by applications in
graph drawing, computer graphics and VLSI layout problems.

The broader impacts: The results obtained from this research will have impacts
on practical fields such as graph drawing, computer graphics and VLSI design, by
providing better, simpler and more efficient algorithms. It will also enhance
graduate education in computer science. The algorithms, concepts and techniques
developed in this research will be include in a new advanced algorithm course.