* 0309197
* Collaborative Research: Mass Independent Fractionation of Sulfur Isotopes, Re-Os Dating of Sedimentary Pyrite, and the Composition of the Late Archean Atmosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Holly Stein, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2006
* USD 149,987.00

ABSTRACT

The discovery of mass independent fraction (MIF) of the sulfur isotopes in
pre-2.45 Ga sulfides and sulfates opened a new window on the chemical evolution
of the atmosphere-ocean system. At present, the MIF data for sulfur in Archean
sediments are few and contradictory. We propose to undertake a thorough study of
the MIF of sulfur in pyrite for three pairs of highly carbonaceous sedimentary
rock units deposited between 2.7 and 2.5 Ga in Western Australia, South Africa,
and Canada. Pyrite will be selected for this study on the basis of textural,
chemical, and isotopic evidence indicative of a syngenetic or diagenetic origin.
Pyrite in each of the six rock units will be dated by the Re-Os method.
Preliminary data show that it is possible to determine the age of 2.3 Ga
sedimentary pyrites with a precision of 1 m.y. Initial 187Os/ 188Os ratios
inferred from the pyrite isochrons will provide information on secular
variations in the Os isotopic composition of seawater, which probably reflects
changes in oxidative weathering and transport of Os from the continents. The
dating of Archean sedimentary pyrite can therefore yield important information
regarding Os cycling. The MIF measurements will be made on the MAT 253 mass
spectrometer at the Geophysical Laboratory in Washington, D.C, using laser
fluorination and continuous flow inlet technology. The Re-Os dating will be done
at the AIRIE laboratory at Colorado State University (CSU) using Carius tube
dissolution and negative thermal ionization mass spectrometry. Sample
preparation, microscopy and trace element analyses will be done at Harvard
University. We expect that our data will demonstrate to what extent local
conditions determined the MIF of the sulfur isotopes in these rock units, to
what extent global differences were important, and to what extent global
differences reflected changes in the composition of the atmosphere during the
last 200 Ma of the Archean. Broader Impacts Criterion The project will promote
training and learning through involvement of students at all levels
(postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and high school) with at least the
younger students drawn from underrepresented groups. All will be engaged in
application of state-of-the-art techniques, and will be encouraged to present
their findings at professional meetings. New collaborations are established
through this project between Harvard University and CSU, among researchers on
three continents, and across geologic sub-disciplines. Dissemination of results
will reach beyond immediate research communities, as the Harvard group reports
to NASA through participation on the Astrobiology Team, and the AIRIE Program at
CSU is based on international collaboration, and transfers new techniques and
concepts quickly to applications of direct use in mineral exploration.