* 0309631
* Emission Spectroscopy of Silicic Lavas:  Implications for Dome Processes and Hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Michael Ramsey, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 228,109.00

EAR-0309631&lt;br/&gt;Ramsey &lt;br/&gt;Explosive decompression of silicic lava
domes due to over-steepening and/or flow front collapse can produce moderate to
large pyroclastic flows. Such events have resulted in numerous casualties and
property damage in the past decade at volcanoes such as Soufriere Hills,
Montserrat and Unzen, Japan. The detailed examination of thermal infrared
(TIR)-emitted energy from a dome's surface can provide quantitative data on the
composition and micrometer-scale surface texture of the lava. For example, the
percentage of surface vesicles in glassy lavas tends to mute or reduce the
spectral contrast of the emissivity absorption bands in linear proportion to
their surface abundance. This derived parameter has provided important insights
into dome emplacement/evolution, and where coupled with temperature and surface
deformation, has direct implications for the hazard state of the dome. Emission
spectroscopy differs from Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) microscopy in its
applicability to capture information on whole rock samples, macroscopic surface
textures and remote sensing applications. However, in order to provide the
rigorous and quantitative analysis needed to confidently interpret these data,
two objectives are proposed: (1) to perform a detailed laboratory-based analysis
of glassy lavas of various compositions, which will result in a quantitative
correlation between infrared spectral features and the chemical composition and
textural morphology; and (2) extend that research to both a field-based study of
the Soufriere Hills volcanic dome, Montserrat and a remote sensing-based study
of the Bezymianny volcanic dome, Russia. This application to active domes will
relate the chemical variation in the lavas to textural information derived from
the laboratory studies. It also provides a critical bridge between the
laboratory analysis/scale and those derived from space. The intellectual merit
of the research is a more complete analytical and theoretical analysis of the
thermal infrared emission of naturally occurring mineral and rock glasses. This
in turn will provide an accurate understanding of the linkages to active dome
emplacement processes and monitoring. The broader implications of this project
include laboratory, computer and field training of one graduate student, one
post-doctoral researcher from an under-represented geographical group, and
several undergraduate students. In addition, the results will advance the
scientific understanding of emission spectroscopy acquired from glass/vesicle-
rich samples. That knowledge has the potential to lead to the development of a
new space and ground-based scientific tool, which can be used to monitor the
processes of active dome formation and its subsequent hazard
potential.&lt;br/&gt;