* 0309684
* Collaborative Research: An Optimality Principle of Evaporation over the Land Surface
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Witold Krajewski, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2005
* USD 39,939.00

Eichinger&lt;br/&gt;0309684&lt;br/&gt;The working hypothesis of this research
is that evaporation at the &lt;br/&gt;earth-atmosphere interface is always
maximized, given radiative energy input &lt;br/&gt;in a particular environment.
Under the hypothesis, evaporation is uniquely &lt;br/&gt;determined as a result
of an optimization exercise in terms of surface &lt;br/&gt;temperature, surface
soil moisture and sensible heat flux (a measure of &lt;br/&gt;turbulent
transport) given an energy input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ideas presented here will allow the independent
verification of models, &lt;br/&gt;will lead to improved parameterization of
surface hydrology and, more &lt;br/&gt;importantly, will provide a framework in
which the sensitivity of land &lt;br/&gt;evaporation to changes in radiation,
earth surface properties etc. could be &lt;br/&gt;evaluated independently of the
traditional empirical models. The research &lt;br/&gt;strategy includes: 1.
further theoretical and empirical study to include &lt;br/&gt;the dependence of
long wave radiation on surface temperature; 2. show &lt;br/&gt;the lack of
sensitivity of evaporation to atmospheric moisture; 3. carry &lt;br/&gt;out
field work to test the concepts with more appropriate data sets over bare
&lt;br/&gt;soils; 4. investigate the validity of existing evaporation models; 5.
initiate the &lt;br/&gt;extension of the concepts to vegetated
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
represents a broad interdisciplinary collaboration between
&lt;br/&gt;hydrologists and ecologists with theoretical and experimental
expertise. The &lt;br/&gt;work supports unique experimental infrastructure at
the University of Iowa. &lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will have the
opportunities to do theoretical and field &lt;br/&gt;work. Several graduate
students will get their masters/doctoral degrees based &lt;br/&gt;on their work
in this proposal. All students will be encouraged and financed &lt;br/&gt;to
present findings in professional meetings. All work will be published in
&lt;br/&gt;the refereed literature in a timely manner. This proposal is being
submitted &lt;br/&gt;under the umbrella of the new MIT Earth System Initiative.
This research and &lt;br/&gt;educational effort is intended to promote the
understanding of the ``body &lt;br/&gt;earth'' in order to define the
appropriate science to develop sound &lt;br/&gt;sustainability policies. The
Principal Investigator is one of the leaders of &lt;br/&gt;this initiative, a
member of its executive council, and teaches one of the &lt;br/&gt;require
courses under the initiative's freshman core alternative program:
&lt;br/&gt;Terrascope.&lt;br/&gt;