* 0309215
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH - An Integrative Study of the Evolution of Complex Sexual Singals
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Bruce Lyon, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 04/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

An Integrative Study of the Evolution of Complex Sexual Signals Alexis S. Chaine

A central goal in current studies of evolutionary biology is to understand the
evolution and function of animal signals. Indeed, biologists have for a long
time turned their attention to understanding the bright coloration of birds of
paradise or the melodious calls of songbirds. Costs associated with the
production of these signals and the efficiency of information transfer to an
intended receiver should cause signals to be simple; therefore, it is surprising
that many species have multiple, or complex, signals. The evolution of multiple
signals is still not fully understood because most previous studies on this
topic have focused on only a subset of hypotheses for their evolution. Using a
specific statistical framework (path analytic model) based on both observational
and experimental data, this project will distinguish between all the alternative
hypotheses for the evolution of multiple sexual signals in free ranging lark
buntings, Calamospiza melanocorys. Lark buntings are especially suited for this
question because they have complex social behaviors, a number of distinct visual
signals, and are easily observed, all of which are key to a successful study of
multiple signals. Furthermore, males behaviorally modify signals by rearranging
their feathers to achieve chameleon-like color change, which suggests the
intriguing possibility that males might flexibly and instantaneously uncouple
otherwise linked sexual signals. The proposed research also includes
opportunities for undergraduate research assistants to participate in all
aspects of the project from experimental design and data collection through data
analysis. Past assistants have mostly been from underrepresented groups (female,
culturally diverse) and, as a result of direct mentoring, many are now pursuing
higher degrees.