* 0309257
* The Role of Hydrologic Inputs in the Balance of Carbon Dioxide in Small Lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Jonathan Cole, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2005
* USD 175,999.00

0309257&lt;br/&gt;Cole&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The surface waters of lakes are in
constant, and sometime turbulent, contact with the overlying atmosphere. This
contact allows gases dissolved in the water to equilibrate with those in the
atmosphere. Despite this gas exchange, certain gases in the surface waters of
lakes are consistently out of equilibrium with the atmosphere. The partial
pressure of carbon dioxide, for example, tends to be several-fold higher in most
lakes than one would expect from equilibrium with the atmosphere. Because CO2 is
an end-product of biological respiration, many researchers have assumed that
this CO2 supersaturation in lakes is the result of metabolism. That is, these
researchers assume that respiration exceeds photosynthesis in the water body.
For this to occur the lake's metabolism must be subsidized by organic C from the
terrestrial watershed. Other processes, however, can also lead to carbon dioxide
supersaturation. These include: the input of highly supersaturated ground water;
or the input of reduced chemical species such as iron or sulfur, the oxidation
of which generates acidity and converts bicarbonate to carbon dioxide. The
research here is designed to determine which processes are most important in
causing elevated CO2 in lakes.&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose to determine
the role of hydrologic inputs as a cause for elevated CO2 in lake water by
studying, Mirror Lake, a very-well studied lake which is part of the Hubbard
Brook Ecosystem Study. The preliminary CO2 budget for this lake suggests that
the loss of CO2 to the atmosphere is several-fold larger than can be accounted
for by the sum of all known processes. The major goal of this proposal is to
balance this CO2 mass balance. The researchers hypothesize that significant
direct or indirect inputs of CO2 have been underestimated because the role of
hydrologic events, and spatial variation in ground water inputs have not yet
been incorporated into the input calculations. The researchers will create a
spatially explicit hydrologic model to determine the inputs of CO2 , DOC, and
alkalinity-consuming redox constituents. This work is possible at Mirror Lake
because of an ongoing collaboration with hydrologists at USGS and an extensive
series of continuously monitored wells in the Mirror Lake watershed, and
continuously monitored inputs and outputs of surface waters and surface water
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;One graduate and two undergraduate students will receive
training at the interface between hydrology and limnology in the program.
Additionally, this work will be linked to the larger educational outreach
program of the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study, an LTER site. The Mirror Lake
research will be a new focus of the Science Links. Program for middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;