* 0309902
* Algorithmic Problems in Haplotyping, Oligonucleotide Fingerprinting,and NMR Peak Assignment
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Tao Jiang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Biological and biomedical sciences are undergoing a major
revolution&lt;br/&gt;as new experimental approaches, such as high-throughput
DNA&lt;br/&gt;sequencing, DNA microarray, whole genome location,
and&lt;br/&gt;single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) techniques, are
yielding&lt;br/&gt;unprecedented amounts of genetic data. The exploration of
this&lt;br/&gt;information is critically dependent upon the development
of&lt;br/&gt;advanced computational methods for data analysis. Since the
recent&lt;br/&gt;completion of the Human Genome Project, the focus of
Computational&lt;br/&gt;Biology (or Bioinformatics) has shifted to topics that
are more&lt;br/&gt;directly related to biological functions, i.e. computational
problems&lt;br/&gt;that arise in functional genomics and
proteomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will study some new
algorithmic problems&lt;br/&gt;that aim at addressing three important questions
in&lt;br/&gt;computational biology: (i) how to infer haplotype configurations
from&lt;br/&gt;genotype data based on the Mendelian law of inheritance for a
given&lt;br/&gt;pedigree, (ii) how to resolve missing values in
cluster&lt;br/&gt;analysis for oligonucleotide fingerprinting, and (iii) how
to&lt;br/&gt;assign NMR peaks to individual amino acids. The first question
is&lt;br/&gt;fundamental to the fine-mapping of genetic diseases&lt;br/&gt;using
markers such as microsatellites and SNPs.&lt;br/&gt;Question (ii) arises in the
analysis of discretized oligonucleotide&lt;br/&gt;fingerprints from DNA array
experiments and has important applications&lt;br/&gt;in the classification of
microbial communities. Question (iii)&lt;br/&gt;represents a crucial step in
NMR-based protein structure determination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the
above algorithmic problems are relatively new in the&lt;br/&gt;literature (in
fact, some of them were recently introduced by the PI &lt;br/&gt;in
collaboration with experimentalists), they have strong ties to&lt;br/&gt;well-
known combinatorial optimization problems such as bipartite
matching,&lt;br/&gt;interval scheduling, graph clique partition (or coloring),
and set cover.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, their solutions could also be of interest to
the general&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and combinatorial optimization
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;