* 0309131
* Studies of Metal-Organic and Organic Charge-Transport for Plastic Opto-Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Seth Marder, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 486,000.00

0309131&lt;br/&gt;Marder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this program is to
improve the state-of-the-art of molecular charge-transport agents by: i)
developing an understanding of the relative importance of disorder and
reorganization energy in high-mobility materials and ii) developing high-
mobility materials. This will be accomplished by minimizing reorganization
energy by using systems with more-or-less non-bonding frontier orbitals, and by
using systems with highly delocalized frontier orbitals; maximizing
intermolecular electronic coupling by using systems with diffuse orbitals
delocalized towards the periphery of the molecule, by using species capable of
more isotropic overlap than typical organic charge-transport agents, and by
using columnar discotic liquid-crystalline materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
minimize reorganization energy, the energy required to move the electron whilst
leaving nuclei frozen, systems should be selected in which the frontier orbitals
have little bonding or anti-bonding character, or in which they are extensively
delocalized. Removal of electrons from metal based orbital in organometallic
compounds will be investigated in this regard. To maximize orbital overlap two
approaches will be pursued. Firstly, organometallic and coordination compounds
with rather more three-dimensional shapes (e.g. octahedral, tetrahedral) than
most organic charge-transport agents (which often contain basically planar
cores; e.g. the biphenyl unit in TPD) will be investigated. In this way, it is
anticipated that the overlap will not be dependent upon orientational factors in
glassy media; i.e. that overlap between nearest neighbor molecules will always
be good. Moreover, these materials are likely to form isotropic glasses with
isotropic mobilities, which will be useful in some devices. This second approach
involves examination materials that self-organize into columnar discotic
mesophases in which overlap along the column of molecules is maximized. In the
process of performing this research students will receive an interdisciplinary
training, working on both synthesis and physical measurements.&lt;br/&gt;