* 0309755
* Collaborative Research: Factors Controlling Chemical Weathering in Regions of Very High Physical Weathering Rates
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* W. Berry Lyons, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 231,296.00

0309755&lt;br/&gt;Carey&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade, a debate has taken place
concerning the ultimate controls on chemical weathering at Earth's surface. Some
have argued that the rate of physical weathering, not climate, is the major
control on chemical weathering. Physical weathering is highest in areas of rapid
tectonic uplift. Rapidly uplifting tectonic regimes with high frequency rainfall
events are the dominant feature of many high-standing oceanic islands in the SW
Pacific/Australasian region. High-standing islands (HSIs) there produce at least
33% of the sediment entering the marine environment annually. Because of this,
HSIs have some of the highest physical weathering rates known on Earth. Research
in our previous grant (EAR 0096285) determined chemical weathering rates in some
New Zealand watersheds. Comparison of newly determined chemical weathering rates
to the previously determined physical weathering rates showed that, although the
ratio of chemical to physical weathering is low, the absolute rates of chemical
weathering are some of the highest ever observed. Preliminary observations from
Taiwan indicate that chemical weathering rates there are also very high. The
current project is a return to New Zealand and Taiwan to collect water,
suspended sediment and soil and sediment samples in order to conduct the
following work: 1. Use a suite of radionuclides (7Be, 137Cs, 210Pb) to determine
residence times of sediments in the soils and floodplains of two previously
investigated watersheds in New Zealand; 2. Use a full suite of major, minor and
trace element analyses to evaluate the physical and chemical weathering rates in
New Zealand and Taiwan watersheds whose primary lithology is volcanic rocks; 3.
Use data from activities 1 and 2 and the results of our previous research to
develop a quantitative framework to evaluate the relationship between physical
and chemical weathering rates, especially in these regions of very high physical
weathering. &lt;br/&gt;At the locations where we collect soil and streambed
sediment profiles for 7Be, 137Cs and 210Pb, we shall collect additional samples
for future analysis of uranium and thorium series nuclides. These samples will
be archived until time and funds permit, we shall analyze these samples using
the ICP-MS at OSU's MARC analytical center. The data will be used for
calculation of watershed residence times. We plan these additional activities in
response to the reviewer comment that the original choice of nuclides had half-
lives too short to be useful in calculating the likely watershed residence
times. Using the uranium and thorium data, we can use the approaches of Plater
et al. (1994), Vigier et al. (2001), Moreira-Nordemann (1980) and Marques et al.
(2003) to calculate erosion rates and timescales, and watershed residence
times.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the work will include training provided to
graduate students and the building of international partnerships with New
Zealand and Taiwanese scientists. The PIs plan to establish a website where all
the data from the proposed research and from EAR 0096285 will be placed so that
it will be accessible by the broad scientific community. This research has
important societal relevance in contributing to the overall understanding of CO2
concentration in the atmosphere. Because the chemical weathering of silicate
minerals on the surface of Earth is thought to be the major control on the
atmospheric CO2 concentration, this research has important implications for
understanding the mechanisms of greenhouse gas regulation.&lt;br/&gt;This is a
collaborative proposal among Drs. Carey and Lyons at The Ohio State University,
Dr. Dibb at the University of New Hampshire, Dr. Kao of Academia Sinica, Taiwan,
and Dr. Hicks of the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, New
Zealand. &lt;br/&gt;