* 0309371
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Implications of Adult Incubation Behavior on Embryo Growth and Metabolism
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Carol Vleck, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,882.00

Dissertation Research: Implications of Adult Incubation Behavior on Embryo
Growth and Metabolism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Christopher R. Olson and Carol M.
Vleck&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Birds
incubating eggs must allocate time between maintaining egg temperatures required
for embryonic growth and spending time foraging for food. It has long been known
that the range of thermal conditions for eggs to hatch successfully is narrow.
However, the eggs of many small songbirds frequently undergo wide thermal
fluctuations when the adults leave their nests to forage, and yet the eggs hatch
successfully. Birds vary in their incubation behaviors. In some species both
parents incubate and eggs seldom cool. In other species only the female
incubates, resulting in episodic cooling of the eggs when the female leaves the
nest to forage. This suggests that some avian embryos have evolved thermal
tolerance, that is, they are able to survive episodes of cooling and still
maintain normal growth. This study's general goal is to describe the
relationship between the thermal profile of the eggs and the incubation strategy
of the incubating adult. It will incorporate two experiments carried out in the
lab on the physiological and developmental responses of embryos to episodic
cooling and one field experiment. 1. Metabolism of zebra finch (Taeniopygia
guttata) eggs will be examined during simulated cooling and rewarming bouts to
define the embryonic metabolic response to different degrees of episodic
cooling. 2. The phenotypic and survival consequences of episodic cooling
throughout development will be examined. This knowledge will then be extended to
the field to study constraints and limitations that both adult and embryonic
birds endure. 3. Cooling rates of house wren (Troglodytes aedon) eggs will be
increased or decreased and adult response monitored. When cooling rates are
increased, adults are predicted to compensate by shifting to behaviors that
benefit the eggs, mainly spending increased time on the nest. However, when
cooling rates are decreased, adults should spend more searching for food.
Combining the results of these three experiments will aid in understanding how
egg thermal physiology places limits on adult incubation behavior and breeding
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;