* 0310592
* SGER--Engineers and Engineering Education In The Middle East: Symposium June 2003
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Gary Downey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 01/31/2006
* USD 48,449.00

The goal of this project is to produce much needed scholarship on engineering
education and practice in the Middle East, from a selection of both Arab and
Islamic states. U.S. engineers often assume engineering education is similar
across Middle Eastern countries due to commonalities in language, religion,
geographical location, or emphasis in oil production. Yet each country has had a
unique history, including distinctive colonial struggles and varying sets of
political and economic relations with other countries around the world, which
have, in turn, shaped its engineering education and practice in particular ways.
Hence, the main intellectual merit of this project involves providing U.S.
engineering educators and practitioners with new knowledge about engineering
education and practice in the Middle East, with a focus on outlining the
diversity of engineering cultures in this part of the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gathering of content on the past, present, and future
of engineering education and practice in several Middle Eastern countries will
take place in three panel discussions and individual interviews with expert
panelists at the 2003 Annual Meeting of the American Society for Engineering
Education, to be held on June 22-25, 2003, in Nashville, TN. With the
participation of selected STS scholars knowledgeable about the Middle East,
panel discussions and individual interviews with experts in engineering
education in the Middle East will both document histories and highlight
similarities and differences among national patterns. Presenters will also
identify important issues currently confronting engineering educators,
engineering institutions, and engineering employers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this project include (1) a video archive available via the Internet
to individuals and organizations interested in learning about engineering in the
Middle East; (2) frameworks for multimedia modules on engineering cultures in
3-5 Middle Eastern countries, and (3) the organizing framework for a future
International Conference on Engineering Education in the Middle East. This
project can have a significant impact on how engineering students and
practitioners approach and understand their colleagues from the Middle East,
whether in education or in industry. An additional benefit is to expand networks
and increase collaborations among American and Middle Eastern engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;