* 0310339
* Collaborative Research:  Quantitative Sediment Routing across Pristine Foreland Basins
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Thomas Dunne, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2006
* USD 135,541.00

Collaborative Research: Quantitative Sediment Routing across Pristine Foreland
Basins: Transport, Accumulation, and Floodplain-Channel Interactions within
Three Fluvial Dispersal Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charles A. Nittrouer and
Rolf E. Aalto, Washington University, EAR-0310339&lt;br/&gt;Thomas Dunne,
University of California, Santa Barbara,
EAR-0309688&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large lowland
rivers comprise the primary arteries through which water and sediment are
conveyed across continents, from mountain sources to estuarine and marine sinks,
providing critical habitat, fertile agricultural land, vital water resources,
and land for tens of millions of people. River sediment also serves as the
primary vehicle to transport carbon, nutrients, and pollutants. This project
will document and model the mechanisms of sediment transport, accumulation, and
floodplain-channel interaction within three large rivers traversing pristine
foreland basins in Bolivia and Peru. In trio, these rivers exemplify the
continuum of fluvial processes and rates for lowland rivers within a wide range
of tectonic scenarios, providing an ideal natural laboratory. This project will
also continue the development of new methods for floodplain geochronology and
computer analysis of river morphology and migration using satellite imagery. PIs
collaboration with French scientists represents a productive new international
partnership. They will generate data products useful to educators, researchers,
digital libraries, and navigators, as well as research and results to be used
for teaching at the university level. The research benefits anyone interested in
the full natural range of morphologies, rates, or mechanics of water and
particulate flux, channel-floodplain interaction, and sedimentary basin dynamics
for sand-bedded fluvial dispersal systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;