* 0310922
* SWEAT, AUSWUS, AUSMEX, or Other?  Testing Proterozoic Supercontinent Reconstructions by Refining 1.8-1.6 Ga Apparent Polar Wander Paths from Laurentia and Australia
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* David Evans, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 04/30/2006
* USD 203,014.00

Tectonostratigraphic syntheses of Proterozoic rocks worldwide have allowed
plausible reconstructions for Rodinia, the early Neoproterozoic supercontinent,
and its predecessor Nuna, assembled by 1.8 Ga. Many different reconstructions
have been postulated, however, that have yet to be tested with high-quality
paleomagnetic data. Tectonostratigraphic similarities between Archean-
Proterozoic terrains in Laurentia (cratonic North America) and Australia form
the bases for most modern conceptions of Rodinia; if valid, these comparisons
would also pertain to Nuna configurations. One recent high-quality paleomagnetic
study has cast doubt upon the most popular earlier juxtapositions of Proterozoic
Laurentia and Australia, known as SWEAT and AUSWUS; that study identified a
third possible reconstruction, dubbed AUSMEX. The PI seeks to test these
hypothesized juxtapositions further, by collecting new paleomagnetic and
geochronological data from well preserved 1.8-1.6 Ga volcanic- sedimentary
successions in central Canada and northern Australia. These results will
generate refined apparent-polar-wander paths for the two cratons during that
interval and thus permit quantitative tests for Nuna and Rodinia
reconstructions. Broader scientific impacts of the proposed research follow the
recognition that accurate continental reconstructions form paleogeographic
foundations for all aspects of Earth surface processes, and they provide
boundary conditions for models of mantle geodynamics. Broader impacts also
include research training for graduate and undergraduate students, including a
female graduate student aspiring toward a career in
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;