* 0310355
* Paleomagnetic and Seismological Investigation of Rotations in Transpressional Folds, San Andreas Fault System, California
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Craig Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2005
* USD 67,377.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transpressional folds can be either wrench folds
or slip-partitioned folds. The two can produce structures similar enough that
folds adjacent and subparallel to the San Andreas Fault could be either. The
difference between the two models is far more substantial: it is the difference
between strong and weak faults. Which model better reflects the geology alters
our perception of both the neotectonic hazards of and the geometry produced in
these folds, geometry that is responsible for several super giant oilfields in
California alone. Furthermore, if these are slip-partitioned folds, then they
are produced with a fold axis not normal to the most compressive horizontal
stress, indicating that current theories of folding are incomplete. In a wrench-
folding environment, the folds (and any underlying faults) rotate with time as
the finite shortening strains rotate normal to the strike-slip fault.
Paleomagnetic rotation should be equal everywhere at the same distance from the
strike-slip fault. Micropolar rotation, observable from focal mechanisms, will
be small, because small and large scale rotations are the same. On a partitioned
system, the underlying faults are not rotating. However, a component of strike-
slip on underlying faults has yet to be recognized in surface folding. Most
likely, this shear strain produces vertical-axis rotations near the anticlinal
axes of the folds paralleling the San Andreas, as is observed in physical models
and in the Yakima Fold Belt in Washington. Both the inhomogeniety of rotation
and the absence of rotation of the macroscale structures will produce laterally
varying paleomagnetic rotations and larger micropolar rotations than for the
wrench folding case. This project addresses this problem through analysis of the
paleomagnetic and seismological characteristics of the folds adjacent to the San
Andreas west of the San Joaquin Valley. These folds, initiated in the Neogene
over active blind thrust faults, have been the focus of debate between those
inferring strain partitioning and low shear stress on the San Andreas fault and
those inferring wrench faulting and high stresses. Paleomagnetic and
seismological investigation of the Coalinga, Kettleman Hills, and the Wheeler
Ridge anticlines should determine which kinematic model of regional deformation
best fits these structures. These two techniques complement each other, and the
work will proceed in parallel so that refined analysis strategies can address
questions arising from the other approach. Additionally, while the paleomagnetic
analysis provides a time-integrated view of the deformation, use of some of the
dense aftershock datasets in these folds will permit us to apply the micropolar
analysis to different depth slices and different volumes near and far from the
axial plane of the overlying anticline. This will constrain the three-
dimensional variations in strain and micropolar rotation, which will provide
important constraints for understanding the physics of deformation in these fold
systems. Broader impacts of this work include studying active, super giant
petroleum fields that continue to be exploited. Improved understanding of the
genesis of these structures is likely to improve the ability to manage this
resource most efficiently. Second, these structures are seismogenic and have
already produced a damaging earthquake. This work directly addresses the
mechanism of deformation, which in turn is likely to effect studies of return
times and seismic hazard. This work also addresses the seismogenic character of
the San Andreas Fault, one of the greatest seismic hazards in the United States.
The PI will also be building the infrastructure of science and education. The
project largely supports female graduate student Joya Tetreault, an
underrepresented class in earth science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;