* 0310721
* Making Visible the Science in Science Teaching: Using TIMSS-R Conceptual and Video Tools to Support Teachers' Inquiries of Science Teaching, Content, and Student Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Nicole Wickler, LessonLab, Inc.
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,738,459.00

The researchers would study a pllan for professional development of elemtary
level teachers in science. This study would use the TIMSS-R Science Video public
use tapes to create and compare two professional development programs for
elementary teachers. The programs focus on developing science content by
engaging in long-term collaborative inquires. It would provide a training
session for 4th and 5th grade teachers during the summer months in which they
would see and discuss lessons videotaped from 8th grade teachers in TIMSS for
discussion and learning. The central question in the research study is to
discover how teachers "draw from different comunities of knowledge to represent
science in their classrooms"? The investigators will examine the role of science
community (what is the science?), the education community (what counts as
evidence?), and the classroom community (what actually happens) in effective
professional development activities for teachers. In particular, the
investigators intend to compare two perspectives: a "teacher-guided" that engage
teachers in collaborative inquiries of practice around a common set of artifacts
and a "framework-guided" approach that assumes that working with common
artifacts of practice is insufficient and that teachers need explicit guidance
and tools to see the links among the communities.