* 0310932
* Implementing Activity-based Cooperative Learning and Technology (ACT Curriculum) in Statistics Courses for Non-majors and K-12 Preservice Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Carl Lee, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 08/31/2007
* USD 177,052.00

Mathematical Sciences (21) General statistical knowledge and hence undergraduate
statistics courses play an important role in the growing emphasis on ensuring a
basic level of statistical literacy in the nation's post secondary school
graduates. This project adapts, implements and evaluates an Activity-Based,
Cooperative learning and Technology (ACT) curriculum in three statistics courses
for non-majors and K-12 prospective teachers at Central Michigan University. The
courses focus on the mastery of fundamental statistical reasoning skills and
concepts required to understand the increasingly quantitative world. This
project builds upon the calls for reforming statistics education by national
organizations and for meeting the NCTM Standards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Literature shows many students have difficulty in
connecting formulae with context and their experience in statistics.
Furthermore, research on learning statistics indicated students learn better by
using hands-on activities, projects and technology in groups. The project
integrates exemplary NSF-funded and successfully implemented: i) instructional
materials, ii) assessment instruments, and iii) on-line data analysis tools
using a common teaching framework that facilitates active learning. The project
objectives include: developing problem-solving and statistical reasoning skills,
the ability to apply content knowledge to real world problems, the ability to
work as a contributing team member, positive attitudes towards the increasingly
quantitative world, the ability to use ACT curriculum for K-12 teaching, and
improving written and oral presentation skills. Additional objectives for
instructors include developing a teaching community and conducting research to
evaluate the ACT curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project impacts about
6000 students, of which about 3600 are females or minority and 2000 are
prospective K-12 teachers. These K-12 teachers have an impact on the students
they teach. The use of the ACT curriculum by graduate students in their
internships impacts their future teaching. The implementation of web database
and online data analysis software is especially beneficial to statistics
instructors at small colleges and economically disadvantaged K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;