* 0310840
* Integration of Service-Learning Incorporating Environmental Atomic Absorption Analysis into the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Joan Esson, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* kristina parsons
* 05/31/2005
* USD 68,903.00

Chemistry (12) The Chemistry Department at Kalamazoo College is integrating
environmentally based service-learning laboratories involving atomic absorption
spectroscopy into the chemistry curriculum to more effectively engage students
in learning. Introducing environmental chemistry into the curriculum also
supports the college's Environmental Studies Concentration. The laboratories
being developed are modeled after the service-learning General Chemistry project
at the University of Utah, which employs atomic absorption spectroscopy to test
for lead in the local community. In adapting this model, students in
Introductory Chemistry I are collaborating with students in a sociology course
at Kalamazoo College to sample and test for lead in city neighborhoods. In
addition, students in Analytical Chemistry are working with county environmental
services and local elementary school students to sample and test the local
watershed for trace metals. The intellectual merit of the proposal lies in the
experience students will gain with atomic absorption spectroscopy in a
sequential fashion beginning in Introductory Chemistry I and continuing in
Analytical Chemistry and applying their new knowledge and skills to real
problems in the local community. The broader impacts of this project include
enhancing the chemistry and environmental studies curricula, strengthening
collaborative efforts between Kalamazoo College and the local community,
providing the community with needed results of chemical analyses, and promoting
science to elementary students who are predominately (~70%) from groups
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields.