* 0310414
* Workshop:  Security at Line Speed: Developing Next Generation Guidelines for Network Security in the Research and Higher Education Community
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Terry Gray, INTERNET2
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 01/31/2004
* USD 74,650.00

There are two difficult and seemingly contradictory imperatives facing the
research networking community today. The first is the need to enhance local
network security in the face of increased nationwide cyberprotection
requirements, and the second is the need to support deployment of advanced
networked services for campus researchers using distributed computing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the workshop is to propose a
process to begin to resolve these orthogonal requirements into a coordinated
architecture that will drive network research and campus deployments. Workshop
deliverables include:&lt;br/&gt;1) creation and publication of a Requirements
Document specifying the technical issues involved in improving network security
while preserving multiple layers of advanced network services&lt;br/&gt;2)
development of an Inventory of Current Practices for advance, high performance
network environments identifying effective existing approaches used by leading
campuses to integrate scientific networking with campout network security,
and&lt;br/&gt;3) creation of a standing expert Advisory Board to regularly
discuss new issues and tools in high performance security, with broad promotion
of those discussions and updates to the Inventory and Requirements
documents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through these activities, federal funding
agencies will be informed of key areas for investments to ensure security at
line speed, and large academic research institutions will be able to improve
network security while preserving an environment that enables their advanced
scientific and education missions. In addition, workshop outcomes are likely to
be useful as the larger cybersecurity research strategic plan and funding
initiatives are developed.&lt;br/&gt;