* 0310829
* A Problem and Reasoning Based Curriculum for Preservice Elementary Educators: Understanding Mathematics Deeply for Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Judith Flowers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 08/31/2007
* USD 199,576.00

Mathematical Sciences (21) This project addresses the need for improved
mathematics courses for future elementary teachers. The project creates four
instructional units on CDs each with detailed lesson guides and an assessment
package constituting the core of an exemplary, replicable model for teacher
education. The project adapts the problem- and reasoning-based curricula: the
Connected Mathematics Project and Investigations in Number, Data, and Space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project identifies worthwhile mathematical tasks with
the greatest potential for development, makes connections among key mathematical
ideas, and raises the level of mathematical challenge. Lessons are developed
around problems drawn from established research. The project also informs
practice in other courses. Developed courses are more problem-based, and
mathematical questioning and other instructional strategies are enhanced
throughout the development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The units being developed form
the first two of three courses required of all elementary educators at
University of Michigan-Dearborn and are used by instructors at public, private,
and community colleges. The initial users provide feedback on the development of
the materials. The project has the potential to create a 9-credit sequence that
is widely usable.&lt;br/&gt;