* 0310107
* New conformational sampling and large-scale electronic structure techniques:  applications to polypeptide structure, proton transport, and dynamics of silicate melts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Mark Tuckerman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 07/31/2007
* USD 345,000.00

Professor Mark Tuckerman, of New York University, is supported by Theoretical
and Computational Chemistry to perform quantum-mechanical-based investigations
on the structure of polypeptides, proton transport and the dynamics of silicate
melts. A significant component of this research deals with general algorithmic
issues that currently limit the efficiency of such calculations. The research
deals with developing on-the-fly force techniques that allow one to treat the
atomic and vibrational degrees of freedom semiclassically or quantum-
mechanically using forces that are determined from quantum-mechanical treatment
of the electronic degrees of freedom. Particular emphasis is on development of
descrete-variational grids for solution of Schrodinger's equation and numerical
scaling techniques that facilitate the simulation of uncommon events. The effort
also aims at the calculation of localized orthogonal molecular orbitals.

This work deals with development of new computational algorithms that will be
used to study the seemingly disparate technical problems confronted in the
design of fuel cells, the simulation of biological molecules and the storage of
nuclear waste materials. The common problem associated with these three topics
is that one is most interested in understanding processes that, in relation to
electronic interaction, occur infrequently and in determining how to control the
rate of these processes.

