* 0310193
* Integrating Lithospheric Dynamics, Geophysical Observations, and Three-Dimensional Whole Earth Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* William Holt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2008
* USD 219,594.00

&lt;br/&gt;Principal investigators seek to construct a complete description of
both the lithosphere and mantle dynamics on Earth. They propose a joint modeling
of the lithosphere (thin sheet) and three-dimensional mantle dynamics. These
models will be directly constrained by surface observations of geodesy, gravity,
topography, stress measurements from the World Stress Map, crustal structure
estimates, earthquake moment tensor solutions, together with mantle tomography
solutions and the inferred history of subduction. The new generations of three-
dimensional dynamic models can provide new insights into dynamics and rheology
of both lithosphere and mantle, especially, (1) lithosphere-mantle coupling, (2)
lithosphere dynamics of both continents and oceans, and (3) the role of lateral
viscosity variations in the lithosphere and asthenosphere. Their approach is to
solve the force-balance equations directly for vertically averaged deviatoric
stress in the lithosphere using the complete set of possible forces that are
applied to the lithosphere. This procedure is set up as an inverse method in
which the forces constitute observations and the deviatoric stresses constitute
model parameter estimates. These forces include (1) body forces associated with
gravitational potential energy (GPE) differences within the lithosphere
(directly inferred from observations of topography, geoid, and seismically
defined crustal thicknesses) and (2) basal tractions associated with
observationally constrained large-scale mantle circulation. The coupled three-
dimensional mantle circulation models, while providing basal tractions at the
base of the lithosphere, will also predict surface topography, geoid, and
surface motions that are directly compared with the surface observations. Such
observationally constrained lithosphereic and mantle circulation models allow us
to move a step forward in answering fundamental questions in geodynamics: such
as lithosphere-mantle coupling, asthenospheric and lithospheric viscosity and
their lateral variations, the role that the actual lithospheric viscosity
variations play in affecting mantle flow, basal tractions and plate motion, as
well as the relative importance of the various driving forces for plate motion
and plate boundary deformation. This proposal has the following broader impacts:
its proposed research will contribute toward the International Lithosphere
Projects (ILP) Global Strain Rate Map (GSRM) project
(http://archive.unavco.ucar.edu/ilp_gsrm) and it will strengthen the research
and teaching tool developed in that project by the P.I. in collaboration with
UNAVCO facility scientists Dr. Lou Estey and Dr. Chuck Meertens; the proposed
research will also provide training for a PhD student and it includes the
participation of Dr. Lucy Flesch, a post-doctoral fellow at Department of
Terrestrial Magnetism, who is experienced with lithosphere dynamic
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;