* 0310574
* Development of an Inquiry Based Life Science Curriculum for Non-Science Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Elizabeth Hays, Barry University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2005
* USD 137,244.00

Biological Science (61) This project addresses the need for engaging, lab-based
science courses for non-majors, particularly underrepresented minorities, and
the need to provide these students with opportunities to explore a wide variety
of scientific issues. Through these courses, students broaden their knowledge
base in science and improve their scientific literacy. The new course offerings
increase the number of existing laboratory-based courses within the curriculum,
support National Science Teachers Association Standards (Krockover, 2001), and
model best practices in science education for teaching non-science majors by
incorporating an inquiry-based and hands-on approach to the study of science.

Two NSF-supported projects serve as the general model for course development.
These are "Theme-Centered Laboratory Courses for Non-Science Majors"
(Berlinrood, Ithaca College, NSF DUE #9156197) and "Enhanced Scientific Literacy
Using Project-Based Biology Laboratory Exercises" (Morrison-Shetlar, Georgia
Southern University, NSF DUE # 0127066). The new course offering, "Sustainable
Ecology," also adapts and incorporates materials from Georgia Southern
University project. Two other new courses, "Disease Detectives" and "The Six
Senses", are modeled after research publications from a book titled Exploring
the Biomedical Revolution published by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. The
new entomology course, "Barry's Bugs - Insect Appreciation", is modeled after a
course designed by Dr. B. N. Danforth at Cornell University ("The Alien Empire:
Bizarre Biology of Bugs") and a course developed by Dr. F. T. Turpin at Purdue
University ("Insect Friend or Foe").

