* 0310208
* Eroding the Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2003,06/30/2009
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2009
* USD 199,856.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Appalachians stretch 4000 km from Georgia to
the Canadian Maritimes. They are old and enduring mountains. First uplifted in
the Paleozoic, parts of these mountains still rise up over 2000 meters above the
Atlantic. How quickly is a mountain range such as the Appalachians eroding
today? How quickly did it erode in the past? Are short and long term erosion
rates similar, implying steady rates of denudation over time?&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this research is straightforward, to understand rates of Appalachian highland
and piedmont erosion over space and time. We will apply a relatively new
technique (cosmogenic nuclide analysis of sediment, soil, and rock) to the old
question of&lt;br/&gt;Appalachian landscape evolution and integrate our new
findings with existing data sets.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed measurements will
compliment several recent and on-going efforts to quantify rates of erosion for
this well-studied, ancient orogen. Specifically, cosmogenic nuclides record
erosion integrated over a shorter time (shallower depth) than U/He which in turn
records a shorter time/lower temperature/shallower depth than fission tracks and
pressure-temperature-time paths deduced from mineral assemblages. Considering
all the data sets together, we anticipate being able to assess the variability
(or lack thereof) of denudation rates over time in terms of processes responding
primarily to structure, rock- type, climate, and/or epeirogeny
(tectonics).&lt;br/&gt;The study will focus on the southern Appalachians. Our
interdisciplinary approach will incorporate the collection of significant new
isotopic data. Measuring in-situ-produced 10Be in fluvial, colluvial, and
terrace sediments as well as in ridge-top and sub-colluvial bed-rock samples
collected from a carefully selected set of 6 drainage basins, we will quantify
sediment production and rock-denudation rates over the 10,000 to 100,000 year
time scale. Measurement of U/He in samples from the same basins will provide
denudation rate estimates over longer time frames. Drainage basins have been
chosen specifically so that the roles of lithology, relief, and climate in
controlling erosion rates can be estimated.&lt;br/&gt;Our study will build upon
a decade of orogen-scale studies that have elucidated dynamic interactions
between the surficial processes that erode rocks and deep earth processes that
uplift rocks. These studies are traditionally and necessarily focused on
constructional and steady-state orogens. Our study seeks to understand a
decaying orogen in order to address the poorly understood conspiracy of deep-
earth and surficial processes that results in the persistence of ancient orogens
as significant topographic features.&lt;br/&gt;The timing and setting for our
proposed study is ideal. Extensive Appalachian thermochronologic data have been
collected, new helium studies are underway, the siliciclastic sediment load in
the offshore post-rift sediment basins is well-documented, long-term landscape
evolution has been quantified, and stream sediment yield databases are
available. Most importantly, a pilot study has been completed in the Great
Smokey Mountains (Matmon et al., in press) demonstrating the viability of our
proposed approach.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has a strong educational component
that includes field, laboratory, and data analysis training and mentoring at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Students involved in this project will get
hands on experience with sophisticated analytical tools and will, as is the
tradition for UVM graduate students, interact with a wide variety of USGS
geologists and present their work for scrutiny at professional meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;