* 0310474
* Physical Oceanography Curriculum Development
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Craig Gilman, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2006
* USD 71,102.00

Oceanography (43) This project seeks to transform the physical oceanography
curriculum at Coastal Carolina University (CCU) from a traditional lecture-lab
structure to a technology-rich, collaborative learning environment by adapting
the SCALE-UP physics instructional model (from North Carolina State University)
and the Open Source Physics (OSP) curricular materials (from Davidson College).
This project combines the lecture and lab sections into an integrated
instructional block, creates collaborative learning groups among the students,
develops in-class conceptual questions and activities to enhance student
understanding, integrates computer analysis of oceanographic data into the
course, adapts Java-based physics simulation applets to model oceanographic
phenomena, and disseminates the results to other faculty and K-12 teachers in
the area. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This transformation impacts every
marine science major at CCU, as &lt;br/&gt;well as other majors seeking the
marine science or physics minors. It serves to increase students conceptual
understanding of physical oceanography, which is vitally important to all marine
scientists. This project improves their problem-solving ability and their
ability to do problems and research activities in groups. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project advances learning and discovery within the physical
&lt;br/&gt;oceanography curriculum by adapting successful teaching methods and
materials from other universities and applying them at CCU. It broadens the
participation of women in this field by adopting pedagogical techniques that
have been proven to increase the success of women in the physical sciences. It
enhances the educational infrastructure at CCU by adapting OSP curricular
materials to the physical oceanography curriculum. This project disseminates
these results to CCU faculty and local K-12 educators through workshops, and
nationally through presentations at national geoscience meetings. Finally, this
project benefits society as a whole by improving the physical oceanographic
understanding of the next generation of marine scientists. &lt;br/&gt;