* 0310901
* NMR Spectroscopy as a Cornerstone Technique in the Undergraduate Chemical Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Russell Timkovich, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 120,728.00

&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry (12) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) is a powerful
technique for structural determination and quantification that is widely used
across all areas of science. In the traditional undergraduate curriculum, hands-
on experience with NMR is typically limited outside of sophomore organic
classes. This project uses NMR as a cornerstone technique in nine undergraduate
laboratory classes. In additional to traditional uses of NMR to identify and
characterize structures in organic and inorganic chemistry, NMR is being used to
demonstrate principles in analytical, physical chemistry, and biochemistry labs.
The specific goal of this project is to improve student understanding of
chemical principles, by using NMR as a cornerstone technique, with which
students become proficient over their career. To achieve our goals of expanding
NMR beyond the sophomore organic lab, we are using a modern, high-field NMR
spectrometer. The new instrument is used in a hands-on fashion by both chemistry
majors and non-majors taking sophomore through senior level chemistry lab
classes. Published experiments, primarily from the Journal of Chemical
Education, are being adapted and integrated within the nine courses in order to
achieve our curricular goals. A tutorial page is used to walk students through
the transfer and processing of a standard NMR data file, with the processing
system modeled on one used at Florida State University. Finally, a workshop is
being offered annually to regional four-year institutions that are interested in
having student samples run on our NMR. The results are e-mailed back to the
students who then use software capable of all standard NMR processing functions
to analyze their data.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The use of technology in
the classroom is of increasing importance to teach modern scientific concepts
and engage computer literate students. NMR is a central technique since it can
be used to study a variety of problems. This project is leading to the
development of a number of new laboratory experiments, and these experiments
will be made available to other instructors interested in increasing the use of
NMR in their laboratory classes. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed project
is involving approximately 300 undergraduate students per year. These students
receive hands-on experience as a means to learn fundamental chemical concepts.
We also expect that students will be excited about chemistry, and science in
general, as a result of this project. In particular, by reaching out to non-
majors we hope to encourage these students, particularly those from under-
represented groups, to consider careers in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;