* 0310119
* High-Performance Computer Architecture in the Nanoelectronics Era: Overcoming the Reliability Challenge
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Margarida Jacome, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy M. Pinkston
* 07/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Jacome&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-Performance Computer Architecture in the
Nanoelectronics Era: Overcoming the Reliability
Challenge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formidable
increase in device densities promised by nanoscale integration will be
accompanied by a substantial rise in the numbers of faulty devices. This
increase in both hard and soft faults poses a major `reliability challenge,'
demanding a rethinking of fundamental microarchitectural techniques and
components. Indeed, performance will be inextricably tied to reliability. Thus,
it is important to investigate how effective reliability-performance tradeoffs
can be realized at the microarchitecture level. The proposal includes research
on several novel techniques including: reliability driven speculation, adaptive
validation via incremental recomputing of speculated values, and exploiting
reliability-aware functional units and self-checking capabilities. In addition
the research includes devising novel design methodologies aimed at achieving the
necessary reliability for microarchitectural components, and models capturing
the scaling of delay versus reliability for concrete component designs. Key
quality metrics (performance, reliability and yield) will be evaluated through
analysis and simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The timeliness, strategic
importance and huge potential payoff of advances in nanotechnologies are widely
recognized. The ability to engineer these technologies into new products will
create tremendous opportunities for economic expansion and improved quality of
life. Taking these technologies into production environments requires addressing
the reliability challenges identified in this proposal. The outcomes of this
project are likely to impact the design of future nanocomputing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;