* 0310809
* Adaptive Transceivers for Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Michael Honig, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2007
* USD 245,052.00

The PI is investigating methods for jointly adapting transmitters &lt;br/&gt;and
receivers in a wireless network. The objective is to
optimize&lt;br/&gt;performance by measuring and exploiting properties of the
channel &lt;br/&gt;and interference. Parameters adapted at the transmitter
include &lt;br/&gt;data rate and power, along with transmitted signatures, which
can &lt;br/&gt;span dimensions across space, time, and frequency. An
important&lt;br/&gt;part of this effort is to account explicitly for limited
feedback&lt;br/&gt;from the receiver to the transmitter. Both cellular and non-
cellular &lt;br/&gt;(e.g., peer-to-peer) wireless networks are being considered.
&lt;br/&gt;In the latter case, the PI is investigating methods for allocating
&lt;br/&gt;rate and power across degrees of freedom associated with
&lt;br/&gt;multiple antennas and links in a multi-hop
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joint power and signature optimization problems
are being studied&lt;br/&gt;both with perfect channel knowledge at the
transmitter, and with &lt;br/&gt;limited feedback. Signature optimization serves
to avoid interference while &lt;br/&gt;simultaneously exploiting channel
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Solutions to problems with perfect channel
knowledge&lt;br/&gt;provide benchmarks for comparisons with suboptimal
transmission schemes, &lt;br/&gt;e.g., when channels are unknown. Channel models
of interest include &lt;br/&gt;multiple access (reverse-link) and forward-link
channels, and &lt;br/&gt;the uncoordinated multi-input/multi-output channel,
which models &lt;br/&gt;a peer-to-peer network. Transmitter optimization is
being studied&lt;br/&gt;in the context of both direct-sequence spread spectrum
and&lt;br/&gt;multi-carrier signaling. Implications for joint transmitter-
receiver &lt;br/&gt;adaptation over time-varying channels are being
considered.&lt;br/&gt;Transmitter designs, which can exploit link diversity in a
&lt;br/&gt;simple multi-hop channel model, are also being
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;