* 0310583
* Adaptation and implementation of Research-based Curricula in Introductory Physics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Stamatis Vokos, Seattle Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2006
* USD 87,999.00

Physics (13) With involvement of the entire physics department, this project
seeks to: (a) improve learning for all students who take algebra- and calculus-
based introductory physics courses, 40% of whom are women; (b) contribute to the
research base on the learning and teaching of physics through identification of
the intellectual and affective states of students before, during, and after
instruction; (c) immerse advanced undergraduate students in STEM disciplines and
graduate students in the preservice teacher preparation program in a technology-
rich, research-driven instructional environment as peer instructors and
researchers; (d) provide professional development to the project faculty and
advanced students; and (e) expose all faculty in STEM disciplines and Science
Education to the results of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
vehicle for achieving the broad impact sought is the implementation and
adaptation of selected units from exemplary instructional materials that have
been developed on the basis of physics education research: University of
Washington's Tutorials in Introductory Physics, University of Maryland's
Activity-based Physics tutorials, and RealTime Physics. The implementation and
refinement of Interactive Examples delivered via Tycho, the University of
Illinois web-based homework system, assist students to sharpen their
quantitative problem solving. Students in one section of the first two quarters
of the calculus sequence also participate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing
research by faculty and students guide every component of this systemic project.
Results are disseminated locally and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;