* 0310466
* Foundations of Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Moses Charikar, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 01/31/2007
* USD 398,778.00

Complexity theory addresses the question of how much resource &lt;br/&gt;is
needed to solve a given computational problem. In recent &lt;br/&gt;years
complexity theory has found connections and applications &lt;br/&gt;in many
scientific and engineering disciplines. This project &lt;br/&gt;plans to
investigate complexity theory across a broad front. &lt;br/&gt;The topics
include communication complexity, decision trees, &lt;br/&gt;quantum algorithms,
quantum cryptography, and other foundational &lt;br/&gt;issues in complexity
theory. Te goal is to gain deep insights &lt;br/&gt;into the nature of
computation, so that one can most effectively &lt;br/&gt;perform computational
tasks in any model. It is expected that &lt;br/&gt;a variety of algebraic and
combinatorial techniques will be &lt;br/&gt;called upon to explore these
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two of the most interesting scientific developments
in recent years &lt;br/&gt;spring from the realization that complexity theory
can be utilized &lt;br/&gt;for cryptography, and that quantum mechanics can be
used for &lt;br/&gt;performing powerful computation. Advances in these fronts
have &lt;br/&gt;attracted interest from scientific communities at large,
&lt;br/&gt;as their relevance is far-reaching. The research of this project
&lt;br/&gt;could lead to substantial further progress in these two
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the broader domain of public education, the
Principal Investigator &lt;br/&gt;has given many speeches in recent years on
various topics on &lt;br/&gt;complexity, cryptography and quantum computing.
Many of these talks &lt;br/&gt;are geared toward general audiences and often
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;These lectures, if thoughtfully designed, can
stimulate the &lt;br/&gt;intellectual curiosity of young minds and develop their
interest &lt;br/&gt;in the computing sciences. With further advances of research
in &lt;br/&gt;these areas, one can expect that public awareness and interest
&lt;br/&gt;will be further enhanced to the good of a stronger scientific
education.