* 0310785
* Integration of Undergraduate Laboratory Experience by Use of a Common Experimental Organism: Caenorhabditis elegans
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Douglas Easton, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2006
* USD 45,594.00

Biological Sciences (61) This project is integrating the undergraduate
laboratory experience by introducing a common experimental organism,
Caenorhabditis elegans, into a series of biology courses that span the
curriculum. The use of a common organism allows laboratories to be structured
such that students use knowledge and techniques learned in lower level courses
to address experimental questions in more advanced courses. Instrumentation is
being introduced in the labs so that students can take full advantage of this
model organism. This approach is being adapted from NSF funded projects
involving the use of a cloned gene in several courses (9950647) and integrated
experiments with a common theme (9950879), and a course entitled "Worms in Class
at NYU" at New York University. The objectives of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Students understand the integrated nature of biological science and can apply
knowledge from one subdiscipline to questions in a second subdiscipline, 2.
Students understand why C. elegans is an appropriate model for the study of
behavior, genetics, molecular and cell biology; 3. Students effectively use
technology to study behavior, genetics, molecular and cellular biology of C.
elegans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrated laboratory experience fosters in
students the development of intellectual curiosity and problem solving skills
essential for the pursuit of a scientific career. It provides classroom research
experiences using cutting edge approaches with an experimental organism of
proven merit. Students in the program are encouraged to consider choosing the C.
elegans system for their independent undergraduate research projects.
Additionally, since more than half of the students in the project become biology
teachers, we expect these teachers to use C. elegans as an experimental organism
in their secondary school laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;A web page describing
laboratory exercises and project evaluation is posted as a resource for both
college faculty and secondary school educators implementing C. elegans based
laboratories in their curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;