* 0310085
* Collaborative Research: Further Investigation of the Onset and Evolution of Compaction and Dilation Bands
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Kathleen Issen, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2005
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project, a continuation of experimental and theoretical
investigation of compaction and dilation band formation, examines several
critical questions regarding conditions for localized band formation. Specific
project activities include: 1) investigation of the influence of stress
concentration on compaction band initiation/evolution, 2) investigation of the
influence of bedding and anisotropy on compaction band formation, 3) examination
of the localization behavior in Aztec sandstone and comparison with recent field
findings, 4) investigation of dilation band formation in porous sandstone under
triaxial extension, and 5) development and evaluation of two-damage mechanism
based constitutive models to represent observed microstructural damage
mechanisms. The experimental work, together with published data, provides a
compete set of mechanical and microstructural data on porous sandstones. Further
theoretical analyses examine the influence of constitutive models and stress
state on localization conditions, and include incorporation of experimentally
derived material parameter constraints. By synthesizing experimental and
theoretical results, a model is extrapolated to predict failure modes and
localization development in crustal settings for different stress states and
loading paths.