* 0311518
* Application of Thermal Analysis Techniques Across the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* David Boyd, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 30,680.00

Chemistry (12) Materials-related investigations and products are prominent in
recent technological advances, yet formal instruction in materials-related
fields is typically absent from the undergraduate curriculum. With the
acquisition of thermal analysis instrumentation (differential scanning
calorimeter and thermogravimetric analysis (DSC/TGA) to support instruction of
materials chemistry methods, we are in the process of formalizing instruction in
materials chemistry by infusing materials-related content into existing
undergraduate courses at several levels of our curriculum. The classes impacted
by this new instrumentation include General Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis,
Bioanalytical and Forensic Chemistry, and a new course, entitled "Laboratory
Methods in Materials Chemistry". Experiments from educational literature that
make use of DSC/TGA techniques are being adapted and implemented in each of the
above laboratory courses. For example, our general chemistry students use DSC to
examine the crystallization behavior of the amino acid glycine. Other
experiments, such as the effect of different plasticizers on the properties of
polystyrene films and connecting the DSC measurements of glass transition
temperature to the performance of some commercial polymers are being adapted in
other laboratory courses. The "Laboratory Methods in Materials Chemistry" is a
workshop style, laboratory intensive course that blends theory and application
of preparative and characterization strategies used in materials science. The
students utilize our existing equipment (IR, NMR, spin coater, tube furnaces,
high vacuum lines, GPC) with the newly acquired DSC-TGA to provide an overview
of methods used to synthesize and characterize useful solid-state materials. The
new instruments are also used by our faculty in doing collaborative research
with colleagues and undergraduate students. We anticipate that the DSC/TGA
laboratories will add significantly to the technical preparation of our
students, and better prepare them to teach, pursue graduate study, or seek
industrial employment in materials-related fields.