* 0311506
* Enhanced Learning for Students in Intermediate and Advanced Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2006
* USD 70,993.00

Physics (13) This project implements new laboratory experiments and overhauls
existing experiments in the intermediate and advanced undergraduate courses in
the Boston University Physics Department. The main objective is to promote
student understanding of quantum mechanics by emphasizing interactive
engagement, aided by application of new equipment and technology. This project
has a broad impact, affecting 250 students per year, improving their
understanding of fundamental concepts in modern physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Modern Physics courses the project adds Magnetic
Torque and single-photon experiments (see for example, Schneider and LaPuma, A
Simple Experiment for Discussion of Quantum Interference and Which-Way
Measurement, Am. J. Phys., 70 (3), 266-271, 2002) to build on student's
experience and to provide a foundation for later work. The laboratories employ
new equipment so students can carry out measurements more efficiently and
investigate underlying principles in greater depth. The project also includes
the construction of a revised lab manual requiring more intellectual effort from
students. In the Advanced Laboratory course, three experiments are added that
produce better results, less frustration than previous experiments, and
significant insights into fundamental principles of physics. To evaluate the
project, a new Quantum Concept Exam and questionnaires for students and faculty
is developed. Publication of results will be in peer reviewed journals and via
the University web site.