* 0311962
* Conference: Gametophytes: Evolution, Development and Function; Monte Verita, Ascona, Switzerland; June 8-13, 2003
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Robert Pruitt, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 05/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

Pruitt 0311962

An international conference entitled "Gametophytes: Evolution, Development and
Function" to be held at Monte Verita, Ascona, Switzerland June 8th - June 13th,
2003 is being organized by Dr. Ueli Grossniklaus (University of Zurich,
Switzerland), Dr. Mitsuyasu Hasebe (National Institute for Basic Biology,
Japan), and Drs. Robert Pruitt and Jo Ann Banks (Purdue University). The goals
of the conference are to bring together a diverse group of international
scientists to: 1) learn about all aspects of gametophyte biology through
seminars, workshops, posters and informal discussions; 2) identify future
research needs and directions; and 3) explore new ideas for applying this
knowledge to benefit plant breeding and crop production. The meeting will be
advertised and organized to encourage participation of graduate students and
young investigators. This is the first meeting ever organized around the plant
gametophyte, which is remarkable given the essential functions that the
gametophyte performs in plant sexual reproduction.

The plant gametophyte represents the haploid phase of the plant life cycle and
functions to produce the egg and sperm. Although it is minute in size in most
plants, it has an essential role in sexual reproduction and, for this reason,
has recently become the focus of intensive study by many scientists throughout
the world. The gametophytic phase of the life cycle of lower plants consists of
a macroscopic, free-living organism that is developmentally complex and responds
to its environment in diverse ways. During the evolution of the flowering plants
the male and female gametophytes were reduced to microscopic haploid structures
entirely dependent on their diploid parent for survival. These reduced
gametophytes are structurally simpler, but retain their essential role in plant
sexual reproduction as well as key developmental processes such as asymmetric
cell division and differential cell fate specification.

By improving communication between plant scientists studying gametophytes of
many species, this meeting will accelerate the pace of this fundamentally
important research. A better understanding of gametophytes and their role in
reproduction will ultimately lead to new strategies for improving plant
breeding. The manipulation of sexual reproduction in plants through male
sterility and self-incompatibility, for example, has led to spectacular
successes in plant breeding and agriculture despite a very limited understanding
of how sexual reproduction is controlled. An understanding of the genetic basis
of gametophyte development and function will open up many new opportunities for
controlling these processes. This conference will bring together scientists from
around the world to discuss current and future research efforts to understand
all aspects of gametophyte development in all plants and how this knowledge can
be applied for the purposes of improving plant breeding and crop production.

