* 0311911
* Modeling and Computation of Flow-Structure Interaction in Multi-Phase and Complex Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Hector Ceniceros, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 104,720.00

Ceniceros&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and collaborators develop two classes
of&lt;br/&gt;modern, hybrid numerical methods to study fluid-
structure&lt;br/&gt;interaction for multi-phase flows in two and three
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid computational methodologies merge two sets of
usually&lt;br/&gt;disjoint approaches, front capturing (both through the level
set&lt;br/&gt;method and through phase field based models) and front
tracking&lt;br/&gt;(immersed boundary setting) on one hand, and moving meshes
and&lt;br/&gt;adaptive mesh refinements on the other, to produce an
efficient&lt;br/&gt;method that exploits the best features of each
individual&lt;br/&gt;approach. In addition, controlled adaptive front-tracking
in&lt;br/&gt;concert with a leading small-scales semi-implicit
time&lt;br/&gt;discretization is used to overcome the long-standing
time&lt;br/&gt;stepping problem (stiffness) associated with interfacial
tension.&lt;br/&gt;The blending of all these ingredients produces fully
adaptive&lt;br/&gt;and non-stiff hybrid methods for capturing accurately small-
scale&lt;br/&gt;effects, high interfacial deformations, and flow-
structure&lt;br/&gt;interaction in multi-phase and complex flows.&lt;br/&gt; The
understanding of how flow-structure interaction&lt;br/&gt;influences the
macroscopic behavior of multi-phase flows is of&lt;br/&gt;both fundamental and
practical significance. Surfactants,&lt;br/&gt;viscoelastic fibers, fluid
interfaces, and polymeric&lt;br/&gt;microstructures and nanostructures can
radically change the&lt;br/&gt;behavior of a flow and ultimately determine the
properties of&lt;br/&gt;complex soft matter formulations. The methodologies are
an&lt;br/&gt;important tool to study flow-structure interaction for a
wide&lt;br/&gt;variety of problems of direct interest to nanotechnology,
the&lt;br/&gt;soft materials industry, and to some biomedical applications.
The&lt;br/&gt;project also serves an important education goal:
the&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary education and training of undergraduate
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;