* 0311929
* Mechanisms of Calcium Carbonate Precipitation and Dissolution: Microbial Populations, Metabolic Processes and Mineral Products
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Pieter Visscher, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2007
* USD 332,106.00

Visscher Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This project is investigating the underlying
mechanisms of carbonate precipitation in biologically active sediments by
performing a geobiological study on a gradient from lithifying to non-lithifying
microbial communities from microbial mats in a hypersaline pond (Eleuthera,
Bahamas). Field measurements and in situ manipulations are being combined with a
variety of laboratory experiments to isolate and characterize the biological
processes and environmental variables that control carbonate precipitation. The
PIs are examining microbial community composition, metabolic rates, and EPS
characteristics in relation to carbonate mineral formation. Environmental
parameters which are being investigated include water chemistry (e.g., pH,
[Ca2+], [CO32-]) and light intensity. Microbial metabolism
(production/consumption of inorganic carbon) on carbonate precipitation are
being investigated by experimenting with pure and mixed bacterial cultures in
both batch and continuous culture. By focusing on precipitation and dissolution
along a natural gradient from lithifying mats to gelatinous EPS-rich mats, the
PIs hope to understand the general rules that govern calcium carbonate
precipitation by microbial communities. This information is being used to
develop a mechanistic theory describing mineral precipitation in biologically
active sediments. Since the main microbial guilds (cyanobacteria, sulfur
oxidizers, sulfate reducers) responsible for carbonate precipitation are found
in numerous environments, the theory developed will address the entire carbonate
factory, the role of microbes in the formation of geologically important mineral
products and the lithification and preservation of biological materials.
&lt;br/&gt;