* 0311769
* 2003 Cold Spring Harbor Conference:  Genomic Approaches to Transcriptional Regulation, March 6-9, 2003, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 02/28/2005
* USD 15,000.00

This project provides partial funding for the "Genomic Approaches to
Transcriptional Regulation Conference", to be held at Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, March 6-9, 2003. The meeting will focus on unraveling the regulatory
information that controls the activation and repression of genes involved in
developmental, metabolic, and environmental responses. Traditionally,
investigators have studied this problem by analyzing the DNA-binding preferences
of specific transcription factors, and/or the cis-regulatory elements that
control the expression patterns of single genes. These studies have tentatively
identified DNA sequence motifs for around one hundred transcription factors, and
have led to the idea that transcriptional regulation at the genome level
involves a complex interplay between modular DNA sequence elements such as
enhancers, silencers, insulators, and basal promoter elements. Despite this
progress, there is still much to learn about the mechanisms that control the
transcriptional repertoire within an individual cell. Because of the scope of
this problem, researchers have begun to refine traditional experimental
approaches and invent new ones. Many of these approaches involve a computational
component in their design or interpretation. Other strategies have evolved from
the availability of several complete genomic sequences and the prospects of many
more to come. It is clear that effective collaborations between experimental and
computational biologists will be required to grapple with this complex problem.
Thus this meeting will be organized so as to permit a free cross-disciplinary
exchange of existing ideas and expertise. It is hoped that this meeting will
provide a mechanism for the establishment of new collaborations, and a forum for
discussing new experimental and computational approaches.