* 0311800
* Manifold Learning from Unorganized High-dimensional Data Points
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Hongyuan Zha, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 01/31/2007
* USD 261,187.00

Zha&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his colleagues use spectral methods
to&lt;br/&gt;investigate a challenging problem in unsupervised learning
and&lt;br/&gt;data visualization: given a set of unorganized data
points&lt;br/&gt;sampled possibly with noise from an underlying manifold,
compute&lt;br/&gt;a set of global coordinates of the data points with respect
to&lt;br/&gt;the underlying manifold. The approach is guided by the
general&lt;br/&gt;principle that global structures can emerge from careful
analysis&lt;br/&gt;of local interactions. The central idea is the exploration
of&lt;br/&gt;tangent spaces as representations of local geometry on
a&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear manifold using weighted PCA, and the global
alignment&lt;br/&gt;of those local tangent spaces to obtain the global structure
of&lt;br/&gt;the manifold by way of computing a partial eigendecomposition
of&lt;br/&gt;the neighborhood connection matrix. The study focuses on
the&lt;br/&gt;following areas: 1) effective local geometric and
topological&lt;br/&gt;structures for manifold learning; 2) the interaction of
the local&lt;br/&gt;sampling density, noise level, the regularity of the
manifold and&lt;br/&gt;the local curvature structure, and their effects on the
accuracy&lt;br/&gt;of manifold learning; 3) local smoothing methods to make
manifold&lt;br/&gt;learning more robust to noise and outliers; 4) connections
with&lt;br/&gt;infinite mixture models, one-class support vector machines
and&lt;br/&gt;level set methods; 5) efficient and scalable algorithms
for&lt;br/&gt;large-scale manifold learning problems.&lt;br/&gt; With the
advancement in modern computing technology, we are&lt;br/&gt;faced with the
challenging problems of extracting useful&lt;br/&gt;information from vast
amounts of data. The data generated in a&lt;br/&gt;variety of applications tend
to have tens of thousands of&lt;br/&gt;attributes, leading to the problem
characterized by "curse of&lt;br/&gt;dimensionality." In many applications,
however, high-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;data points are governed by a few intrinsic
degrees of freedom.&lt;br/&gt;Think of the set of images depicting a
horizontally rotating&lt;br/&gt;face: the images are high-dimensional but the
intrinsic degree of&lt;br/&gt;freedom of the image set is simply one,
representing the rotation&lt;br/&gt;angle of the face. The focus of this
proposal is the development&lt;br/&gt;of geometric, statistical, and
computational methods for&lt;br/&gt;extracting those latent intrinsic degrees of
freedom by modeling&lt;br/&gt;the set of data points as samples from nonlinear
manifolds, and&lt;br/&gt;the discovery of the global structure of the manifolds
from&lt;br/&gt;careful analysis of local interactions. The results,
algorithms,&lt;br/&gt;and techniques developed have immediate applications
in&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics, especially for gene expression analysis
for&lt;br/&gt;detecting and distinguishing diseases and disease types;
in&lt;br/&gt;appearance-based modeling for people detection using
video&lt;br/&gt;sequences generated from surveillance cameras; in
helping&lt;br/&gt;intelligence analysts to sift through large amount of
textual&lt;br/&gt;information by more efficient modeling of text
document&lt;br/&gt;collections; and in enhancing computer-supported
collaborative&lt;br/&gt;learning and performance measurement in second language
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;