* 0311690
* Quantitative Network Security Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* David Moore, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 384,183.00

Proposal number: CCR-0311690&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Quantitative Network
Security Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: David Moore, Geoffrey M. Voelker,
Stefan Savage&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research investigates the following
questions: how does the nature of&lt;br/&gt;large-scale Internet security
threats change over time, how effective&lt;br/&gt;are attackers at compromising
services, and how well do existing&lt;br/&gt;security countermeasures provide a
meaningful defense against these&lt;br/&gt;threats in
practice?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This requires the development of a combination of
network analysis&lt;br/&gt;techniques and network measurement infrastructure to
analyze these&lt;br/&gt;threats. In particular, this project has three specific
goals. First,&lt;br/&gt;our prototype measurement infrastructure will be re-
engineered to&lt;br/&gt;provide real-time analysis about current Internet-wide
security&lt;br/&gt;anomalies. This will allow for active measurements to
characterize the&lt;br/&gt;impact of attacks, the presence and effectiveness of
security&lt;br/&gt;countermeasures and patches, and to better correlate this
data with&lt;br/&gt;other sources of network measurement data. Second, tracking
these&lt;br/&gt;events on a long-term basis allows extraction of trends in
the&lt;br/&gt;prevalence, make-up, and staging of large-scale Internet
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;Creating this kind of longitudinal dataset is essential
for&lt;br/&gt;understanding the evolution of the threats and vulnerabilities
being&lt;br/&gt;exploited. Finally, while there has been initial validation of
results&lt;br/&gt;concerning large-scale homogenous attacks, it is an open
question how&lt;br/&gt;well these techniques can be used for also observing
smaller or highly&lt;br/&gt;skewed attack distributions. This research will
evaluate the resolution&lt;br/&gt;of techniques by comparing with smaller scale
monitors and direct&lt;br/&gt;measurements on individual networks. Together
these efforts will&lt;br/&gt;produce the first meaningful datasets about large-
scale network attacks&lt;br/&gt;on the Internet. It is hoped that this data will
ultimately have impact&lt;br/&gt;beyond the individual results of this research,
and will change the way&lt;br/&gt;network security decisions are made.