* 0311972
* SGER: Use of the Tetracysteine Tag to Study Localization Dynamics of Hydroxyproline-Rich Glycoproteins (HRGP)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Maura Cannon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2005
* USD 76,332.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Maura Cannon of the University of Massachusetts
to test the application of the recently developed 'tet-tag' technology for use
in plant cells. This technology will be tested with a HRGP (hydroxyproline-rich
glycoprotein) in the model plant Arabidopsis. HRGPs are a large family of cell
wall proteins that occur in all known plants, and are involved in cell wall
structure, cell shape, cell division, and plant growth and development. Although
vitally important to plants, very little is known about HRGPs. To identify their
localization dynamics at the cellular level, would be a valuable contribution to
understanding their functions. In animal cells it has been shown that the
biarsenical fluorophores, FLAsH or ReAsH, bind to recombinant proteins
containing a tetracysteine sequence, CCXXCC, where X is a non-cysteine amino
acid. When bound to the tet-tag, FLAsh and ReAsH fluoresce at different
wavelengths to each other, therefore, a tet-tagged protein can be visualized in
space and time, and older proteins can be distinguished from younger proteins.
Antibodies are not required with these probes, thus making them very useful for
localizing products of large gene families, where a specific antibody to an
individual gene family member, can be impossible to obtain. Also, due to its
small size, the tet-tag is less likely to hinder protein function, which is
important in the case of structural proteins such as HRGPs.

Results from this project will not only provide data concerning the HRGP in
question, but it will enable other cell wall proteins to be probed by the
methods developed. This is important because plant cell walls are a major
component of food and animal feed, and are the starting material for most fuels.
Data on the dynamics of essential components of cell walls will facilitate the
improved production of plant biomass. Furthermore, the research in this proposal
will provide training for students at the interface of molecular, cellular and
developmental biology.