* 0311169
* Collaborative Research: A Novel Approach in Improving Power Electronics and Electric Drives Courses, Curriculum, and Laboratories: Multi-University Adaptation and Implementation
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Mohammad Shahidehpour, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 08/31/2004
* USD 63,896.00

Electrical Engineering (55)- Power electronics converters and electric drives
are being put into use at an increasingly rapid rate. They enable smarter
utilization of electric and electronic systems. Declining student interest in
strategically important fields of power electronics and electric drives is the
problem being addressed by this project. Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT),
Montana State University (MSU), University of Alaska-Fairbanks (UAF), and
University of North Dakota (UND) are the four participating universities
collaborating in this project. This project is improving education in
engineering at the four participating academic institutions through the
adaptation and implementation of exemplary materials, laboratory experiences,
and educational practices that have been developed and proven successful at the
University of Minnesota (UMN) under the NSF CCLI-EMD-9952704 grant. Objectives
and expected outcomes of the project are the revitalization of courses in power
electronics and electric drives with the state-of-the-art laboratories and,
thus, providing the electric power industry with a larger and better trained
supply of engineers. Though the upgrading of the power electronics and electric
drives courses and laboratories are to meet the needs of the undergraduate
students, these courses and laboratories work equally well to meet the
continuing education needs of professional engineers. These initiatives are
motivating the exceptional students to pursue engineering careers in these
exciting and challenging areas of the electric power field. Hence, this project
is sustaining and strengthening the Nation's engineering capabilities. Meeting a
critical challenge of revitalizing courses and laboratories in these strategic
fields is the intellectual merit of this collaborative proposal. Ensuring
highest quality education and multi-disciplinary interaction with mechanical
engineering, computer engineering, and other engineering fields is the main
broader impact.