* 0311843
* DMRG Studies of Doped Antiferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Steven White, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

One of the most exciting areas in condensed matter physics is the study of
strong correlation effects in low dimensional systems. Of particular interest
are the high temperature superconducting cuprates. These systems exhibit a wide
range of behavior in addition to superconductivity, including antiferromagnetism
and striped phases. Numerical simulations of models of these systems play a
crucial role, since the systems have strong coupling terms and competition
between different types of order. The principal investigator is the creator of
the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG), which is one of the most
effective techniques for studying strongly correlated systems. This project will
apply DMRG to models of the cuprates in a variety of
circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In one set of studies, the properties of a
superconducting vortex core in a two-dimensional antiferromagnet will be
studied. Recent scanning tunneling microscopy studies have revealed intriguing
checkerboard patterns in the local density of states surrounding vortex cores
which are not yet understood. The DMRG method id particularly well adapted to
study this phenomenon. If these patterns are reproduced in the simulations, a
clear understanding will be obtained about their origins. In another set of
studies, the nature of the correlations around doped impurities in the copper
oxygen layers common to cuprates will be studied. These impurities provide a
window into the normal state underlying these
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel technique for determining the
superfluid stiffness and superfluid density will be developed for ladder
systems. This will provide much more direct information about superconductivity
than the usual pairing correlation measurements. In another set of studies, a
new type of diagonally oriented ladder system will be studied in order to
understand nodal quasiparticles in the 2D copper oxygen
layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using another numerical method, numerical canonical
transformations, we will work to derive models for the cuprates from ab initio
calculations and from more basic models. Curently, the construction of models is
an art rather than a standard technique, and a better method may reveal
important inadequacies in current models.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Algorithms
developed in the course of this research have wide applicability and are
accessible via the internet.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;One of the most exciting
areas in condensed matter physics is the study of strong correlation effects in
low dimensional systems. Of particular interest are the high temperature
superconducting cuprates. These systems exhibit a wide range of behavior in
addition to superconductivity, including antiferromagnetism and striped phases.
Numerical simulations of models of these systems play a crucial role, since the
systems have strong coupling terms and competition between different types of
order. The principal investigator is the creator of the density matrix
renormalization group (DMRG), which is one of the most effective techniques for
studying strongly correlated systems. This project will apply DMRG to models of
the cuprates in a variety of circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;