* 0311474
* Integrated Guided-Inquiry Laboratories with the use of HPLC Across Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Helen Boylan, Westminster College
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 07/31/2007
* USD 67,049.00

Chemistry (12) Building on our previous efforts in establishing a laboratory
program around the concept of discovery-based learning, we are expanding on this
pedagogical perspective by merging lecture and laboratory for our Introductory,
Organic, Biochemistry, and Chemical Analysis courses through block scheduling
and using an HPLC system networked to adjacent classrooms. Essential to this
approach is the rapid acquisition, analysis, and sharing of chemical data
collected by students. These tasks are accomplished through the integrated use
of contemporary instrumentation such as NMR, UV-VIS, AA and HPLC to expedite
analysis and thereby create more time for discovering, thinking, and learning.
We are adapting several experiments and methods endorsed by the NSF New
Traditions Chemistry Initiative, centered at the University of Wisconsin, and
others published in the educational chemical literature, primarily the Journal
of Chemical Education. A typical science student's exposure to this integrated
format occurs in six different courses, four of which employ HPLC. Because this
project features the combined implementation of block scheduling, it provides
more opportunity for laboratory inquiries than experienced in traditional
scheduling. By repeatedly encountering contemporary instrumentation and the
problem-based approach to instruction, students are able to explore various
methods of analysis and nurture their independent decision-making role in the
experimental process. We plan to disseminate the results from this project
locally and to the broader chemical education community by giving presentations
at the Biennial Conference on Chemical Education as well as at the local and
regional ACS meetings. Results on new laboratory inquiries produced from this
project will be also be submitted for publication in the Journal of Chemical
Education.