* 0311027
* A Remote, Robotic Observatory for Undergraduate Astronomy Research and Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* David Griffiths, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2006
* USD 36,142.00

Astronomy (11) Once available only to professional astronomers, remote, robotic
observatories are now being built and used by small colleges as well as by
amateur astronomers. Reliable, mass-produced telescopes and robotic mounts have
become available within the past ten years. Successful remote observatories
developed for education include projects such as the Telescopes in Education
program as well as the remote observatory developed by Angelo State University.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A remote observatory is a valuable tool for undergraduate
education, especially for urban colleges such as Reed, which is located in
Portland under light-polluted and frequently-cloudy skies. The project supports
a remote, robotic observatory located outside the Portland area and used for
undergraduate education and research as well as public outreach. The observatory
houses a 16-inch RCOS telescope on a Paramount ME robotic mount and is used for
two purposes: by Reed physics undergraduates collecting data for senior thesis
projects in observational astrophysics; and by students in introductory and
advanced astronomy courses to collect data for labs. For labs and
demonstrations, the telescope would be operated in real time over the internet.
When not operated in real time, it would be scripted to automatically collect
data for long-term, student-directed projects, possibly including spectroscopic
monitoring of close binary stars and the detection and astrometry of near-earth
asteroids. &lt;br/&gt;