* 0311348
* Symbolic Approaches to Analysis and Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Ashish Tiwari, SRI International
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2006
* USD 209,967.00

Abstract:

Hybrid systems consist of discrete time systems interacting with continuous time
systems. Most frequently they arise when a discrete computational device
functions in a continuous physical environment. Such systems have become very
common, thanks to the proliferation of software in controlling physical systems.
Modeling and analysis of hybrid systems is, therefore, paramount for efficient
development of high quality safe devices. Formal models of hybrid systems have
been developed by combining discrete state transition formalisms with continuous
dynamical systems. Developing analysis technology for such expressive formalisms
is a challenging task. In recent years, several analysis tools have been
developed for specialized classes of hybrid models that either restrict the
continuous behavior or the discrete behavior severely. The continuous component
of a hybrid system, in particular, presents a great challenge to the development
of sound analysis techniques.

This project aims to develop sound and effective techniques and tools for
analysis of large hybrid system models. The approach centers around the
construction of approximate abstractions for hybrid systems using intelligent
abstraction mappings that yield effective computability and scalability. The
project builds on the hybrid abstraction technique that combines predicate
abstraction for discrete systems with qualitative abstraction of continuous
dynamical systems. It focuses on (i) improving techniques to generate the most
appropriate abstraction mappings by structurally analyzing the continuous
dynamics; (ii) the exploitation of the modular structure of the discrete and
continuous components, and the compositional structure of the hybrid system; and
(iii) developing the necessary symbolic methods for effective automation.

The tools and techniques developed under this project will have broader impacts
by making analysis amenable to intermediate and large hybrid system models in
application areas such as embedded system design for automotive and other
applications and bioinformatics. It also helps students develop intuitions about
complex system behaviors without analytically solving them. The results are
disseminated through research publications and the tools are made available for
academic use.



