* 0311692
* Introduction of Bioinformatics in an Undergraduate Molecular Techniques Laboratory using Extreme Halophiles as Models
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Richard Shand, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2004
* USD 33,815.00

Biological Sciences (61) This project is adapting research tools in
bioinformatics and microarray analysis as a teaching method. The intellectual
merit of this proposal addresses the problem of the technical infrastructure
required for bioinformatics by introducing into an existing undergraduate
molecular techniques laboratory two inquiry-based experiments: DNA sequencing
and concomitant phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA genes recovered from novel
extreme halophiles isolated from the environment; and global differential gene
expression in the extremely halophilic archaeon Halobacterium sp. NRC-1 by DNA
microarray analysis. The objectives for the DNA sequencing/phylogenetic study
are: (i) PCR amplification of 16S rRNA genes from extremely halophilic organisms
the students isolate from a nearby salt mine, (ii) sequencing these genes and
submitting the sequences to GenBank, and (iii) placing the organisms
phylogenetically based upon these sequences. The objectives for the microarray
analysis are: (i) designing and implementing differential gene regulation
experiments, (ii) extracting and labeling RNA, (iii) probing, scanning and
analyzing DNA microarrays from Halobacterium NRC-1, and (iv) determining which
genes are differentially expressed under the experimental conditions. The
broader impacts of this proposal include: (i) advancing discovery and
understanding using inquiry-based teaching and learning, (ii) integrating
research and education by adapting current research on extreme halophiles into
an undergraduate teaching laboratory, (iii) enhancing the technical educational
infrastructure with the acquisition of instrumentation, and (iv) disseminating
the results through the world wide web, GenBank, articles in peer-reviewed
journals of science education, and presentations at the education divisions of
professional societies.&lt;br/&gt;