* 0311260
* Enhancement to the Undergraduate Advanced Physics Laboratory Experience: Measurement of Muon Properties
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Sally Koutsoliotas, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/2006
* USD 25,602.00

This project significantly enhances the Advanced Physics Laboratory curriculum
at Bucknell University in two distinct ways. First, it enables the PIs to
implement a series of advanced laboratories that engage students in the complete
scientific enterprise. Advanced laboratory classes are traditionally seen as a
stepping-stone to the process of new research. These labs are the product of
existing experiments in the literature (e.g., R.W.Clay, et al., Electronic
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia, 17 (2), 171; or N. Easwar
and D.A. MacIntire, Am. J. Phys. 59 (7), 1991) as well as the PI's extensive
experience in the field of high-energy physics. This project addresses a key
element that is often overlooked in the undergraduate laboratory environment: a
preliminary calculation that justifies the experiment and estimates the
likelihood of its success. The addition of this aspect to existing experiments
significantly increases the benefit both to students planning to pursue advanced
degrees in science, as well as those planning to go into industry. The second
contribution of this project is the addition of a muon lifetime experiment to
the Advanced Physics Laboratory class. This experiment introduces undergraduates
to the area of experimental high-energy physics using modern instrumentation
common to the particle physics research environment. In addition, the initial
construction and commissioning of this experiment provides an opportunity for an
independent project to an upper-division undergraduate student. Finally, the
equipment serves as a valuable resource for classroom demonstrations for several
undergraduate physics classes. The results of the project are evaluated and
published in peer-reviewed journals and presented both by faculty and
undergraduate students at relevant national and regional conferences.