* 0311052
* Remotely Accessed Energy Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2005
* William Hutzel, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 12/31/2005
* USD 91,343.00

Engineering - Engineering Technology (58)&lt;br/&gt;Remotely accessible
laboratories are becoming more common, but can they really help satisfy the
learning objectives for engineering technology laboratories? Sharing lab
resources is becoming more attractive as the pace of technical innovation
escalates. The cost of purchasing and maintaining a sophisticated piece of
laboratory equipment is easier to justify if it can be used by a large number of
students. Journals and conference proceedings are full of implementation
projects, but objective evaluations are rare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project
involves the development, deployment, and evaluation of a remotely accessible
energy laboratory. Our work uses a model similar to the WEAVE program developed
by faculty members at Duke for web enable experimentation. Although our
laboratory facility is physically located on the West Lafayette campus of Purdue
University, web-based controls and an interactive tutorial allow this equipment
to be used by Associate Degree students at seven different Mechanical
Engineering Technology locations across the state of Indiana. Our project
compares learning for students that use the equipment first-hand versus students
that use the same equipment in a distance learning format. Our hope is that any
project that demonstrates the strengths and weaknesses of using remote access to
distribute laboratory resources will have a significant impact on the
engineering technology community. &lt;br/&gt;