* 0311536
* Adaptation and Implementation of the Harvard Astronomy-191 Labs in the Undergraduate Astronomy Laboratory at Berkeley
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Geoffrey Marcy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2007
* USD 80,389.00

Astronomy (11) The Optical Astronomy Lab offers experiments in classical and
modern astronomy. The specific educational goals are to develop understanding of
various physical principles, statistics, and experimental uncertainty. More
broadly, the goal is to involve students in the exploratory process of
experimental and observational science, with the concomitant development of
quantitative reasoning and deep thinking about specific problems.

The lab emphasizes inquiry-based learning and peer instruction, and anecdotal
evidence tells us that this Lab has been very successful, particularly in (1)
empowering women to pursue career paths in science and technology and (2)
providing all students with the versatility to embark on a broad range of career
paths.

This project makes significant improvements in the course and, additionally,
transmits these to the broader community. Objectives include: 1) Benefit from
the excitement and motivation afforded by increasing the emphasis on modern
astronomy; 2) Include spectroscopy, which is currently absent from the course;
3) Utilize modern educational literature to implement improved instructional
techniques; and 4) Include formal evaluation to replace anecdotal evidence.

These objectives are being accomplished in two ways. First, the project is
adapting certain aspects of the Harvard University Astronomy-191 labs. Several
ex-Harvard Berkeley graduate students are participating in this process as the
first Graduate Student Instructors. Second, astronomy faculty are collaborating
with Berkeley education professionals, both to design even better instructional
techniques and to design and use proper evaluation instruments.