* 0311609
* Developing a Research-Rich Introductory Biology Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Jeffrey McKinnon, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2006
* USD 169,978.00

Biological Sciences (61) This project addresses the need to support
undergraduate research by introducing inquiry into two introductory courses. The
PIs are restructuring two introductory biology courses to include inquiry-
based, multi-week laboratory modules adapted from several successful external
models. Simultaneously, they are revising the lecture portion of these courses
to increase interaction and inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the laboratory
models being adapted in the BIO I course are the Plant Profile Project (R. Noyd,
(http://www.botany2001.org/section13/abstracts/9.shtml, 2001), Yeast Genetics
Model System (T. Manney, et al., Kansas State University), Evolution Lab, a unit
in Biology Labs On-Line (BLOL, http://biologylab.awlonline.com/, a collaboration
of the California State University system Center for Distributed Learning and
Addison Wesley Longman), Angiosperm Hormones (D. Emmeluth and D. Brott, Am.
Biol. Teacher, 1985), Behavioral and Evolutionary Ecology in Springs (D.
Glazier, http://faculty.juniata.edu/glazier/researchlink/rl2kpage1.htm ), and
Conservation Biology (N. Ruggeri, University of Wisconsin-Madison.)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model interactive lecture techniques include debate, role-
playing, and mid-lecture review questions answered singly or cooperatively (J.
Faust and D. Paulson, J. Exc. Coll. Teach, 1998; K. DeNeve and M. Heppner,
Innov. Higher Educ., 1997; F. Caccavo, Am. Biol. Teacher,
2001).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new curriculum produces students with better
research skills, a deeper understanding of science, and enthusiasm for
conducting research. The project also incorporates significant faculty
professional development on interactive teaching skills. The project is novel
because it integrates exemplary laboratory, lecture, and web-based exercises to
promote inquiry and because it explicitly emphasizes evolutionary biology as a
unifying concept throughout. Because the university has a mandate to provide
programs for students with disabilities and graduates a high proportion of
underrepresented minority students, the curricular revisions have a large impact
on these populations of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;