* 0311123
* Algorithmic Synthesis of Embedded Controllers
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* George Pappas, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2006
* USD 193,067.00

LGORITHMIC SYNTHESIS OF EMBEDDED CONTROLLERS

In recent years, microprocessors have invaded the physical world, resulting in
sophisticated but complicated networked embedded systems that defy theoretical
understanding, resulting in inadequate design tools for the modern embedded
system engineer. Embedded systems require the development of new theories,
methods, and tools providing the correct understanding of these systems and
accelerated analysis and design methods in order to ensure safety but also
substantially decrease their design time. Embedded systems require very novel,
very challenging specifications that have to deal with synchronization,
sequencing, and temporal ordering of different tasks. Mathematically formulating
such desired specifications cannot be achieved using traditional mathematical
formulations in control theory. On the other hand, computer aided verification
has popularized the use of several temporal logics to describe complex
specifications. However, the emphasis has been on verification of these
properties for purely discrete systems, and not on synthesis for systems with a
continuous component.

In this research, a novel approach for automatically synthesizing hybrid
controllers is pursued in order to satisfy specifications that are expressed in
temporal logics. In particular, methodologies are developed to extract finite
abstractions of linear control systems, that will be used to design controllers
meeting the desired temporal logic specifications. Contrary to other approaches,
this project considers specification dependent abstractions for continuous
control systems as opposed to continuous dynamical systems. The proposed
framework will provide algorithms and tools for the computation of discrete
controllers, which by refinement will lead to embedded, hybrid controllers for
the original system while providing performance and correctness guarantees.

The educational agenda of the proposal focuses on the development of a cross-
departmental, undergraduate, signals and systems course that broadens the
definition of systems in order to capture software and hardware systems in
addition to traditional control or communication systems. This course has been
carefully coordinated with recent curriculum changes and aims at the educational
uniformity of signals and systems concepts in both the discrete and the
continuous world.