* 0311061
* Integrity Monitoring and Recovery Techniques for Next Generation Submicron Microprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Arun Somani, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 10/31/2008
* USD 258,430.00

Integrity Monitoring and Recovery Techniques for Error-Prone Submicron
Microprocessors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As advances in VLSI technology reduce
circuit dimensions dramatically, processor chips become more vulnerable to soft
errors. Thus dependability is becoming an increasingly important quality measure
of microprocessors. A transient and/or permanent processor failure could have
diverse impacts on our daily lives. The goals of the proposed research are:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) to characterize soft error behavior on commercial
microprocessors through fault injection experiments; &lt;br/&gt;(2) to provide a
guideline for exploiting soft error susceptibility in integrity checking
strategy and predicting the error characteristics from the processor's
architecture; and &lt;br/&gt;(3) to develop comprehensive micro-architectural
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will investigate individual components of the
processor with circuit-level approaches. Subsequently, we will study the area
overhead vs. fault coverage trade-off to show the effectiveness of our proposed
solutions. We will be developing specific tailored dependability solutions that
are independent of technology and based on fault occurrence and error
propagation characteristics of a given processor architecture. The techniques
are easily adapted to future generations of
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since use of microprocessors and micro
controllers is very wide spread and affects every aspect of our lives,
improvement in the dependability of such systems would have the widest possible
broader impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;