* 0311292
* Development of Project-Based Advanced Optics Laboratory for Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Devon Mason, Albright College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2006
* USD 35,933.00

Physics (13) Continued demand by industry for optics-trained scientists and
engineers suggests there is a need for expanded educational opportunities in
this field. In particular, employers desire optics graduates who are good
problem solvers, communicate well, and can work successfully within a team.
These qualities are rarely addressed within the traditional laboratory setting.
This project expands a project-based, advanced optics laboratory course to serve
as a capstone for the experimental portion of the new undergraduate optics
curriculum at Albright College. Students in this course work in teams to design,
implement, and test various optical devices. The projects include a number of
funded or published exemplary lab experiments. NSF funded examples include
DUE-9952773, "Enhancement of an Advanced Integrated Student Optics Course";
DUE-9650431, "Intermediate and Advanced Physics Laboratories in Ultra-fast
Phenomena"; and DUE-9452517, "Enhancement of the Modern Optics Laboratories at
Miami University". Published examples include K.B. MacAdam, et al., "A narrow-
band tunable diode laser system with grating feedback and a saturated absorption
spectrometer for Cs and Rb", Am. J. Phys. 60, 1098-1111 (1992); R.S. Conroy, et
al., "A visible extended cavity diode laser for the undergraduate laboratory",
Am. J. Phys. 68, 925-930 (2000); C. Wieman, et al., "Inexpensive laser cooling
and trapping experiment for undergraduate laboratories", Am. J. Phys. 63,
317-330 (1995); S. Smith et al., "Inexpensive optical tweezers for undergraduate
laboratories", Am. J. Phys. 67, 26-35 (1999); and E. Fort, et al., "Multiplexed
fingerprint recognition using holography", Am. J. Phys. 67, 116-119 (1999).
These and other projects are chosen to reflect current scientific and commercial
optical technology, especially in the areas of fiber optics, diode and ultra-
fast lasers, and require students to integrate their knowledge of optics gained
from previous coursework. The laboratory is designed for maximum flexibility and
versatility to serve the project-based format. The equipment includes optical
mounts and components, lasers, pulse-shaping technology, spectroscopic
equipment, software for data acquisition and optical design, photodiodes, CCD
cameras, and some non-optical equipment such as signal generators,
oscilloscopes, and an ion pump. The lab's versatility allows the equipment to be
used for experiments and demonstrations in other optics and science courses and
in already existing community outreach programs. The course outcomes are matched
to the needs of industry by consulting a committee of representatives from local
optics companies, who provide advice and ongoing assessment.