* 0311199
* DISE:  A New Hardware-Software Interface for Customizing Application Execution
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Amir Roth, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Timothy M. Pinkston
* 06/30/2006
* USD 240,000.00

DISE: A New Hardware-Software Interface for Customizing Application Execution

Abstract

The growing diversity of computing platforms (laptop, handheld, phone, etc.) has
necessitated application customization functions (ACFs), utilities that
customize the execution of applications to the environments in which they run.
ACF examples include safety checking, profiling, dynamic optimization,
decompression, and bug patching. ACFs are used to make applications more
reliable, more secure, and more easily developed, essential characteristics of
next generation software systems. Unfortunately, ACFs are often not used because
of their runtime cost, complexity, or deployment burden.

We propose dynamic instruction stream editing (DISE) as an efficient,
convenient, and practical hardware/software mechanism for realizing ACFs. In
DISE, an ACF is formulated as a set of dynamic instruction stream
transformations and programmed via a set of rules (macros) for replacing
instructions that match certain criteria with instruction sequences. The
processor's decoder executes these specifications on the application, feeding
the execution engine a modified instruction stream that includes ACF code.
Inserting ACF code at the decode stage admits ACFs that modify (not just
observe) application behavior, and sidesteps many of the costs of inserting ACF
code into the application's static image first. DISE is a single mechanism that
unifies the implementation of a large class of ACFs.

This research will prove the utility of DISE by implementing and evaluating a
diverse set of ACFs, such as support for debugging, runtime code generation, and
security/safety. This unique organization will positively impact the way
applications and ACFs are engineered, used, and deployed, ultimately improving
the reliability, efficiency, and security of software.

