* 0312939
* ITR: Modeling of Local Critical Behavior in Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Kevin Ingersent, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 383,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational and theoretical research
on novel correlated electron physics arising from interactions between localized
magnetic moments and itinerant electrons. The PI seeks to gain understanding of
fundamental models. Through critical comparison between model results and
experiments, the PI hopes to elucidate the role of correlations in heavy-fermion
compounds and high-temperature superconductors. To meet these goals, the
capabilities of the numerical renormalization group (NRG) technique for treating
magnetic impurity problems will be significantly extended. An important open
question in correlated electron physics concerns the role of zero-temperature
phase transitions in accounting for the unconventional metallic states in high
temperature superconductors and related materials, heavy-fermion materials, and
two-dimensional electron systems. This project focuses on a novel class of
quantum critical points (QCPs) at which critical fluctuations of local degrees
of freedom play a crucial role. Such "local QCPs" may underlie the anomalous
magnetic ordering transition found in some heavy-fermion materials, as well as
the magnetic response exhibited by nonmagnetic impurities in high-temperature
superconductors. The aim of the research is to develop a deeper understanding of
the physics of local critical fluctuations, primarily through calculations using
the NRG technique. The proposed activity has two main thrusts: 1. Extend the NRG
technique so that the extended dynamical mean-field approximation can be applied
to lattice problems. This will enable access to approximate solutions of the
Kondo lattice model of heavy fermions that are not accessible from perturbative
approaches in order to establish the existence of a local QCP in this model and
to determine the physical properties near this QCP. 2. Developing parallel
algorithms for NRG for distributed memory machines to enable calculations
involving large basis sets. This enhanced capability will be used to investigate
local QCPs in magnetic impurity models that exhibit critical local-moment
fluctuations-studies of interest in their own right that will also be of value
in developing theories of local criticality in lattice systems. The models will
be used to calculate magnetic properties produced by doping nonmagnetic
impurities into d-wave superconductors, permitting comparison with experiments
on impurities in high-Tc cuprates. This work will not only yield insight into
the effect of the impurities, but should also provide indirect information about
the host materials. It will also result in the creation of new computational
tools and their application to fundamental problems involving critical local
moment fluctuations in metals and superconductors. Graduate and postdoctoral
education at the frontiers of condensed matter theory will be advanced and
training will be provided in advanced scientific computing. Undergraduates will
be integrated into the research. Software developed as part of this project will
be made available for use by other researchers. %%% This award was made on a
'small' category proposal submitted in response to the ITR solicitation,
NSF-02-168. It supports computational and theoretical research on correlated
electron materials. Research focuses on the consequences of interactions between
localized magnetic moments and itinerant electrons and elucidating the role of
electron correlations in heavy-fermion materials and high temperature
superconductors. The PI will develop new computational algorithms targeted for
parallel computers to implement a powerful method known as the numerical
renormalization group. Resulting computer codes will be made available to the
broader research community. The project will also advance graduate and
postdoctoral education at the frontiers of condensed matter theory, and provide
training in advanced scientific computing. Undergraduates will be integrated
into the research. Software developed as part of this project will be made
available for use by other researchers. ***

















