* 0312382
* Hispanic Linguistics Symposium/Acquisition of Spanish and Portuguese to be held October 16-18, 2003, at the University of New Mexico
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Rena Torres Cacoullos, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2004
* USD 21,428.00

The National Science Foundation will support the seventh Hispanic Linguistics
Symposium and the associated Sixth Conference on the Acquisition of Spanish and
Portuguese as First and Second Languages, to be held at the University of New
Mexico in Albuquerque, October 16-18, 2003. The conference will provide a forum
for scholarly exchange on issues related to Spanish linguistics, bilingualism
and the teaching of Spanish as a heritage language. People of Hispanic origin
now constitute the largest ethnic minority in the United States. Many of these
are English-dominant speakers who wish to improve their Spanish speaking skills.
For this reason two special sessions will focus on the use of Spanish in the
United States and on teaching Spanish to heritage speakers. Another session will
focus on quantitative approaches to Spanish and Portuguese linguistics.

The Hispanic Linguistics Symposium is a major forum for the interchange of
current research on the Spanish and Portuguese languages. Published resources
associated with the symposium will make the latest research widely accessible.
The symposium will not only advance the scientific study of Spanish and
Portuguese but it will also promote the teaching of these languages through
special sessions devoted to teaching methodology as it relates to second
language speakers. The symposium will broaden the participation of an
underrepresented group, Hispanics, through sessions oriented to their concerns
and through outreach to attract them to the conference. Secondary school Spanish
teachers from the State of New Mexico will be invited to attend. The larger
society will benefit from the transmission of sociolinguistic knowledge that
will inform the practice of teachers in the public schools, facilitating a more
positive engagement with culturally and linguistically diverse students.