* 0312792
* Effect of Nanoscale Interfacial Structural Transitions on Liquid Crystal Anchoring
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2008
* Satyendra Kumar, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 10/31/2008
* USD 650,000.00

This project focuses on interfaces between liquid crystals (LC) and solid
substrates exhibiting a variety of behaviors such as orientational wetting,
spreading, memory effects, and anchoring transitions near and far from bulk
phase transitions. The goal of the research is to understand surface driven
phenomena that have origins in nanoscale organization at the interface of an
organic material and the liquid crystal. Experimental techniques such as
glancing incidence synchrotron x-ray diffraction, x-ray reflectivity, atomic
force and confocal microscopies, and electro-optical measurements will be used
to study the nanoscale structure and structural transitions at model interfaces
to determine how the underlying interfacial nano-structure affects the anchoring
of nematic liquid crystals. Graduate students and postdoctoral scholars will be
trained in the use of sophisticated facilities and instrumentation while
acquiring interdisciplinary scientific knowledge through interactions with
researchers from other fields. In addition, high school science teachers will be
educated about various issues related to LC phases that are so ubiquitous in
nature. %%% Surfaces and surface energetics play an important role in processes
ranging from common wetting, to more sophisticated phenomena such as adhesion,
liquid crystal alignment, surface memory effects, and non-coalescence of
identical fluids. Empirical knowledge of surface phenomena has led to a number
of technologically important applications such as the liquid crystal flat panel
display (LCDs), smart glue used in medicine, and highly sensitive bio-sensors.

Undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and high school
teachers (during the summer) will acquire training in the use of advanced
experimental techniques at local, national, and international facilities where
they will also closely interact with scientists from different disciplines and
countries. Because these materials research areas are of high interest to
industry, the students trained on this NSF funded project will compete very
effectively in the job market.