* 0312635
* ITR Collaborative Research: Fault Tolerance in WDM Optical Networks: Multifailure Recovery and Multilayer Survivability
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Guoliang Xue, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2008
* USD 168,500.00

Study of fault tolerance in networks and distributed systems had its origins in
early works in digital system design and testing. Over the years several
dimensions of this area have emerged, encompassing almost all areas in
electrical engineering, computer engineering and computer systems. Study of
fault tolerance in WDM optical networks is a recent addition to the growing list
of areas of interest in fault tolerance research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is aimed at advancing the state of art of research in fault tolerance
theory for optical networks. Research will be carried out in two broad areas:
Robust multiple failure recovery and multilayer survivability. By multilayer
survivability we refer to the broad class of problems that involve logical
topology design taking the impact of multiple failures in the physical topology
into consideration. By robustness of a recovery mechanism, we refer to the
ability of the recovery method to provide protection against a large number of
multiple failures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We shall develop innovative algorithmic
approaches based on advanced optimization techniques such as meta heuristics and
approximation techniques, for problems in the three broad areas: (1) Quality of
protection and robustness enhancement of single failure recovery methods, (2)
Design of highly robust multiple failure recovery mechanisms and (3) Protection
Interoperable design. &lt;br/&gt;