* 0312491
* ITR: Optical Processing of Information in Doped Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Carlo Piermarocchi, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2007
* USD 291,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports theoretical research to explore the
storage and processing of information by optical techniques in semiconductors
doped with impurities. Diluted impurities in semiconductors represent the solid
state analogue of a collection of atoms. Unlike an atomic gas, impurities are
(i) frozen spatially, and (ii) are embedded in an optically active host. State-
of-the-art Nan-optical techniques can address a single impurity localized in a
semiconductor. The optical properties of the host can be used to efficiently
control the internal degrees of freedom of the impurities where the information
is encoded. A novel aspect of this work lies in the focus on a solid-state
system, with potential technological applications, where new quantum optical
effects can be investigated.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to
identify reliable schemes for the realization of information technology devices
using the electronic and spin degrees of freedom of the impurities. The quantum
nature of these systems will be taken into account and exploited. Impurities are
a collection of identical objects, and this property can be used to efficiently
encode information. A major question concerns the actual viability of these
schemes. Investigations of optical and electronic properties of impurities and
quantum kinetics simulations will fill the gap between model and real systems.
Microscopic calculations will help to identify the most suitable materials.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Future information networks may exchange information
using light, eventually at the level of single photons. At the same time, the
storage of information will require matter-based memories. The research aims to
advance the knowledge of a system representing the ideal interface between light
and matter, and will give direction for future efficient and secure
communication technologies. The processing of information by ultrafast optical
control in the proposed system may well be at the base of new revolutionary
computing machines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in actively applying physical ideas from quantum and statistical
mechanics to information technology. The specific system considered in this
project provides an excellent active-learning benchmark for understanding
fundamental concepts in physics. With the help of collaborations, students
involved in this project will be exposed to materials science, quantum optics,
and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics. The research involves developing
numerical codes for quantum kinetics equations and microscopic properties of
materials. This will improve student's skills in designing numerical codes to
solve complex problems. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a
'small' category proposal submitted in response to the ITR solicitation,
NSF-02-168. It supports theoretical research to explore the storage and
processing of information by optical techniques in semiconductors doped with
impurities. Diluted impurities in semiconductors represent the solid state
analogue of a collection of atoms. Unlike an atomic gas, impurities are (i)
frozen spatially, and (ii) are embedded in an optically active host. State-of-
the-art Nan-optical techniques can address a single impurity localized in a
semiconductor. The optical properties of the host can be used to efficiently
control the internal degrees of freedom of the impurities where the information
is encoded. A novel aspect of this work lies in the focus on a solid-state
system, with potential technological applications, where new quantum optical
effects can be investigated.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to
identify reliable schemes for the realization of information technology devices
using the electronic and spin degrees of freedom of the impurities. The quantum
nature of these systems will be taken into account and exploited. Impurities are
a collection of identical objects, and this property can be used to efficiently
encode information. A major question concerns the actual viability of these
schemes. Investigations of optical and electronic properties of impurities and
quantum kinetics simulations will fill the gap between model and real systems.
Microscopic calculations will help to identify the most suitable materials.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Future information networks may exchange information
using light, eventually at the level of single photons. At the same time, the
storage of information will require matter-based memories. The research aims to
advance the knowledge of a system representing the ideal interface between light
and matter, and will give direction for future efficient and secure
communication technologies. The processing of information by ultrafast optical
control in the proposed system may well be at the base of new revolutionary
computing machines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in actively applying physical ideas from quantum and statistical
mechanics to information technology. The specific system considered in this
project provides an excellent active-learning benchmark for understanding
fundamental concepts in physics. With the help of collaborations, students
involved in this project will be exposed to materials science, quantum optics,
and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics. The research involves developing
numerical codes for quantum kinetics equations and microscopic properties of
materials. This will improve student's skills in designing numerical codes to
solve complex problems. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;