* 0312461
* ITR:  Efficient Self-Organizing Content Distribution Network for Scalable Video Streaming Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Dmitri Loguinov, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2008
* USD 280,999.00

As successors of IP multicast, application-layer multicast and overlay networks
have become two very important technologies in the current Internet that promise
to provide a highly scalable platform for concurrent delivery of information to
large groups of Internet users. This project focuses on next-generation overlay
networks and studies the problem of building a distributed, self-organizing
content distribution architecture for real-time video streaming services. Unlike
previous approaches, our work does not rely on delay as the metric of distance,
but rather utilizes the topological and routing structure of the existing
Internet to compute distances and create local topologies. Using topologically
aware discovery of the neighborhood of each replica server, nodes build
efficient meshes for replication of static content and construct self-organizing
multicast overlay trees for real-time streaming of live video material.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A special attention is paid to making sure that the entire
architecture is highly scalable and suitable for practical use over the existing
Internet. Once installed, each node in the proposed content distribution network
(CDN) automatically discovers its location in the Internet, attaches to the
control tree of the CDN structure, and finds other nodes in its neighborhood.
The information in the control tree contains a scalable aggregation of all
independently discovered views of the Internet by the nodes of the CDN network.
Using this control tree, the nodes quickly build an overlapping set of
neighborhood meshes that reach the main data server. Arriving end-users are
efficiently directed to the nearest cache based on their location in the
Internet and network clusters already discovered by the individual cache nodes.
To avoid packet loss and to control the flows along the branches of the
multicast tree, we investigate new congestion control methods for video
streaming that allow smooth playback and remain stable under delayed feedback
from the network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CDNs emerged as a crucial part of the
existing web infrastructure and already improve the response time, as well as
the throughput, of many Internet downloads. Future CDNs that support video
streaming will deliver a scalable platform for distributing live and pre-
recorded video programs to end-users and will greatly improve the current
ability of the society to disseminate information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research activities will be integrated in the network course
curriculum. This will enable students to gain deep understanding of the
architectural design issues related to peer-to-peer networking and content
distribution networks. &lt;br/&gt;