* 0312373
* ITR: Virtual Values and Academic Work: Research, Service and Teaching
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Gary Rhoades, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 07/31/2009
* USD 494,531.00

This project uses a comparative case study approach to examine the interaction
of information technologies with faculty activities, which it characterizes as
virtual values and faculty work. It explores three questions that address
virtual values. How do information technology and intellectual property
intersect research and service? How does information technology structure and
value faculty teaching? How do these new developments feature in student
socialization? To answer these questions it looks at academic units that produce
technologically intensive intellectual property, that organize on-line and
hybrid (on-line and conventional) instruction in ways that "unbundle" faculty
work, and that produce and use technology saturated materials. These new virtual
environments may change values associated with the traditional tripartite
faculty work role of research, service, and teaching as well as alter student
socialization processes. The value sets associated with the tripartite role are
normative guidelines for faculty work (research, service and teaching). If new
sets of values emerge around faculty work as information technology is
increasingly utilized in universities, it is important to know what they are and
how they intersect traditional values. Similarly, if these new technologies and
uses influence students' socialization, it is important to know about these
changes also. What do these products say about gender? Does information
technology change what counts as knowledge? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
uses a multiple case study design, with primarily qualitative, comparative
methods. The points of comparison are by institutional type, field of study, and
level of education. Field work encompasses several site visits to three or four
universities of different types, control, and mission, focusing on three to four
fields of study that cut across engineering, science, and social science, at two
degree levels, bachelors and masters. Several graduate students are to be
involved in construction, testing and administration of the field instruments
and interpretation of results. &lt;br/&gt;Study results should clarify ethical
and value issues involved in introduction of a new mode of production into
faculty work. Results will include presentations and publications in a wide
variety of scholarly and practical outlets. Besides a scholarly audience, this
information will be of use to faculty and administrative policy-makers at the
institutional level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploration of the intersection of
intellectual property and information technology will show when market values
and traditional values complement or contradict each other. Looking at ways in
which technology intensive research is deployed as service will speak to
changing conceptions of the public good. Service for free and service for fees
may both serve the public, although the different types of service may be
directed at differing constituencies with different needs. Studying the various
parties involved in unbundled information technology instruction will identify
the embedded and explicit values in this mode of instruction production,
including differing conceptions of quality. Examining the ways in which
technology intensive products and processes influence student socialization,
including the ways in which they affect knowledge claims, will let us see how
future professionals may serve their disciplines and society. Attending to the
embedded and explicit gender values in technology saturated educational
materials will contribute to understanding equity issues in the virtual
socialization process. &lt;br/&gt;