* 0312357
* Collaborative Research: ITR: Distributed Data Mining to Protect Information Privacy
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,09/30/2006
* Mikhail Atallah, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 09/30/2006
* USD 282,274.00

Privacy concerns can prevent constructing a centralized data warehouse to
support data mining. For example, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) may want
to mine insurance companies' data to identify trends and patterns in disease
outbreaks, such as understanding and predicting the progression of a flu
epidemic. Gathering all patient data into a single warehouse increases
opportunities for privacy breaches and misuse. We propose an alternative: secure
collaborative computing between the parties holding the data that produce the
desired data mining results, while provably preventing disclosure of private
data.

This project will enable knowledge discovery under the following assumptions: 1.
data are distributed across multiple sources, with security/privacy concerns
that limit data sharing, and 2. if data were gathered into a centralized
warehouse, data mining tools could identify patterns or relationships that give
beneficial knowledge. Developed techniques will replicate or approximate the
results of centralized data mining, with quantifiable limits on the disclosure
of data from each site. The goal is to develop a toolkit of privacy-preserving
distributed computation techniques that can be assembled to solve specific real-
world problems. By simplifying component assembly so it becomes development
rather than research, widespread use of privacy-preserving distributed data
mining will become feasible.