* 0312183
* Early Molecular Events in Plant-Fungus Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 12/31/2002,05/31/2003
* P. Kolattukudy, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Herbert
* 05/31/2003
* USD 46,368.00

9816868&lt;br/&gt;Kolattukudy&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research
program is to elucidate the early molecular events involved in the interactions
of fungi with the plant cuticle using Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and Nectria
haematococca as test organisms. These interactions include the first priming
stage that involves the contact of the fungal conidia with hard surface followed
by germination and appressorium formation triggered by the host's chemical
signals, and penetration of the cuticle and pectin barriers of the host. Early
molecular events involved in the interaction of C. gloeosporioides with its host
will be elucidated by cloning the genes induced by contact of the conidia with
hard host surface. The Colletotrichum Hard surface Induced Protein (chip) genes
will be disrupted to assess whether they are required for pathogenesis and the
functions of the chip gene products will be explored. How hydroxyfatty acids of
plants activate cutinase gene transcription in N. haematococca will be
elucidated by cloning the transcription factors involved in the activation and
by assessing their functions in yeast transformed with marker genes and the
cloned transacting factors. The role of pectate lyase in pathogenesis will be
tested by assessing the virulence of single and double disruptants in which
pectin-inducible pelA gene and/or host-inducible pelD gene are disrupted. The
host factor that is responsible for the in Planta expression of pelD gene will
be purified and identified. The results of the proposed studies will provide new
insights into the role of the cuticle in pathogenesis, and may help to devise
new methods to control fungal diseases of plants that constitute one of the
major causes of losses in food and fiber production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;