* 0312868
* ITR:  Integration of Handheld Wireless Computing Devices into Core Engineering Courses for Rapid Feedback and Concept Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2007
* John Chen, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

EIA-0312868 John Chen Institution: Rowan University

Title: Integration of Handheld Wireless Computing Devices into Core Engineering
Courses for Rapid Feedback and Concept Learning

This ITR small award provides support to adapt the Concept Inventory for
frequent classroom use and then to implement it in a technology-enabled system
to provide rapid feedback to students of their understanding of key concepts
being presented. The feedback system acts as the focal point and catalyst to
encourage students, working in pairs, to assist each other in correcting
misconceptions or deepening each other's understanding of topics. The system
allows the professor to assess the students' level of comprehension in a just-
in-time fashion and thus judge the professor's pacing and coverage of the
material. The system and methodology are to be implemented in two core-
engineering courses at two institutions to demonstrate feasibility and
adaptability in different environments.

The intellectual merit of the project in centered on its strong conceptual
framework for the research. The resulting system should provide a platform for
enhancing education in many disciplines and settings. The project has a sound
evaluation plan that clearly will demonstrate the educational as well as
technological benefits of the research to multiple audiences.

A major broad impact of the project is the integration of education, research,
and faculty development, including the use of rigorous scientific research
methods to establish that the environment is transferable and adaptable easily
to other institutions. In addition, through the involvement of a historically
black university impacts the participation of underrepresented minorities in
engineering and enhances the curriculum at the institution. In addition, it
provides opportunities for faculty professional development for currency in new
and emerging technologies. The project is currently and timely and will impact
both research and instruction as well as develop tools employing emerging
technologies and technical innovations.