* 0312696
* ITR: A New Class of Vector Sensing Antennas for Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Brian Hughes, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2007
* USD 357,906.00

ABSTRACT 0312696 Lazzi, Gianluca North Carolina State

Most wireless communication systems currently employ arrays of single- or dual-
polarized antenna elements, each which is capable of measuring at most two
components of the electromagnetic signal. Recent results in communication theory
suggest that, in a rich scattering environment, the capacity of wireless links
can be dramatically improved by employing co-located, co-polarized antennas that
can detect and excite additional components of the electromagnetic field.
Intellectual Merit: The aim of this project is to improve the performance of
wireless communications through the use of arrays of vector sensors that can
detect or excite up to 6 components of the underlying electromagnetic field.
This project is an interdisciplinary effort between radio frequency antenna
design and communication theory. Four main issues are addressed: (a) a new class
of compact, planar vector-sensor antennas suitable for wireless communication,
(b) new computational tools for accurately predicting the performance of such
antennas, (c) an information-theoretic study of the capacity of vector-sensor
communication systems, in order to quantify their advantages and extract
insights into array design, and (d) new modulation, error-control coding, and
receiver architectures that exploit the additional information provided by these
antennas. The ultimate goal of this work is to more fully exploit the potential
of wireless radio channels, and in the process reduce the power and bandwidth
requirements of wireless communication. Broader Impact: This project is a joint
effort between two investigators with established track records in antennas and
wireless communication and a successful history of collaboration. This research
will have a direct impact on our undergraduate and graduate students by exposing
them to an interdisciplinary view of antenna design and wireless communications,
seen as an indivisible concept rather than as separate engineering disciplines.
This activity further has the potential to significantly impact the next
generation of commercial wireless systems, by offering new approaches to
reducing power and bandwidth requirements, and by generating a wealth of new
concepts in antenna and communication system design.