* 0312910
* ITR:    Emerging Communities in Large Linked Networks:    Theory Meets Practice
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* John Hopcroft, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop the theory, concepts and tools to track changes and
detect emerging structure in large networks. It combines a theoretical
investigation of how networks and communities evolve over time with empirical
studies using the NEC CiteSeer database. Clustering plays a crucial role in
detecting community structure. However, tracking changes in structure over time
places new demands on clustering algorithms. In particular it requires a
stability not usually demanded of clustering techniques. This project starts
from the premise that there actually are real communities of various sizes in
the data and that these communities are invariant under changes such as random
removal of 5-10% of the papers in the database.

If a clustering technique gives a radically different clustering when an
additional 10,000 papers are added to the database, it will be impossible to
separate small changes in the evolving structure from artifacts of the
clustering technique. The project builds upon a concept of natural communities
of various sizes that can be identified under quite strong changes in the data.
A central component of the work is to develop a principled generative model of
growing random graphs which has complex evolving community structure and in
which the concept of a natural community arises. Tools will be developed to find
these natural communities with sufficient stability to track real changes in the
clusters over time and identify when new communities emerge.

The ability to track emerging trends and detect hidden structure in large
networked digital data sources should be of potentially great societal benefit.
In particular, it would allow the end-user to search for information in a more
informed manner, and enable a pro-active approach towards emerging trends and
new developments.