* 0312636
* ITR-Promoting Semantic Interoperability of Metadata for Directories of the Future
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Vijay Vaishnavi, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* James French
* 08/31/2007
* USD 252,000.00

Directories provide a well-defined, general mechanism for describing enterprise
resources within an organization and enabling their discovery by individuals and
applications. LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) directory services
enable data sharing by defining both the metadata (schema information) and an
access protocol. While such directory enabled services can be provided within an
organization, offering or accessing these services beyond the home organization
requires significant coordination of directory architectures and standards for
directory metadata.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates an
alternative to current approaches to enabling interoperability of directory
metadata. The research is based on the proposition that monitoring, clustering,
and appropriate visualization of cross-organizational metadata can help identify
patterns of practice and evolving standards, and promote and facilitate the
reuse of such metadata, which in turn can lead to automatic, dynamic evolution
of standards. Solutions are developed for automated clustering of metadata at a
level matching human expertise, employing such techniques as Self-Organizing
Maps and Latent Semantic Analysis/Latent Semantic Indexing, optimized using
genetic algorithms. The solutions are experimentally validated. Visualization of
metadata is prototyped.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is expected to
contribute to enhancing interoperation, semantic resolution, standards
evolution, and management of directory metadata that is fundamental for
effective inter-organizational collaboration and access to data, applications
and resources that are deployed on the World Wide Web. The results of the
research will be disseminated through conference and journal publications, and
through a project Web site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;