* 0312130
* Structure Control in Electrochemical Atomic Layer Eptiaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* John Stickney, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 422,838.00

The long term objective of this project is to gain fundamental understanding of
compound semiconductor electrodeposition and to achieve deposition of compound
semiconductor thin film structures with the quality and control necessary to
form optoelectronic devices. The methodology proposed for these studies is
electrochemical atomic layer epitaxy (ECALE), the electrochemical analog of
atomic layer epitaxy (ALE), where surface limited reactions are used to form a
material, one atomic layer at a time. Underpotential deposition, upd, is another
name for a surface limited electrochemical reaction. It is a phenomenon where an
atomic layer of one element is deposited on a second at a potential prior to
that needed to deposit the first on itself. The driving force is formation of a
surface compound, and the free energy of compound formation. Using upd in an ALE
cycle, deposits are formed at or near equilibrium, a monolayer at a time. An
atomic layer of each element is deposited in turn, in a cycle, to form a
monolayer of the compound. The number of cycles determines the thickness of the
deposit. A major benefit of ECALE is that it breaks compound electrodeposition
into a series of fundamental steps, allowing their independent investigation and
control. ECALE studies are the most direct route to the mechanisms of compound
electrodeposition. Questions to be addressed include: How much control can be
obtained in the electrochemical formation of compound semiconductor device
structures? What types of electrochemical reactions can be used to create an ALE
cycle? Can the deposit habit be altered by using different substrate or by
changing the deposition parameters? Can ternary compounds be formed? Can
programs be developed to form graded deposits as buffer layers, or to help with
lattice matching issues. What types of electrochemical reactions can be used to
create an ALE cycle? Can doping be controlled in compound electrodeposition? Can
both p and n type materials be formed? An automated flow deposition system is
used to form deposits using ECALE, where potentials and solution changes are
controlled by computer. Methodologies for characterization include in-situ
electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy (ECSTM), electrochemical quartz
crystal microbalance (EQCM), ultrahigh vacuum electrochemistry (UHV-EC) for
studies of deposit surfaces, as well as reflection, absorption, luminescence,
photoelectrochemical, photoconductivity, and Hall measurements for studies of
physical and electronic properties. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;An important
feature of the project is in education and human resource development through
the integration of research and education. The project involves graduate and
undergraduate students with participants at all levels interacting with each
other and the principal investigator (PI) on a regular basis. Two of the five
students working in the PI's group are from under-represented groups, and will
be supported by this award. Students are actively involved in publishing papers
and presenting talks and posters at professional society meetings. Most of the
PI's students have over five presentations on their vitae before they graduate.
It is also intended to construct a web page on ECALE, where students design and
build various sections, with the intent of forming a page where the present
status of ECALE can be found. The page will include descriptions of how to form
deposits using ECALE, listings of publications by all groups working in the
area, methodologies, instrument designs, as well as programs written in lab view
for controlling deposition, accessible by anyone interested in the method.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;