* 0312841
* ITR: A Prototype to Enable Near Real-time Environmental Characterization on the Grid
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Nicholas Karonis, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 566,561.00

0312841 Mahinthakumar Environmental characterization is becoming increasingly
important in real-time forecasting of environmental events and in designing
effective strategies for environmental protection, cleanup, risk assessment, and
disaster mitigation. An essential component of environmental characterization is
the process of deducing information from sparse measurements (e.g., data from
in-situ monitors or satellite photos). For example, in characterization of
groundwater pollution from data collected from a small number of monitoring
wells, desirable outcomes may include a three-dimensional map of underground
pollutant concentrations and an estimate of the pollutant velocity field. If the
subsurface features or the source of contamination are poorly characterized, the
analysis may also identify the porosity field or the number, location, and
strength of pollutant sources. Problems in which unknown system characteristics
(e.g., pollutant source location and strength) are resolved from observed data
are known as environmental inverse problems. In these problems, pollutant
transport and chemistry are represented by a mathematical model consisting of a
system of partial differential equations (PDEs). Resolving the unknown problem
characteristics is an optimization problem that requires the PDEs to be solved
hundreds-to-thousands of times. Gradient-based search techniques represent the
state-of-the-art for solving inverse problems. An alternative is to use global
optimization heuristics, such as genetic algorithms, to provide a more robust
search of the decision space. Once global search has identified good regions of
the solution space, gradient or non-gradient local search techniques may be used
for fine-tuning. The emergence of grid computing (e.g., NSF's new Tera Grid) and
the associated increase in available computing power yield new possibilities.
Efficient mapping of computations to grid resources has proven extremely
challenging for realistic applications due to the complex fabric of
heterogeneous resources. &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this proposal is to
investigate formal computational approaches that can readily harness grid
computing for the solution of environmental characterization problems. To this
end, we will develop a grid-enabled software framework. Two iternative
paradigms, based on the grid-enabled version of MPI and Java, espectively, will
be explored. The framework will be applied to groundwater and air pollution
problems, both of which are of prime societal importance. Acknowledging that,
even within a grid environment, inverse problems are computationally
challenging, model surrogates (e.g., statistical approximations using artificial
neural networks) will be explored. Further, Modeling to Generate Alternatives
(MGA), a technique that identifies a set of good yet very different solutions,
will be investigated for dynamically steering the search process through human-
computer interaction. &lt;br/&gt;Alternatives generated via MGA will be used
also to address the commonly encountered non-uniqueness issue (i.e., where
multiple characterizations can match the same measured data) in inverse
problems. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Integration of several core components of
research into existing graduate and undergraduate courses in high performance
computing and engineering systems analysis will advance discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching and learning. &lt;br/&gt;