* 0312401
* ITR: Automatic Content Categorization and Annotation with Ambiguous Training Information
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Thomas Hofmann, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Machine learning algorithms are crucial for efficiently automating key tasks in
content and information management such as content annotation and
categorization, taxonomy creation, content linking, information routing and
filtering, robust search, and information extraction. One key factor that has
limited the success of machine learning methods in this domain is a conceptual
mismatch: The formal assumptions with regard to the type and nature of available
training information often differ from what is actually available in real-world
applications.

This project addresses this mismatch by developing innovative machine learning
algorithms and architectures that can make use of more realistic types of
training information. This includes in particular the use of weakly labeled
data, i.e. training data with ambiguous or incomplete annotations, and a
systematic exploitation of dependencies between concepts and between concept
annotations. The proposed research will lead to algorithms that have an
increased range of applicability and that are more accurate and robust. The
scope of the project encompasses well-known special cases like multiple instance
learning, label ambiguity, learning with concept taxonomies, learning with
overlapping concepts, and label sequence learning. As a proof of concept, tools
for categorizing medical documents and for supporting content-based image search
will be developed.

