* 0312691
* ITR/IM (EAR) - Collaborative Research: Development of Data Visualization and Query Tools for NAVDAT, Western North American Volcanic and Intrusive Rock Database
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Allen Glazner, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2007
* USD 111,830.00

EAR-0312880&lt;br/&gt;Walker&lt;br/&gt;This award will expand the data content
and utility of a web-accessible Western North America Volcanic and Intrusive
Rock Database (NAVDAT). These tools will integrate geologic information with
geophysical and crustal structure data to allow visualization of complex
patterns in magmatism throughout western North America. Initial funding received
in 2001 was used to develop the database and web interface, as well as populate
it with igneous rock information from the western U.S. This renewal will
complete the compilation of geochemical data from Late Cretaceous to Holocene
igneous rocks from the region and add analyses of age-equivalent rocks from
western Canada and northern Mexico. It will also develop downstream IT tools
including conventional petrologic tools and GIS-based tools that allow
visualization of time-space patterns in igneous activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits Future progress in geoscience requires
the integration of diverse datasets. NAVDAT is aimed at such integration, will
play a key role in the cyberinfrastructure for the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts NAVDAT expands research
infrastructure and supports collaboration of geoscientists with interests in
both basic research and applied work such as volcanic hazard mitigation and
natural resource exploitation. NAVDAT's development will also involve the
education of postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students through
activities spanning the disciplines of earth science and information technology.
The work will also involve international collaboration with scientists from
Canada and Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;