* 0312352
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  Reconfigurable Architectures for Bio-Molecular Detection:  Modeling, Experimentation, and Optimization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2007
* USD 339,224.00

Project Title: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator (Duke University):
Krishnendu Chakrabarty&lt;br/&gt;Co-Principal Investigator (Duke University):
Richard B. Fair&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator (Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute): Julie
Stenken&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this
project includes the high-level modeling of biosensors and detectors, laboratory
experiments on bio-molecular detection, and optimization techniques for system
design. An optimized, system-level architecture is being incorporated into a
chip design that will demonstrate a bio-chemical assay sequence to identify a
specific target. Research is focused on high-speed fluidic and molecular
transport of a variety of biological and chemical substances by surface-tension
actuation in the form of micro-droplets, as well as subsequent detection of
these substances through array or decision-tree architectures. A series of
simple tests are being devised to rapidly narrow the set of possible bio-
chemical agents. Techniques are being developed to map these tests and the
associated control/decision mechanism on a droplet-based microfluidic
architecture. The project is planned as a collaborative, multi-disciplinary
effort involving Duke University and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Researchers at Duke University are investigating modeling, optimization, and
microfludics-based on-chip bio-chemical assays. Researchers at Rensselaer are
studying enzymatic assays and assay chemistry for a limited set of target
analytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the proposed research is expected
to be a set of reconfigurable, droplet-based biomolecular detection microsystem
architectures with bio-molecular detection sites and a collection of detection
criteria allowing a decision flow path to be programmed into the system by a set
of decision rules. Advances in system design will lead to the availability of
inexpensive microsystems that offer an early warning capability to combatants
and citizens alike, before they take their next breath. The proposed research
can also contribute to heath care, e.g., through field clinics that can provide
rapid detection and identification of harmful pathogens. Finally, this project
serves as an important bridge between three different research communities:
microfluidics, circuit design, and analytical chemistry, and it fosters
interdisciplinary research and collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;