* 0312328
* User-interface generation for mobile and desktop computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Prasun Dewan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2010
* USD 409,924.00

This project addresses research in user-interface abstractions, which play a
fundamental role in shaping the nature of the user-interfaces we use and the
programs we write. Motivated by the needs of smart spaces consisting of
networked appliances and interactive mobile devices, the PI will revisit the
idea of user-interface generation. Instead of a single, fixed user-interface
generator for all applications, the PI will explore the possibility of multiple
domain-specific generators. He will develop a general user-interface
architecture that allows different generators to share code and their clients to
incrementally customize them. To ensure generality of the architecture, he will
consider the needs both of mobile and desktop computing, the latter in two
domains for which user-interface generation seems to be particularly well
suited, namely research applications and teaching of introductory programming.
The PI's architecture is based on a model of user-interaction that treats user-
interfaces as editors of logical structures of objects. It consists of several
layers including external encapsulated application objects, a set of logical
structures, editors of these structures, and an external toolkit. In addition,
it includes objects that automatically connect objects in adjacent layers. The
PI's hypothesis is that emergence of programming and user-interface conventions
allows these connections to be made more or less automatically for the vast
majority of applications in the domains under consideration. He will develop an
algorithm for automatically identifying the behavior of the external application
and toolkit objects from the patterns used in the signatures of the methods of
these objects. Unlike the traditional approach of requiring an application to
adapt to the (programming) interfaces provided by the tool, this algorithm will
allow the tool to adapt to the interfaces provided by the application. The PI
will also provide an axiomatic scheme for formally specifying the default
patterns assumed by the generator, which can be customized to specify domain-
specific patterns and associated semantics. Based on these formal
specifications, parameterized algorithms will be developed for creating textual
and graphical presentations of application objects, and automatically
implementing commands to edit these presentations, including commands to undo
and synchronize these objects, which require an understanding of the semantics
of objects. The PI will develop efficient implementation techniques to ensure
that the cost of generating and using a user-interface on a mobile device is
low, including a technique to retarget a user-interface generated for a
particular appliance to a new appliance with the same logical structure. The
work will be evaluated by identifying a representative set of applications and
devices from each of the domains under
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will improve
the state of the art in user interface generation, in that instead of requiring
a separate implementation for each pair of mobile and appliance devices, just a
single implementation will be needed for each mobile device. The research will
lead to fundamental changes in the way introductory programming is taught, by
allowing students to focus on programming concepts rather than user-interface
implementation, and will also increase productivity of research projects by
greatly reducing the cost of implementing the user-interfaces of demonstration
applications. The software developed will be distributed via the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;