* 0312830
* ITR: Collaborative Research, Algorithms for Inferring Reticulate Evolution in Historical Linguistics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Tandy Warnow, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2009
* USD 344,517.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Tandy Warnow and Dr. Donald Ringe
will conduct three years of linguistic research aimed at recovering the
evolutionary history of families of languages. Traditional models and methods
assume that languages evolve in a bifurcating manner, in which case trees are
appropriate graphical models of language evolution. Earlier work by the project
leaders Warnow and Ringe (also funded by NSF) produced accurate computational
methods for inferring evolution when the evolution of the languages is tree-like
and led to advances in the understanding of how the Indo-European family
evolved. However, a full resolution of the evolution of Indo-European (and of
other language families) requires methods and models that can reconstruct
evolutionary histories that are not treelike. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
combines research in computer science algorithms, statistical inference and
modeling, and historical linguistics to produce effective means for
reconstructing evolutionary histories of language families. It also draws on
related work in molecular evolution. The project thus impacts several fields,
and it will bring novel techniques and research methods to the field of
historical linguistics. The open source software tools developed during this
project will impact other fields as well, and in particular will help population
geneticists and anthropologists resolve questions related to human origins and
migrations. The project will include workshops in historical linguistics and
will thus provide training in this multidisciplinary area to a broad group of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;