* 0312088
* Sourcing Turquoise Using O and H Isotopes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Frances Mathien, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 88,408.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Mostafa Fayek and his colleagues
will begin a 2-year research project to conduct a turquoise sourcing study along
the northern frontier of Mesoamerica, which constitutes the border between
Mexico and the United States including southwestern portions of the United
States. The team brings together both geologists and archaeologists to conduct a
coordinated investigation, which will reconstruct prehistoric southwestern
turquoise trade networks and strengthen the theory, that Chacoan or other
Anasazi cultures from central and southern Mexico were economically and
culturally linked to Mesoamerica. The team has a suite of turquoise samples,
which they have obtained from seven modern and archaeological mining areas
throughout the southwestern United States and Mexico. They will apply a novel
isotopic technique that will allow them to unambiguously distinguish between
turquoises from each mining area. Although, previous trace element and isotopic
studies have unsatisfactorily differentiated between the turquoise source areas
in southwestern United States, a preliminary study by Dr. Fayek and his
colleagues has shown that turquoise from each mining district has a unique O and
H isotopic signature. Thus, the O and H isotopic composition of turquoise is
potentially a powerful tool for characterizing and distinguishing between source
regions. The team will analyze additional turquoise samples from a wide range of
sources to further substantiate this method. This method will then be applied to
archaeological artifacts, which will allow the turquoise in the artifacts to be
traced to specific mining region. Dr. Fayek and his colleagues will use an
instrument called the ion microprobe, which allows O and H isotopic analysis of
small (200 mm) solid samples, thus only the smallest pieces of archaeological
artifacts are required. Their research will focus on three questions: 1) is the
H and O isotopic composition of turquoise within a sample or single mine
sufficiently homogenous such that we can distinguish between turquoise deposits
within a single source region? (2) Can we use the O and H isotopic composition
of turquoise to distinguish between regional source areas? (3) Can we use the O
and H isotopic composition of turquoise artifacts to link them to a particular
mining region and hence reconstruct the prehistoric turquoise trade network?

This research is important for several reasons. If preliminary results are
confirmed, a 'source fingerprint' could be available in a few years for
turquoise, permitting archaeologists to identify the sources of turquoise found
at sites across the continent and providing new insight into pre-contact trade
patterns in North America. The research will enhance the infrastructure for
research and education at the university level through partnership with Oak
Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). Students and faculty from both the departments
of Geology and Anthropology at the University of Tennessee will be introduced to
the world-class facilities and expertise at ORNL, which otherwise would be
inaccessible.

