* 0312359
* ITR: A New Data Model and Extensible Software for Predictive Chemical Kinetics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* William Green, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 08/31/2006
* USD 429,155.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a completely new data
model for chemical kinetics and corresponding extensible software, including
graphical user interfaces and appropriate examples, that make it feasible to
predict the rates and products of complex chemical processes. Many of the
difficult tasks now performed manually by kineticists are automated, including
the determination of which intermediates and reactions should be included in a
simulation (based on numerical significance). In the new data model, parameters
are required only for each type of functional group, rather than for each
chemical species, and the xml format encourages users to document information on
the provenance and uncertainty of each parameter. Because there are many fewer
types of functional groups than chemical species, the new data model is compact
enough that a human can check all the parameters individually. Furthermore, the
parameters are classified in a scheme that encourages comparisons between
related functional groups and the identification of outliers. To jump-start
adoption of the new data model and software, a large, well-documented set of
rate and thermochemical parameters is provided, as well as software appropriate
for modeling a wide range of thermal and oxidative chemistry of hydrocarbons;
new software tools for manipulating, comparing, and analyzing large-scale
chemical kinetic simulations; and many examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical
kinetic simulations of real-world processes are both extremely valuable, and
extremely data intensive. For example, a model for gasoline combustion chemistry
widely used to help design low-emission engines involves over 20,000 numerical
parameters as inputs, and even this large set is certainly incomplete. The
existing data model for chemical kinetics, created more than 20 years ago, was
never designed to handle this level of complexity. It is adequate for
conventional small a posteriori kinetic models, but not appropriate for
predicting the chemical kinetics of technologically important systems,
especially those involving complex mixtures. Accurate, large-scale simulation of
reacting mixtures requires a whole new paradigm for how engineers, chemists, and
environmental scientists interact with complex chemistry modeling software, and
how they document the many assumptions and uncertainties that underlie the
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;By reducing the size of the required input, and making
the connection between the transferable fundamental chemistry and simulation
results more transparent, this new approach will make a priori chemical kinetic
simulation accessible to a much broader range of scientists and engineers. This
will revolutionize the field of kinetics, open up significant new possibilities
in the design of chemical products and processes, and provide a firmer basis for
business and regulatory decision-making. A variety of outreach and educational
activities are included. To encourage current practitioners of kinetics to take
advantage of the new IT technology, the new methodology is demonstrated at
conferences and promoted using existing Web collaboratories. It is also
necessary to change the way kinetics is taught to encourage new engineers and
scientists to embrace the new paradigm; to this end, new teaching modules are
developed to introduce chemical kinetics to undergraduate and graduate students
in a variety of disciplines including chemistry, chemical engineering,
mechanical engineering, and environmental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;