* 0312780
* ITR:      Architectural Support for Programming-in-the-Small-and-Many
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Nenad Medvidovic, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 448,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0312780&lt;br/&gt;Nenad Medvidovic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the past several decades software researchers and practitioners have proposed
various approaches, techniques, and tools for developing ever larger, more
complex systems targeted at the traditional workstation environment. The results
of these efforts have shared a number of traits: system size and complexity,
possible distribution across desktop platforms, focus on modeling and analysis
before implementation, accompanying development environments, explicit software
architectures, and so forth. The resulting software development paradigm has
been referred to as programming-in-the-large (PitL). A new set of challenges has
arisen with the proliferation of small, inexpensive, heterogeneous, resource-
constrained, possibly embedded, highly-distributed, and highly-mobile computing
platforms. While a number of the individual challenges may bear similarity to
those addressed by PitL, their combination and overall novelty can be described
more appropriately as programming-in-the-small-and-many (Prism).&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project intends to address the challenges of Prism. The project's focus
is at the level of&lt;br/&gt;software application engineering. That is, the
project will utilize advances in lower level software technologies (operating
systems, optimized compilation, (wireless) networking, and data compression) as
it&lt;br/&gt;addresses the goal of developing understandings, principles,
frameworks, methods, mechanisms, and tools&lt;br/&gt;that will support
efficient, scalable, reliable, robust, and, above all, highly adaptable software
applications in the Prism setting. The project will focus on four key
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. develop an effective design methodology, accompanying
software models, and flexible, incremental software&lt;br/&gt;analysis
techniques;&lt;br/&gt;2. develop technology to carry the design approach forward
to implementation in a heterogeneous, highly&lt;br/&gt;distributed, mobile, and
resource constrained setting;&lt;br/&gt;3. develop execution-time solutions in
support of (continuous) dynamic system evolution,
(re)deployment,&lt;br/&gt;mobility, and graceful degradation;&lt;br/&gt;4.
validate the approach through series of experiments to quantify its key aspects,
as well as through applications in three specific problem domains.&lt;br/&gt;The
project will build upon the emerging body of research on software architectures
in providing a comprehensive methodology for software development in-the-small-
and-many. In particular, it will investigate the potential role and impact of
software architectural styles (recurring structural, behavioral, and interaction
patterns across systems) in providing a basis for the design methodology and
incremental architectural analysis. Component-based frameworks and software
connectors (explicit architectural abstractions embodying component
interactions) will form the likely basis of the architecture implementation and
execution solutions. Since it is unrealistic to assume that all applications in
the Prism setting will have the same modeling and implementation needs, the
project will provide configurable architectural style and implementation
frameworks, with guidelines for instantiating these frameworks into specific
styles and style-based implementation/execution platforms.