* 0312261
* Metal-Insulator Transitions in Correlated Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Richard Scalettar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education that
focuses on the role of correlations among particles in quantum many-body
systems. The primary thrust of the research lies in the study of the Mott
transition in ultracold atoms in optical lattice traps. The PI aims to extend
our understanding of critical phenomena in the Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian on a
uniform lattice to the case where a spatially varying one-particle potential can
locally alter the filling and compressibility. A study of the cerium volume
collapse comprises a secondary thrust. The PI aims to refine his application of
the dynamical mean field theory and its extensions to the cerium volume
collapse, where a metal-insulator transition in 4-f orbitals is thought to play
a crucial role. Quantum Monte Carlo techniques will be used for required
numerical simulations. This award also supports the integration of students into
research activities at graduate and undergraduate levels. The PI will continue
his activities in involving students from underrepresented groups in research
and in outreach to high school students. %%% This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education that focuses on the role of correlations
among particles in quantum many-body systems. The primary thrust of the research
lies in the study of atoms at extremely low temperature that are "trapped" in
spatially periodic lattices. This atomic physics system is believed to provide a
useful analog for a strongly correlated electron material and some
superconductors, but unlike electrons in materials, this system may be
experimentally "tunable" enabling detailed exploration of different physical
states with relative ease. Traditional lattice models for strongly correlated
electron materials, e.g. the Hubbard model, are believed to describe these
systems. Focusing on these trapped atom systems, the PI will study a transition
between analogs of superconducting and insulating states in metals and explore
exotic states of matter that can arise in these systems. An aim of this work is
to study atomic lattice trap systems to elucidate the complex physics of
superconductors and strongly correlated materials. The PI aims to refine
recently developed methods for including the effects of correlations among
electrons to study a kind of "metal-insulator transition" that is believed to
occur in the electrons occupying 4-f shell atomic orbitals of the element
cerium. Quantum Monte Carlo techniques will be used for required numerical
simulations. This award also supports the integration of students into research
activities at graduate and undergraduate levels. The PI will continue his
activities in involving students from underrepresented groups in research and in
outreach to high school students. ***

