* 0313142
* ITR:     Supporting Adaptable Pervasive Computing Through a Kernel-Middleware eXchange
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Philip McKinley, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

McKinley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid expansion of mobile computing
infrastructure promises ubiquitous access to the Internet. However, the dynamics
of this environment (variable conditions on wireless networks, changing security
policies as users roam among wireless domains, and computing priorities that
depend on battery life) pose a significant challenge in the design of software
infrastructure for mobile systems. One approach to this problem is to introduce
a layer of adaptive middleware between applications and underlying transport
services. While a traditional role of middleware is to insulate application
components from platform variations, an adaptive middleware layer should exploit
services provided by the platform operating system to enhance functionality and
performance. This project investigates the interaction between adaptive
middleware and the operating system kernel. Specifically, the project focuses on
the question: What services and interfaces should the operating system provide
to enable adaptive middleware to better meet the needs of mobile computing
applications? The key hypothesis to be tested is that this relationship is
bidirectional: certain middleware functionality is more effective when pushed
into the kernel, and certain kernel operations are more effective when combined
with middleware-level information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kernel-Middleware
eXchange (KMX) project builds on the idea that, instead of viewing lower-level
middleware as an "operating system abstraction layer," it is also necessary to
investigate how this part of the middleware might actively cooperate with the
operating system in order to provide applications with supporting functionality
that neither part could provide by itself. The project investigates three cross-
cutting concerns: quality-of-service of multimedia communication on wireless
networks; measures to enhance the security of mobile devices, including adaptive
auditing and packet filtering; and managing battery lifetime through data
transformations, adaptive process scheduling, and management of network
interface card usage.&lt;br/&gt;