* 0313062
* ITR:  Message Ferrying:  Mobility-Assisted Data Delivery in Highly Partitioned Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Mostafa Ammar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 324,999.00

Mobile ad hoc networks form a vital component in realizing the vision of rapidly
deployed communications capability in environments with little or no pre
installed infrastructure. Applications range from battlefield scenarios to
responding to natural and human-made disasters. In these situations the ability
to communicate, even at low rates, is extremely valuable for coordinating
efforts and sharing vital information. Most ad hoc network routing and data
forwarding algorithms are designed for networks that are always connected. While
it is certainly desirable to maintain a connected network, various conditions
may cause a mobile ad hoc network to become partitioned, meaning that there is
no single-hop or multiple-hop route between some (or all) source/destination
node pairs. Node mobility, limited radio range, physical obstacles, severe
weather, wide deployment area or other physical factors, might preclude some
nodes from communicating with others and result in a partitioned network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of network partitioning requires a new
approach other than the traditional "store-and-forward" routing paradigm used in
most current ad hoc routing algorithms, in which messages are dropped if no
route is found to reach a destination. Instead, a device should be able to
buffer and carry the messages until it has a chance to forward them. This
project focuses on the development of a novel "Message Ferrying" (MF) scheme,
inspired by its real life analog, that implements this "store, carry and
forward" routing paradigm. The main idea of the MF scheme is to introduce non-
randomness in the movement of nodes and exploit such non-randomness to help
deliver data. The MF scheme overcomes partitioning in a mobile ad-hoc network by
using a set of mobile nodes, called message ferries. These nodes have the
responsibility to carrying messages between disconnected nodes by moving around
the deployed area according to known routes and communicating with other nodes
they meet. By using ferries as relays, nodes can communicate asynchronously with
other nodes that are disconnected. The proposed work will consist of three main
components:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-The development of fundamental architectures,
algorithms and protocols leading to successful designs of message ferrying
systems,&lt;br/&gt;-The construction of system prototypes to provide a realistic
understanding of the challenges in building and deploying message ferrying
systems, and &lt;br/&gt;-Interfacing with on-going investigations of two
contexts in which message ferrying can play an important role, namely surface
transportation systems and robotic teams &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is
among the first to investigate in-depth the use of non-random node mobility to
assist in providing data connectivity in a partitioned network. This will have
the effect of enhancing the usability of mobile ad hoc networks in contexts
where such disconnection is inevitable. It may also lead to the development of
systems (e.g., on college campuses) where message ferrying is used as a low-
cost, grass roots messaging solution. We are also committed to activities that
will promote the broader impact of the proposed work including, the development
of modules based on our research for graduate and undergraduate classes,
continued emphasis on inclusion of under-represented groups within our research
efforts and outreach activities to Atlanta-based historically black colleges and
universities.