* 0313597
* Bluegrass Algebra Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Alberto Corso, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/29/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The investigators are organizing at the University of Kentucky the Bluegrass
Algebra Conference (April 12-13, 2003) in addition to the third Hayden-Howard
lecture delivered by Professor Craig Huneke on April 11, 2003. The lecture
honors the contributions of UK faculty members Thomas Hayden and Henry Howard,
by bringing an outstanding mathematician to the University of Kentucky each year
to deliver a colloquium lecture on research at the forefront of modern
Mathematics. The additional conference will consist of ten lectures - accessible
to an audience of graduate studens - given by internationally known
mathematicians working in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry: Prof.
Shreeram Abhyankar (Purdue), Prof. Stephen Dale Cutkosky (Columbia, Missouri),
Prof. Shankar Dutta (Urbana-Champaign), Prof. William Heinzer (Purdue), Prof.
Melvin Hochster (Michigan), Prof. Joseph Lipman (Purdue), Prof. Juan Migliore
(Notre Dame), Prof. Claudia Polini (Notre Dame), Prof. Bernd Ulrich (Purdue),
Prof. Wolmer Vasconcelos (Rutgers). Among the areas to be covered we list:
resolutions of singularities, liaison theory, Hilbert functions, tight closure
and its applications. We propose that at least 20 graduate students and young
researchers within three years from their Ph.D. receive funds to support their
participation in these events. The amount requested will be sufficient for
travel as well as local expenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commutative Algebra is of
central importance among the various branches of Modern Algebra because of the
power and efficiency of its structures, which put it in contact with a variety
of disciplines, such as Computational Algebra, Algebraic Geometry, Control
Theory, and Robotics. During the academic year 2002-03, Commutative Algebra is
also receiving particular attention because of a year long program, which is
currently held at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley under
the direction of Professor Huneke. These facts have led the Mathematics
Department at the University of Kentucky to select Professor Huneke to deliver
the third Hayden-Howard lecture. There are also at least three long term goals
that we expect to achieve by organizing the additional Bluegrass Algebra
Conference. In first place, we are seeking to increase the collaboration among
the strong Algebra groups at nearby major institutions. Our second goal is to
encourage and foster scholarly interests within the smaller Algebra groups at
the regional institutions in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. Finally, we are
seeking to expose our&lt;br/&gt;graduate students to current trends of research
in Algebra and at the same time have them interact with fellow graduate students
at other institutions. It is worth recalling that the Department of Mathematics
at UK has a successful history in training a large number of students in
Algebra.&lt;br/&gt;