* 0313529
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Characterization of Conditions Associated with Local and Regional Air Pollution Episodes in Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Adel Hanna, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/2004
* USD 31,711.00

0108305&lt;br/&gt;Hanna&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. Adel Hanna, Manager, Environmental
Research at MCNC, Raleigh, North Carolina and Dr. Mohamed El-Shahawy, Astronomy
and Meteorology Department, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. The goal of this
research is to provide a clear understanding of the multiple and complex
processes that contribute to air pollution episodes in Egypt. They will pursue
two objectives: (1) evaluate meteorological conditions during the fall season
(September, October, November) by analyzing ten years' worth of data
(1990-1999), with special emphasis on the air pollution episode of October-
November 1999; and (2) characterize the role of biomass burning in aggravating
air pollution episodes over Cairo and adjacent cities in Egypt. During the last
week of October 1999 and continuing for a period of two to three weeks, Cairo,
and cities to the north along the Nile Delta were exposed to especially high
levels of a number of air pollutants. The incident has drawn attention to the
problem of biomass burning and other anthropogenic emission sources in the Nile
Delta and greater Cairo area. This study will improve our ability to predict air
pollution episodes, thus allowing people with various health problems to avoid
certain activities during high-pollution periods. It will also improve our
understanding of the roles played by emissions, location, terrain, and
meteorological conditions in aggravating air pollution
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project supports collaboration
between two investigators, with excellent qualifications both by training,
experience and knowledge of the situation they will be studying, to carry out
this research. With the meteorological data and the emissions scenario, the PIs
plan to use a comprehensive air quality model that has been applied to numerous
geographic locations in North America. The application in Egypt will provide
insight into any limitations in the use of the air quality model. This is
particularly important, as global air quality models should be in agreement with
regional and local models. The proposed activity should also lead to
improvements in the air quality model by including new types of environments
different from those for which the air quality model was initially developed,
such as biomass burning, which is likely to be a leading contributor to the air
pollution. This activity strongly supports the adaptation and transfer of
technology in protecting the air quality and health of the citizens of Egypt,
and will provide a process for extension to other locations as well. A US
graduate student will participate in this project and will gain experience in
international scientific collaboration. The proposal meets INT objectives in
supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest, and where there
are potential societal benefits. This project is being supported under the US-
Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in
both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.