* 0313392
* ITR: From Sensor Networks to Multimedia Systems: New Views on MIMO Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2007
* USD 237,238.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0313392&lt;br/&gt;Mitra, Urbashi&lt;br/&gt;U of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the emerging ubiquity of wireless
communications, we continue to seek to provide high fidelity transmission of
heterogenous data on demand. To fulfill this objective, significant improvements
must be made over current wireless systems. The principal aim of the proposed
research is to extend the state of the art of modulation and associated receiver
designs for multiple-input/multiple-output wireless systems via the
generalization of such channels. Spurred by the substantial capacity advantages
promised by theoretical analysis for the use of multiple transmit and receive
antenna systems, significant attention has been devoted to the design and
analysis of spacetime coding and modulation schemes. Experimental transmit
diversity systems have offered further hope that the gap between existing
systems and theory can be bridged. The proposed research shall encompass
commercial wireless systems such as cellular communication networks as well as
more speculative systems such as ad hoc sensor networks. Abstractly, these two
networks represent extremes in terms of network parameter information and
control. A cellular communication system can be characterized as having a simple
hierarchy with a basestation as central controller, modest power constraints,
highly reliable users, and modest density of users per cell, and possessor of
near-complete parameter information of all active users. In contrast, a sensor
network will likely have a nested hierarchy of clusterheads communicating with a
small set of nodes, severe power limitations, unreliable nodes, and dense
deployments. We shall consider three main research foci: collaborative
communication for sensor networks; transmit diversity schemes for interference
channels; and the coupling of space-time methods&lt;br/&gt;with multimedia
systems.