* 0313365
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  The Processing of Syntactic Features of Words during Lexical Access for Speech Production
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Merrill Garrett, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,563.00

0313365&lt;br/&gt;Garrett&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI and students from
University of Arizona in a collaboration with Thomas Pechmann of the Department
of Linguistics at the University of Leipzig, Germany. Through the collaboration,
the researchers will study the activation of syntactic word class information
while speakers access their mental lexicon. The international collaboration
combines the expertise of the US side in speech error analysis with the
expertise of the German side in the use of experimental picture naming tasks.
Cross-language comparisons made possible by the collaboration will use language
specific variation in the expression of syntactic parameters and will greatly
assist in distinguishing constraints on lexical processing indexed by the
experimental procedures. The work will have many behavioral, computational, and
formal reflexes that may be interpreted in the context of lexical access
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also advances international human
resources through the participation of graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows, thereby contributing to the development of a globally engaged work
force. The scientific aspects of the collaborative work will be highly valuable
for the broad education of the PhD students on both sides of the Atlantic and
will strengthen the research efforts of both groups.&lt;br/&gt;