* 0313129
* ITR: A Protocol For Computational Protein Design
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Chao Tang, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2009
* USD 500,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational research on protein
folding and design. The PIs aim to provide a comprehensive computational
protocol utilizing the principle of designability in order to address the
fundamental problem of designing novel protein folds. Algorithmic improvements
will be made to enhance the modulus on backbone selection in the protocol.
Research will address issues ranging from backbone modeling to structure
screening and clustering to stochastic computation of designability to obtain an
optimal strategy in the search for novel backbone conformations of much longer
proteins than previously thought possible. A high-resolution all-atomic modeling
will be employed to pack suitable choices of side-chains onto the backbone to
obtain realistic protein conformations for experimental verification. New
elements that will be actively explored, include: (1) a more accurate pairwise
decomposition of the solvation energy function; (2) improving a widely used
method of side-chain packing to obtain a significant increase of computational
speed for the deterministic dead-end-elimination algorithm with stochastic
sampling schemes embedded; and (3) a novel parametric scheme to characterize the
flexibilities of secondary structure elements of a protein structure to overcome
the severe limitation of the fixed-backbone methodology imposed by most of
currently existing algorithms. This award also supports education at the
graduate and postdoctoral level and provides research experience in an
industrial laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a 'small'
category proposal submitted in response to the ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It
supports multidisciplinary computational research involving statistical
mechanics, molecular biophysics and computer science on protein folding and
design. While there is a great diversity of amino acid sequences in the many
proteins observed in nature, about 100,000 different proteins in the human body
alone, the diversity of structures is much more limited. It is estimated that
there are only about 1000 distinct protein folds in nature. The PIs seek to
develop a method for designing novel protein folds that is based on the
"designability principle." The designability principle, developed by the PIs,
connects highly designable structures and highly stable amino-acid sequences.
Research involves implementing and improving computational algorithms. By a
focused and methodical examination of various options, criteria, and algorithms
at the different stages of the proposed protocol, the PIs aim to design a
powerful and practical tool for protein design by computer. This award also
supports education at the graduate and postdoctoral level and provides research
experience in an industrial laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;