* 0313754
* BE/Gen-En:  The Oxygen-stress Response in the Extremophile Halobacterium sp. NRC-1: Systems Analysis and Development of Supplemental High School Instruction Modules
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Leroy Hood, Institute for Systems Biology
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,750,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Leroy Hood, Nitin Baliga and Pat Ehrman of the
Institute for Systems Biology to evaluate the global oxygen-response mechanisms
in Halobacterium sp. NRC-1 through a research program including a strong
parallel high-school educational component. Halobacterium sp. NRC-1 belongs to a
group of organisms called Archaea that are frequently encountered in extreme
environments such as deep-sea vents and solar salt flats and are, therefore,
resources for novel biotechnology and health-related products. It is an extreme
halophile (salt-loving organism) that experiences frequent sways in light,
temperature, salinity and oxygen. The availability of its complete genome
sequence and sophisticated experimental analysis tools render this microorganism
pliable for studying whole cell (global) mechanisms of adaptation to changes in
important environmental factors. The research goal of this project is to dissect
the biological networks that mediate the oxygen-stress response. Dr. Baliga and
co-workers will simultaneously analyze data for all of the genes in the organism
such as abundance of mRNA and proteins, and protein-protein interactions with
advanced modeling and simulation methods to decipher an essential biological
network at a level unprecedented in scope and detail.

Halobacterium sp. NRC-1 cultures being vibrant and colorful will prove effective
in provoking interest in young students. More importantly, it is non-pathogenic
and easily decontaminated overriding the need for expensive and potentially
hazardous sterilization instruments. The education goal of this project is to
develop inquiry-based supplemental high school teaching modules and materials.
To achieve this goal Drs. Hood, Baliga and Ehrman will work collaboratively with
teachers, students and other science educators. Students will learn the modern
collaborative approaches in systems biology and that biology is not exclusively
a fixed-narrative dominated science. Mr. Ehrman and his colleagues will work
with education products developers to ensure nationwide dissemination of the
educational products to high schools.