* 0313268
* ITR/CCR: Geometric Surface Processing Tools for Analysis of Biological Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ross Whitaker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2007
* USD 357,708.00

EIA-0313268&lt;br/&gt;Ross T. Whitaker&lt;br/&gt;University of
Utah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to develop a new set of computational tools for processing and analyzing
surfaces that are extracted from complex biological data sets. The purpose is
closing the gap that prevents the widespread use of geometric surface-filtering
tools in biological and medical applications. This gap exists for two reasons.
The first is that these sophisticated and powerful tools for filtering surfaces
rely on numerical algorithms that are computationally demanding. The second
reason is that biological applications require not only surface filtering, but a
set of complimentary tools for higher-level processing. Thus, the proposed work
will address both issues, better filtering algorithms and higher-level
processing tools. The broader impact of this work is as follows. Agro wing
number of scientific and medical investigations rely on studying populations of
subjects through 3D imaging. Such studies produce databases of images and
therefore require better tools for extracting meaningful information from the
individual images and quantifying geometric properties in order to make
scientific conclusions. Previous work focused on extracting the surfaces that
are embedded in this 3D data, but many of the relevant biological questions
pertain to the geometric properties of those surfaces. The investigators
envision a powerful new toolbox that will enable scientists, engineers, and
clinicians to process 3D surface data. More specifically, the PI for the
proposed work is engaged in several different projects that have such
requirements, and thus the proposed work has concrete implications for ongoing
research with direct applications. Furthermore, the proposed work has an
educational element that includes multidisciplinary educational opportunities
for postdoctoral candidates and graduate students and a program by which we will
expose undergraduate women to leading-edge research in hardware and software for
3D graphics. The proposed work builds upon previous results that generalize the
fundamentals of image processing to surfaces. That work produced technologies
for surface reconstruction from tomographic data and geometric versions of
variational image filters such as Gaussian smoothing, anisotropic diffusion, and
high-boost filtering. These developments have broad implications for a variety
of problems that entail extracting, analyzing, and visualizing surfaces. To
satisfy the goals of this project, the investigators will pursue two areas of
research. The first is the development of better algorithms for variational
surface filtering. The focus of this part of the work is on speed and accuracy.
The investigators will examine more efficient and accurate numerical techniques
and surface representations, as well as implementations on commodity graphics
cards.&lt;br/&gt;The second area of research is the development of new
algorithms for analysis. This work will focus on surface segmentation, feature
detection, shape quantification, and surface matching. All of this work will be
implemented in conjunction with the Insight Toolkit, an open-source, NIH-
sponsored software framework for multidimensional image
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;