* 0313324
* Community Access for the Brain Injury Population
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* McKay Sohlberg, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2006
* USD 446,025.00

Social isolation is an acute problem for those who are survivors of a Traumatic
Brain Injury (TBI). Many of these individuals are left with long-lasting
alterations in social, behavioral, physical, and cognitive functions. A typical
TBI survivor is a young to mid-life adult, living either in government-assisted
housing, with their family, or in rarer cases in their own house or apartment.
Survivors are universally afflicted with social isolation. This project focuses
on one aspect of social isolation, that of community access. Many TBI survivors
are unable to do independent travel to go to the store, to see a doctor, to
attend a community social event. Not only do they find it impossible to drive
within the community, they also have problems using the bus system or even
traveling by foot to a destination. It is clear that high technology, in the
form of wearable navigation devices, has potential to help. What is missing are
(1) solid data on the actual needs of TBI survivors in accessing their
community, (2) a means to assess the skills and impairments of individual
survivors in terms of using navigation devices, (3) a process that produces both
a training plan and a "prescription" that matches a survivor with a custom
device. This proposal takes on each of these questions. Its results will allow
the assistive technology industry to (a) build devices that are useful to the
TBI population, and (b) do the matching that is necessary to get the right
device into the hands of an individual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Prevalence estimates range from 2.5 to 6.5 million individuals living with the
consequences of TBI, with that number growing with advances in medical
procedures at the scene of the accident, in emergency medical care, and in
neurosurgery. The incidence rates for the most severe traumatic brain injuries
are higher than those for spinal cord injury, multiple sclerosis, cerebral
palsy, and muscular dystrophy combined. &lt;br/&gt;