* 0313943
* Laboratory Support for the Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Paul Fullagar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 226,228.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. T. Douglas Price and Dr. James
Burton of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, along with Dr. Paul Fullager
(University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill), with continue the investigations of
the Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry, one of the very few institutions
for such research in the US. This funding, in the form of a Laboratory Support
Award, will permit the laboratory to pursue the study of isotopic measures of
past human migration and residence change. One of the major foci of the lab is
the application of strontium and lead isotopes to questions of human movement in
the past.

This intensive focus involves the characterization of local variation in
strontium isotope ratios at three separate localities in Wisconsin, Honduras,
and Germany to determine sources of strontium and improve our ability to
identify migrants. Preliminary studies of isotopes at these sites have
documented the mobility of individuals present, as well as substantial variation
among the buried inhabitants. The detailed studies proposed here will provide
new insight into the sources of strontium utilized by the inhabitants of the
site. This new information will tell us about age/sex differences in diet within
the community and the use of the landscape (e.g., agricultural fields, summer
pasture, and hunting areas), as well as providing a badly needed determination
of the local range of variation. This project will result in new approaches to
the use of isotopic proveniencing in archaeological studies that will provide
new information on the human use of the landscape in the past. This information
has important implications for understanding the transition to agriculture in
the past and the nature of culture change. Did human migration play a major role
in the spread of prehistoric agriculture, language, and genetic material, or did
local groups adopt the knowledge and materials of farming from outsiders? This
research is new and at the cutting edge of isotopic proveniencing studies in
archaeology. New perspectives and new techniques resulting from this study will
undoubtedly produce new knowledge. Broader impacts will be felt on the
scientific community and society at large. The Laboratory for Archaeological
Chemistry provides a service to the archaeological community in the form of
education and chemical analyses that involves institutions and colleagues around
the globe. These activities in general and the proposed project specifically
involve students and colleagues in the development and application of
archaeometric methods in archaeology and bioarchaeology. These activities are
international in scope and affect substantial numbers of students and
colleagues.

