* 0313877
* SGER: Commitment Devices and Savings Behavior: A Pilot Experiment in the Philippines
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2004
* Dean Karlan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Savings allows households to smooth consumption and make investments.
Savings also helps stabilize banking markets and fuel economic growth. Yet much
remains unknown about the determinants of savings, particularly in developing
countries. Are low savings a consequence of low access to safe, affordable
savings product, or do households also need mechanisms designed specifically to
help them commit to save?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are working with a rural bank
in the Philippines to offer market-driven innovative savings devices with
commitment features. The project employs a rigorous experimental research
design, with random assignment to treatment and control groups, in order to draw
robust policy conclusions about the potential implications for expansion of
these client-responsive products on overall economic outcomes for poor, rural
Filipinos. We will collect a full set of outcome variables so that we can
measure not only changes in savings at the rural bank, but changes in aggregate
household savings in both formal and&lt;br/&gt;informal vehicles. Furthermore,
we will collect consumption and investment data so that we can observe how
additional savings were or were not used, and lastly we will conduct in depth
analysis of who decides to take-up the commitment savings products so that we
can try to disentangle competing theories of savings
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;