* 0313920
* Evolution of a Complex Hunter-Gatherer Community in Southern British Columbia: The Bridge River Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Anna Prentiss, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 155,835.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. William C. Prentiss and his
colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research at the
Bridge River site, a large housepit village located in the Middle Fraser Canyon
of south-central British Columbia. Like the nearby Keatley Creek site, Bridge
River offers extensive (70 housepits) and well-preserved archaeological deposits
representing a globally significant record of complex hunter-gatherer evolution
and village organization. Most importantly, this site provides direct evidence
for documenting transitions between socio-economically egalitarian and ranked
hunter-gatherer societies. Dr. Prentiss will direct multidisciplinary research
that will examine this evolutionary process relying upon geophysical
investigations, surface contour mapping, archaeological excavation, radiocarbon
dating, and zooarchaeological and paleoethnobotanical analyses. Geophysical
research will employ a wide range of instruments (including magnetometry,
conductivity, resistivity, and ground-penetrating radar) in order to produce a
sub-surface map of features across the village. Laser-transit mapping will
provide a detailed surface contour map. These studies will permit a broad
assessment of variability in house-floors, hearths and roasting pits, storage
structures, and possibly a village palisade. Archaeological test excavations
will be placed in contexts indicative of cooking or heating features with the
goal of collecting samples that will permit radiocarbon dating of all house
floors and a sample of external features. Feature function, and, by proxy,
variation in household subsistence and technological behavior will be examined
through detailed studies of artifacts and faunal and floral remains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Prentiss and his colleagues will focus on several key
questions: 1. When did the Bridge River village emerge as an aggregated
community? 2. When did socio-economic inequality emerge? 3. What are the
ecological, technological, and demographic correlates of this process? 4. Can we
understand social evolution of this nature as a process that occurs under
regionally optimal resource conditions or is it driven by declining access to
key resources making for greater competition to control the most productive
foraging landscapes. The research will offer implications of substantial
intellectual merit, addressing the emergence of socio-economic inequality in
aggregated hunter-gatherer communities. It asks whether inequality is the
consequence of self-interested behavior of aspiring elites when resources are
abundant or if it is one possible result of a cultural evolutionary process
associated with high populations and declining access to resources. The project
will result in broad impacts on several levels. It will directly incorporate
indigenous communities in the research process thereby enhancing archaeologist
and Native American/First Nations relationships. It will offer science
educational opportunities to university students and the general public. It will
offer insight into relationships between human behavior and ecological change
during earlier periods of global warming. This is expected to have eventual
impacts on human, cultural, and natural resource management policies and
practices within the broader region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;