* 0313708
* BE/GENEN Coral Reef Genomics: A Genome Wide Approach to the Study of Cnidarian Symbiosis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Mary Alice Coffroth, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2005
* USD 1,061,353.00

Symbiotic interactions are common and important in a wide variety of plant and
animal communities. Among the more complex symbioses is the mutualism between
benthic marine invertebrates, especially cnidarians, and photosynthetic
dinoflagellate algae (zooxanthellae). This type of symbiosis has had a key role
in the formation of an important marine ecosystem, the coral reef. Little is
known about the molecular basis for the establishment and maintenance of these
common biological relationships. The symbiosis between scleractinian corals and
their zooxanthellae is highly susceptible to changes in environmental factors
such as elevated seawater temperature and/or elevated light levels. Global
warming has impacted coral reefs world wide by causing the disruption of these
symbioses (coral bleaching), causing many corals to subsequently die. It is now
urgent to gain a better understanding of the molecular and cellular interactions
that are critical to the functional integrity of these symbioses. The PIs have
assembled a team of coral reef biologists (Coffroth, Szmant) with a long record
of field experience in studying symbiotic relationships in marine ecosystems,
genome scientists (Medina, Manohar, Nelson, Terry) with wide-ranging expertise
in high throughput genomic techniques and analysis of data generated by such
methods, and educational experts (Tang) with high impact capabilities for public
outreach through the educational programs in a museum/aquarium setting. The PIs
have several members on the team who are part of minority groups, including six
women (Coffroth, Manohar, Medina, Szmant, Tang, and Terry), two Hispanic
(Medina, Szmant), and two Asian-Americans (Manohar, Tang). The PIs are using
microarray expression profiling developed from expressed sequence tags (EST)
data to identify genes and cellular pathways involved in the host-zooxanthellae
symbiosis in the Montastraea faveolata mutualistic system from Caribbean
tropical reef areas. They are performing gene manipulation experiments to
establish function of these genes. When accompanied by sequencing of bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) clones containing them, this approach will
contribute to understanding how these genes are regulated in both the host and
the symbiont. The research is the first attempt to look at a very important
mutualistic relationship using a genome wide analysis of gene expression. The
PIs are making all the resources generated by this project (ESTs, microarrays,
cDNA and BAC libraries) available through several outreach programs. Gaining a
better understanding of host-symbiont relationships in coral reef ecosystems can
have implications for atmospheric and ocean sciences, conservation biology and
the study and diagnosis of microbial diseases in corals. Consequently, this
project will be of great interest to a broader scientific community.