* 0313101
* ITR: Development of Quantitative Coarse Grained Simulation Models for Polyolefin Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Sanat Kumar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational research and education
to study polymer miscibility. The PI's propose to develop a suite of coarse-
grained methodologies and computational algorithms to simulate the liquid state
miscibility of polyolefins. Polyolefins, e.g., polyethyelene, polypropylene
etc., are commercially important polymers which need to be cheaply synthesized
with desired properties. Since minimizing cost is important, it has become
popular to blend polyolefins of different chain microstructure to create
materials with desired properties, rather than to synthesize new polymers.
Unfortunately, many of these long chain polymers do not mix, so desired
properties cannot be readily achieved. It is important to applications that a
good a priori knowledge of the miscibility of a given polyolefin mixture be
available. Available computer simulation tools cannot handle long enough chains
to be useful from an experimental standpoint. The PIs aim to develop coarse-
grained simulation methodologies, which can extend the range of chain lengths
accessible to simulations by an order of magnitude or more. These tools will
enable simulations in the range of experimentally relevant chain lengths and
offer the possibility of developing a tool using information technology to
predict polyolefin miscibility. Codes resulting from the research will be
benchmarked against experiment, and made available to the broader materials
research community. This award will increase the PIs' participation in various
NSF supported education and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the ITR
solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational research and education to
study polymer miscibility. The PI's propose to develop a suite of coarse-grained
methodologies and computational algorithms to simulate the liquid state
miscibility of polyolefins. Polyolefins, e.g., polyethyelene, polypropylene
etc., are commercially important polymers which need to be cheaply synthesized
with desired properties. Since minimizing cost is important, it has become
popular to blend polyolefins of different chain microstructure to create
materials with desired properties, rather than to synthesize new polymers.
Unfortunately, many of these long chain polymers do not mix, so desired
properties cannot be readily achieved. It is important to applications that a
good a priori knowledge of the miscibility of a given polyolefin mixture be
available. Available computer simulation tools cannot handle long enough chains
to be useful from an experimental standpoint. The PIs aim to develop coarse-
grained simulation methodologies, which can extend the range of chain lengths
accessible to simulations by an order of magnitude or more. These tools will
enable simulations in the range of experimentally relevant chain lengths and
offer the possibility of developing a tool using information technology to
predict polyolefin miscibility. Codes resulting from the research will be
benchmarked against experiment, and made available to the broader materials
research community. This award will increase the PIs' participation in various
NSF supported education and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;