* 0313566
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Pastoralism's Legacy: Zooarchaeological Investigations in the Southwest Cape, South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Donald Grayson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,975.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The earliest written impressions of indigenous herdsmen in
southern Africa attest to the vast size of their herds. When a settlement was
founded at the Cape of Good Hope in 1652, herders reportedly drove 20,000 cattle
and sheep into the area. A century later, farms covered the Cape and the
indigenous herders' way of life was nearly over. While European settlement
rapidly transformed this landscape, the Europeans themselves had landed on a
human-modified landscape that had witnessed a long period of hunter-gatherer
occupation and the arrival of pastoralists and their herds 2000 years ago.
Supervised by Donald K. Grayson, Carol J. Frey will examine the role of
pastoralists in structuring prehistoric biotic communities in this region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecologists and conservationists increasingly recognize
that the shapes and courses of modern ecosystems are plotted by the legacy of
prior human land-use and long-term community dynamics. Further, they recognize
that even small-scale human societies are vital components of these histories.
Understanding the anthropogenic impacts of small-scale societies requires long-
term analysis of ecological change and human responses to that change. This
research begins by predicting community dynamics which can be impacted by the
introduction of herding economies, including species richness and diversity,
competitive interactions and predator-prey interactions. Tracking change in
biotic communities involves assessing the live condition, relative abundances
and population dynamics of the animals in those communities. Using vertebrate
faunal assemblages from two archaeological sites in the southwestern Cape, South
Africa (Die Kelders and Kasteelberg), biotic change, and human responses to that
change, will be measured using a range of zooarchaeological techniques,
including skeletal morphometry, demographic profiling, prey type abundances and
skeletal element abundances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the results will be of
interest to archaeologists concerned with human history and prehistory in
southern Africa, they will be equally relevant to those more generally
interested in the development of pastoralist economies, as well as to those
interested in understanding the impacts of herders on today's
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to establish ways of
examining long-term ecological change through analysis of archaeological animal
populations. If successful, these methods will be applicable to modern,
historic, or ancient contexts, and will allow ecological change to be studied
long after it has occurred. With some adjustment, the methods will be applicable
to virtually any terrestrial animal species. The theory and methodology used
here are not based in value judgments about human-caused ecological changes;
positive, or biodiversity-enhancing, impacts are just as probable as negative
ones. Anthropologists armed with this toolkit will be able to contribute to
understanding the human dimension of conservation efforts in countries where
such small-scale communities reside. Given today's international conservation
and land-management issues, it is increasingly important turn our attention to
the places where history and ecology merge, and where small-scale human
societies are crucial agents of change.&lt;br/&gt;