* 0313581
* Aircraft Study of the Structure and Evolution of Supercooled and Mixed- Phase Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* John Hallett, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 06/30/2008
* USD 758,328.00

This grant supports the participation of Dr. Hallett and other researchers in
the AIRS II project (Alliance Icing Research Study), a collaboration of
American, Canadian, and European agencies and institutions motivated by the
important practical problem of aircraft icing. The AIRS field program is
scheduled for the winter of 2003-04 and centered at Mirabel Airport, north of
Montreal, Canada, where a surface observing network and ground-based remote-
sensing equipment will be located. Dr. Hallett and his colleagues will be
responsible for cloud microphysical observations aboard the NSF C-130 aircraft
operating out of Cleveland, Ohio. The main scientific objective is to explain
the circumstances by which regions of supercooled cloud can form and continue to
exist though ice crystals may also be present. The C-130 will be equipped with
instruments for measuring the water content and ice content of clouds; the
concentration, size, habit, and density of ice crystals; the concentration of
ice-forming nuclei; the activity spectrum of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN);
and the concentration and characteristics of aerosol particles both within the
project area and in the air upstream that flows into the clouds of interest.
Because little is known of the structure and evolution of supercooled clouds,
the approach is largely exploratory. Experiments will be designed to answer the
following questions: Are ice nuclei scarce in the supercooled regions? Are the
CCN in the inflowing air consistent with cloud particle sizes and
concentrations? Can the aerosol measurements be synthesized for use in numerical
cloud models that may give further insight on the persistence of supercooled
clouds? What are the meteorological conditions under which supercooled clouds
persist? How might such events be predicted? Answers to these questions
contribute not only to the understanding of the microphysics of supercooled
clouds but also to the advancement of aviation safety.