* 0313887
* A Rice Oligonucleotide Array
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* David Rocke, University of California-Davis
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2008
* USD 4,489,779.00

Rice has become a model for grasses and cereal because of its small genome size,
available genome sequence, and ease of transformation. The structural and
functional analysis of rice genes has broad practical implications for the other
economically important cereals such as corn and wheat. One approach, microarray
analysis, permits biologists to measure the expression levels of thousands of
genes in single experiment. Biologically significant information can be
extracted from these data computationally, and then used to assign functions to
genes, and to identify genetic regulatory networks.

In this project, we will:

1) Design 40,000 70-mer oligomers and construct microarrays for project use and
public distribution. 2) Construct a data analysis system, database and user
interface for project data. Develop web-based tools for data mining the rice
transcriptome. 3) Train the user community in the use of arrays.

Public-sector access to microarrays is critical to ensure that the large public
investment in rice structural genomics is converted into public scientific and
economic benefits. We will deliver a publicly available oligonucleotide
microarray that will be useful for analysis of virtually any trait in rice, a
repository for rice microarray expression data, and enhanced functional
annotation of the rice genome.

Deliverables In years one and two, 15000-element arrays will be distributed. In
year three, 40,000-element arrays will be distributed. Information about the
arrays and where to order them will be available on the project web site at
http://www.tigr.org.

