* 0313792
* PISCES-CB: Partners in Securing Cyberspace through Education and Service  Capacity Building
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Lance Hoffman, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Burley
* 05/31/2006
* USD 537,237.00

This project develops a portable computer security laboratory that may be used
in a wide range of computer security and information assurance (CSIA) courses at
multiple institutions. A suite of hands-on exercises and case studies dedicated
to computer security and information assurance education is developed for use in
conjunction with this laboratory. The exercises cover numerous aspects of
computer security and information assurance including risk assessment, security
policy, firewalls, intrusion detection, secure protocols, and public key
infrastructure. In addition to specifying, building, and testing the laboratory,
the project develops and tests educational modules that use the laboratory in
actual courses at multiple institutions. These modules have instructor and
student guides, are usable in multiple courses, and fully integrate classroom
material with hands-on exercises in the laboratory. The modules emphasize the
importance of the proper, ethical use of the tools and provide ample controls to
prevent the laboratory from being used in an unauthorized manner or to launch
attacks over the Internet. This project is multidisciplinary, integrating
material from computer science, management, law, and other areas important to
CSIA. The project team from three universities has well over fifty years of
combined experience in research and in teaching in this area. The project
creatively uses the existing infrastructure of a regional consortium of
universities that already has easy cross-enrollment to leverage new course
development and make CSIA knowledge much more accessible at all three
institutions. The George Washington University in this project forms a
partnership with two local universities with long histories of serving
traditionally underrepresented groups. Gallaudet University is the world's only
university that brings together deaf, hard of hearing, and hearing students and
faculty in the common pursuit of education.&lt;br/&gt;Marymount University,
until 1986 a women's college, is now a coeducational liberal arts institution in
which women make up 70% of its students.&lt;br/&gt;