* 0313681
* Many-Body Effects in Electronic Dynamics and Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Giovanni Vignale, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 428,000.00

The past two decades have witnessed an explosion of interest in the study of
electronic transport and dynamics in nano-scale devices. Most theoretical work
is usually carried out within a one-electron description, with interaction
effects taken into account via static self-consistent potentials. This
theoretical research program aims at improving our basic understanding of the
role of electron correlations (many-body effects) in nano-electronics through
formal developments and a detailed analysis of simple models. The program is
organized in three parts which build on different but interrelated aspects of
current activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development and applications of the
time-dependent (spin)-current density functional theory (CDFT). This theory
allows a description of many-body effects in terms of time-dependent dissipative
effective fields. The development will include extension of the theory to open
systems (so that transport can be studied); proof of a uniqueness theorem for
the effective fields for non-collinear spin dynamics; construction of new
frequency-dependent potentials; and, a new attack to the (spin) band-gap
problem. The applications will begin with the solution of the spin dynamics in
coupled quantum-dot systems in the presence of non-uniform time-dependent
magnetic fields (with emphasis on magnetization reversal times and the emergence
of Gilbert damping) and continue with the analysis of spin-dependent transport
in these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correlation effects in spin transport. In
this area several projects will be undertaken including theory and calculation
of the "spin mass" (crucial to the calculation of the spin-current in the
Boltzmann equation approach); theory of weak-and high-field spin injection in
the presence of spin-drag friction; inclusion of spin-drag effects in the
Landauer-Buttiker (LB) formalism for interacting one-dimensional channels; many-
body theory of the two-dimensional electron liquid in the presence of Rashba
spin-orbit coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical analysis of spin-
electronic devices. The transport characteristics of a new spin transistor
consisting of two wide ferromagnetic regions connected by a narrow constriction
will be analyzed. This variation on the Flatte-Vignale unipolar spin transistor
concept has the advantage that the thickness of the magnetic domain wall between
the two regions can be made very small, with consequent gain in efficiency.
Drift-diffusion equations for non-collinear spin accumulations will be
introduced and solved.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The past two decades have
witnessed an explosion of interest in the study of electronic transport and
dynamics in nano-scale devices. Most theoretical work is usually carried out
within a one-electron description, with interaction effects taken into account
via static self-consistent potentials. This theoretical research program aims at
improving our basic understanding of the role of electron correlations (many-
body effects) in nano-electronics through formal developments and a detailed
analysis of simple models. The program is organized in three parts which build
on different but interrelated aspects of current
activities.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;