* 0313169
* ITR/AP(CCR): Investigation of Computational Optimization in Brachytherapy Cancer Treatment
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Eva Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Investigations of Computational Optimization in Brachytherapy Cancer Treatment

This project brings together researchers in computational optimization and
medicine to address the fundamental problem of treatment planning for
brachytherapy treatment of cancer. The project involves four avenues of
investigation: 1) Design of realistic and practical mathematical models based on
mixed integer programming (MIP) technology to describe the physical planning of
brachytherapy, which involves the determination of an ``optimal'' configuration
of radioactive sources to be implanted in/near the tumor. 2) Theoretical
investigation of the underlying polyhedral structure of the MIP models via the
construction of conflict hypergraphs. Associated polyhedral implications will be
exploited to develop and implement separation algorithms to assist in the
solution process. 3) Develop new computational tools aimed at solving the
difficult dense MIP instances from this class of problems, as well as from other
applications. Computational approaches include matrix reduction techniques,
penalty branching strategies, aggregate branching which focuses on reduced-cost
and multiple branches with sets of variables instead of variable dichotomy, and
generation of strong cutting planes from hypergraphic structures. 4) Integration
of the mathematical models and computational engine into an expert planning
system for use in the operating room.

The success of the research will lead to important theoretical results related
to integer programming through the hypergrahic constructs; it will lead to
computational advances for solving dense MIP instances, a characteristic rather
different from most industrial applications, but arising commonly in medical
diagnosis and treatment planning problems; and it will improve the ability to
treat patients in the best possible way. Furthermore, the resulting treatment
planning system will serve as a research tool to push the frontier of
understanding for brachytherapy treatment, opening up the possibility of
conducting clinical investigations which require unbiased plans to be produced
within a short time frame.

Educational outreach involves developing teaching materials related to the
project for undergraduate and graduate students in engineering and in the
medical domain. It also involves training of 2 Ph.D. students in this
multidisciplinary research involving optimization, algorithmic design and cancer
treatment. The Ph.D. research will focus on theoretical and computational
optimization, and in particular, on issues related to the project herein.
Undergraduates and minorities will be involved in the research experience
through undergraduate courses and regular premed and minority student mentoring.
Part of the research project will also be disseminated in the lectures on
information and biotechnology in the course ``Cancer Biology and
Biotechnology'', developed recently by a group of interdisciplinary faculty
researchers at Georgia Tech with a focus on multi-faceted approaches for
advancing cancer technology. Mention of this new educational effort highlighting
applications of engineering technology in medical/oncological research will be
included in possible panel discussions and in the recruitment of high school
students.