* 0313224
* ITR:      Generalized Ultrawideband for High Speed Networking
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Gerald Sobelman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2007
* USD 499,303.00

Wireless networks are being successfully deployed at an exponential rate in
public, enterprise and scientific networking environments. Such networks support
roaming and dynamic environments, are easier and often cheaper to deploy than
their wired counterparts and offer flexible configurations that can simply be
modified. Several efforts are currently under way to develop high-speed wireless
technology for wireless personal area networks (WPANs), wireless local area
networks (WLANs) and storage area networks (SANs). This project is studying the
theoretical underpinnings as well as the implementation challenges associated
with two wireless high-speed networking technologies based on ultrawideband
(UWB) communications. The first system is suitable for very high-speed
networking applications where processing power consumption is less of an issue,
such as storage area networks and home networks. The second system is an
excellent match for power constrained consumer electronic devices in a WPAN,
such as the scenarios envisioned by the IEEE 802.15.3a standardization effort in
which the project team is actively participating. The project is making progress
towards a demonstration of the latter technology in a wireless personal area
network video-streaming scenario.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2002, the FCC released
the 3.1 GHz to 10.6 GHz band for UWB communications operating under part 15 of
the FCC regulations. UWB communication systems use signals with a fractional
bandwidth that is larger than 25% of the center frequency, or more than 1.5 GHz.
Prior research established that UWB communication systems offer several
potential advantages, including higher reliability, lower power consumption and
ability to provide fine ranging information. Most importantly, they support
overlaid communications, a key to addressing spectral
congestion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project recently produced a unified view of
UWB schemes. This&lt;br/&gt;Unified view has led to novel UWB schemes with
enhanced spectral efficiency. It has also simplified the design and generation
of UWB pulse trains using broadband signal generation techniques. The resulting
generalized UWB schemes rely on well-known baseband modulation schemes with
existing economical chip level implementations, and adaptive agile spreading
approaches that detect and avoid narrowband systems. They inherit the advantages
of both UWB communications and those of the underlying baseband modulation
scheme. The project pays particular attention to implementation issues, focusing
on trade-offs between cost and complexity of&lt;br/&gt;implementation, and
spectral efficiency and maximal achievable bit rates. For example, it examines
novel one bit novel analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion
structures that are well matched to the baseband modulation schemes that the
project focuses on, and the high bit rates envisioned in the applications of
generalized UWB. These structures are finding applicability beyond the ongoing
work.&lt;br/&gt;