* 0313390
* ITR:  Advances of Core Numerical Linear Algebra Techniques for Quantum Simulations in Solid State Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Richard Scalettar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. This grant is funded jointly by the Divisions of
Materials Research and Mathematical Sciences. It supports interdisciplinary
research and education on the optimization of large-scale matrix computations, a
long-standing problem in computational science with important applications to
computational condensed matter and materials physics and many other fields. The
research effort involves computer science, mathematics, and condensed matter
physics. While much progress has been made by exploiting special properties of a
matrix or the sparsity pattern of its entries, the need remains for more robust
and effective methods, including preconditioning techniques to improve iterative
solutions. Simulating interacting quantum systems, a powerful approach for
understanding many fundamental properties of materials, is an important
application of these methods. It provides motivation for this research on
developing robust and efficient linear algebra solvers for quadratic form
problems and for multi-length scale structured matrices. This research has a
potentially high impact on the ability to predict properties of materials, such
as lattice structures, magnetic properties, and lattice dynamics, through the
application of theory and simulation. This award also supports education of
undergraduate and graduate students and advanced training of a postdoctoral
researcher. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;