* 0313534
* International Travel - Third Pacific Basin Conference of Adsorption Science and Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2003,03/31/2005
* James Ritter, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 03/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Trave International l -
Third Pacific Basin Conference of Adsorption Science and
Technology&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CTS-0313534&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: James Ritter&lt;br/&gt;Institution: USC Research
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding will support
travel expenses for participants from US academic and nonprofit research
institutions to attend the 3rd Pacific Basin Conference on Adsorption Science
and Technology (AST) in Kyongju, Korea on May 25-29, 2003. The AST conferences
were established in 1997 in order to promote scientific collaboration in the
area of adsorption science and technology among scientists and engineers,
especially those from Pacific Basin countries. The primary goal and hence
intellectual merit of the 3rd Pacific Basin Conference on AST is to allow
scientists and engineers from the Pacific Basin Region to present their most
recent research efforts in the area of Adsorption Science and Technology and to
outline further developments in this area. In particular, this will allow US
participants from academia and industry to interact with their international
counterparts and especially to enhance and/or establish collaborations and
scientific exchange with adsorption researchers from the Pacific Basin Region.
The conference will cover a wide variety of adsorption related fields from
fundamentals to applications, and consist of plenary sessions, oral sessions and
poster sessions. To set the stage for the conference, ten plenary speakers will
present in-depth overviews of key research areas covering materials, molecular
simulations, equilibria, kinetics, and processes. The conference will last for
four and one-half days, and host approximately 200 participants from around the
world, with about 20 participants from the US. The broader impacts of the 3rd
Pacific Basin Conference on Adsorption Science and Technology are mainly
associated with the publication of the conferences proceedings volume.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;