* 0313764
* FRG: Piezoelectric Micromachined Transducers using Epitaxial PMN-PT Films on Silicon for Medical Ultrasound
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Xiaoqing Pan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 840,001.00

This FRG (focused research group) project addresses materials science and
biomedical engineering issues in research on new generation, high performance
pMUT (piezoelectric micromachined ultrasound transducer) arrays using
Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)-PbTiO3 (PMN-PT) heterostructures on silicon for real-time 3-D
medical ultrasound imaging. The aim is for more sensitive, broader bandwidth,
less expensive transducer arrays compared with conventional technologies. The
approach is to gain understanding of phenomena governing electromechanical
coupling in epitaxial piezoelectric films in pMUT device structures, and to
achieve epitaxial piezoelectric heterostructure fabrication directly on silicon
with superior piezoelectric response. By integrating PMN-PT films with silicon,
use is made of well-developed device fabrication processes for
patterning/micromachining of silicon, the availability of large-area substrates,
and integration with high performance electronic circuits. Research activities
include: (1) growth of epitaxial SrRuO3 conductive oxide bottom electrodes
directly on silicon by MBE; (2) growth of epitaxial piezoelectric PMN-PT films
by sputtering; (3) macroscale and nanoscale characterization of the
electromechanical properties of PMN-PT films; (4) examination of the
microstructure and interface atomic structure of pMUT devices using high
resolution transmission electron microscopy and analytical electron microscopy
at locations defined by focused ion beam etching; (5) design and fabrication of
pMUT arrays using epitaxial PMN-PT heterostructures on silicon; and (6)
evaluation of the pMUT for medical ultrasound imaging using the Duke University
real-time ultrasound scanner. The required expertise is assembled in a
multidisciplinary team with members working in materials science and biomedical
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;Education and outreach efforts are
integrated into the research program, introducing graduate students to modern,
multidisciplinary science and technology through use of sophisticated research
instrumentation, and research interactions and approaches across disciplines.
Undergraduate students will also be involved with laboratory research
activities. Additionally, direct interaction with high school students and
science teachers is a part of the project. High school teachers will participate
in a summer laboratory research experience at U. Wisconsin and Argonne National
Laboratory. This research experience will be coordinated with an existing
curriculum-development program, in order to integrate it into the high-school
curriculum. The project is co-supported by the MPS/DMR/EM and ENG/BES/BME-RAPD
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;