* 0313520
* Arabadopsis 2010: Identification of New Plastid Division Genes in Arabidopsis and Comprehensive Analysis of Their Functions
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Katherine Osteryoung, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,282,645.00

Plastid division in plants is orchestrated by a complex macromolecular
apparatus, the components of which are mostly unknown. The functions of a set of
predicted and genetically defined Arabidopsis gene products likely to
participate in plastid division will be determined. The proteins to be
investigated derive from three sources: 1) predicted proteins having sequence or
structural homology to known plastid division, bacterial cell division,
mitochondrial fission or fusion, or microtubule-based motor proteins; 2) genes
defined by the Arabidopsis arc (accumulation and replication of chloroplasts)
mutants; and 3) genes encoding proteins with homology to cyanobacterial cell
division proteins, to be identified by transposon mutagenesis in Synechococcus
PCC 7942. Functional studies will include examination of knockout lines by
microscopy for abnormalities in chloroplast number, size, shape, ultrastructure
and FtsZ localization pattern, biochemical assays of protein targeting and
topology, analysis of in vivo localization using GFP fusion proteins and
protein-specific antibodies, and analysis of protein interactions using
immunoprecipitation and yeast two-hybrid techniques. The results obtained from
functional investigations will be integrated to arrive at a model describing the
macromolecular organization and biochemical activity of the chloroplast division
complex from which new hypotheses can be derived and tested. This research will
be relevant to scientists interested in a variety of biological problems,
including organelle fission and dynamics, macromolecular organization, organelle
evolution, and plant development. cDNA clones, plasmids, antibodies and other
useful reagents generated during these studies will be made available to the
broader scientific community. Functional information will be communicated
through publication of results and through a website
(http://www.msu.edu/~osteryou/2010.htm) to be updated regularly to reflect data
obtained on knockout and arc mutant phenotypes. Database annotations will be
revised as new information is obtained. In addition to providing training
opportunities to graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, the project is
expected to provide research experience to several undergraduate students,
including members of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;