* 0313578
* Arabidopsis 2010: The Arabidopsis Gene Collection/ORFeome Project
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Joseph Ecker, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 12/31/2005
* USD 3,000,000.00

Summary of the Proposed Project &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed study
pertains to the development of research tools and resources for the plant
biology community. The elucidation of the DNA sequence of the 125-Mb Arabidopsis
genome revealed the presence of approximately 25,000 genes using various
computational approaches. In order for this vast amount of information to be
useful, a more precise understanding of each of the transcriptional units is
required. To fulfill this need, we initiated an ORFeome project to obtain clones
for each protein coding open-reading-frame (ORF) in Arabidopsis. The project
goals were to experimentally verify the annotation and construct full-length ORF
clones for 10,500 of the Arabidopsis genes. This study resulted in the
experimental verification of 30% of the annotated genes and revealed that the
current genome annotation is only 68% correct. In addition, the project produced
a set of 10,500 publically available ORF clones for plant functional and
proteomics studies. The immediate near tem goal of this two-year 2010 project is
to experimentally verify the annotation of an additional 3,330 genes by full-
length cDNA sequencing and the construction/sequencing of 3,333 additional ORF
clones for new transcriptional units. We will focus on genes that are known to
be transcribed, so called "annotated expressed genes" but for which full-length
ORF clones are not available. ORFs will be constructed using RT-PCR and they
will be subcloned into universal recombination vector system. Transcription unit
sequence information will be deposited in GenBank and displayed on our web
accessible database (http;//signal.salk.edu). Clones produced by the project
will be deposited with the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center at Ohio State
University. We will coordinate with researchers in the US, Europe and Japan to
maximize the rate at which new genes become available to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
resources developed by this project will be widely available to a large number
of researchers and will provide the basis for a wide variety of projects that
rely upon whole genome information. An important feature of this proposal is
that all of the ORF clones and sequences will be made freely available to the
research community as soon as they are produced. The beneficiaries of this
program will be the entire plant biology community as both the sequence
information and the clones will provide plant biologists with essential reagents
necessary to elucidate the functions of the Arabidopsis proteome. Another
important feature of the project is the training of undergraduate students in
bioinformatics and genomic methodologies. The completion of the proposed
research will provide an important resource to the plant biology community,
enabling a variety of future research endeavors such as whole genome protein
arrays and the rapid creation of plants that ectopically express any cDNA that
is regulated using any promoter of choice. The long-term impact of these
enabling tools and technologies on agriculture is expected to be profound,
providing fundamental knowledge for the construction of new plant species with
superior agronomic traits.&lt;br/&gt;