* 0313670
* A Cross-Cultural Study of Conflict Prevention, Resolution, and Reconciliation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Douglas Fry, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2006
* USD 107,531.00

Within the social sciences much more attention traditionally has been paid to
the study of violence, aggression, and warfare than to the multitude of ways
that people use to deal with conflicts successfully without violence. Within
anthropology the use of cross-cultural methods to study of conflict prevention,
resolution, and reconciliation is practically non-existent. In this project an
anthropologist will investigate various kinds of conflict management processes,
specifically, conflict prevention techniques, nonviolent beliefs, conflict
resolution mechanisms, and reconciliation processes used in numerous societies.
The project will ask: do certain psychocultural mechanisms prevent aggression
within and between societies? Second, do beliefs favoring nonviolence contribute
to low levels of internal and external aggression? Third, do certain conflict
resolution mechanisms contribute to low levels of aggression within and between
societies? Fourth, do conflict prevention and conflict resolution mechanisms
have interactive effects? Finally, are reconciliation processes inversely
related to internal and external aggression? &lt;br/&gt;To address these
research questions, the investigator will utilize the ethnographic data in the
Standard Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS), an established data base on 186 societies
worldwide, carefully selected to represent culture areas. In this study, 42 new
descriptive and independent variables will be coded for the societies in the
SCCS. These data codes then will be used to test specific hypotheses related to
the central research questions. Published data codes for internal aggression
(e.g., assaults, homicide) and external aggression (warfare) already exist for
the societies in the SCCS and also will be utilized during data analysis. This
study will provide new descriptive and cross-cultural frequency data on conflict
prevention, resolution, and reconciliation mechanisms-topics that previously
have received minimal attention-and also will advance anthropological
understanding of conflict management by testing specific hypotheses regarding
the effects of prevention mechanisms, nonviolent beliefs, conflict resolution
techniques, and reconciliation processes on levels of internal and external
aggression. The study is the first to examine reconciliation processes using
cross-cultural data. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include new knowledge on
conflict management and reconciliation that has relevance for preventing and
reducing violence and war. The findings on how violence is prevented and
conflicts managed without violence across a worldwide spectrum of societies
should provide some generalizable principles that could be very useful to
policy-makers concerned with reducing violence. By investigating the human
ability to prevent and manage conflict in ways that do not entail violence, this
study provides a balancing perspective to numerous writings that place a one-
sided emphasis on the human capacity for violence and war-making. An
overemphasis on aggression can become a self-fulfilling prophecy as people
become discouraged about the possibility of developing alternative approaches
for handling conflict at various social levels. By contrast, a broad cross-
cultural perspective on conflict management may contribute to the creative
application of new approaches and strategies for the successful prevention and
resolution conflicts within and between societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;