* 0313980
* Fundamentals of DFT & Dynamics of Quantum Systems in Strong, Time-Dependent Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Walter Kohn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 104,000.00

This award supports fundamental theoretical research and education on the
conceptual foundations, extensions, and applications of density functional
theory. Research will be performed in two areas: I. Density Functional Theory
(DFT) The PI will use methods he recently developed to address unresolved basic
questions involving spin magnetism. He further plans to extend earlier work into
a new very broad regime, interactions of two non-overlapping systems of
arbitrary composition, size, and shape. This work aims to improve density
functional theory descriptions of Van der Waals interactions and is appropriate
for many polymeric and biological systems. In previous work, the PI put forward
the concept of "nearsightedness" as a fundamental property of many systems of
very many atoms. The concept is that local properties near a point r depend
significantly only on atoms and fields near r. The PI aims to quantitatively
sharpen this concept which provides a fundamental basis for order N electronic
structure methods and algorithms. II. Strong Time-Dependent Perturbations With
an international collaborator, the PI plans to continue studies of the
spectacular effects of very strong and very high frequency laser fields on
molecules. Their previous work found that in the asymptotic regime of a very
strong and very short laser pulse striking a molecule, the electronic charge
cloud is lifted away rigidly from the nuclear "skeleton," which stays behind.
Broader Impacts: (a) This work extends and enhances the intellectual foundation
of density functional theory, the leading theoretical methodology for systems
consisting of many atoms. (b) The broad area of highly non-linear effects in
arbitrarily strong time-dependent laser fields is becoming accessible to
experiment and is ripe for advance. (c) The PI lectures on his work to audiences
ranging from elementary school children to senior professionals. (d) This award
supports a valuable educational experience at the postdoctoral level. %%% This
award supports fundamental research and education on the conceptual foundations
of density functional theory, on its extensions, and applications. Density
functional theory is the leading theoretical methodology for systems consisting
of many atoms. As density functional theory-based methods have been applied to a
growing number of diverse materials and problems from ice to spin polarized
materials to time dependent systems, important conceptual questions have arisen.
The PI's research aims to directly address these questions and place density
functional theory based methods on a firm conceptual foundation. Broader
Impacts: (a) This work extends and enhances the intellectual foundation of
density functional theory, the leading theoretical methodology for systems
consisting of many atoms. (b) The broad area of highly non-linear effects in
arbitrarily strong time-dependent laser fields is becoming accessible to
experiment and is ripe for advance. (c) The PI lectures on his work to audiences
ranging from elementary school children to senior professionals. (d) This award
supports a valuable educational experience at the postdoctoral level. ***





