* 0313546
* Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Analysis of the Arabidopsis CLE Family of Putative Polypeptide Signaling Molecules
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Lewis Feldman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,272,389.00

As plants grow, they coordinate their development and environmental responses by
exchanging information using small gene products called signaling molecules. The
goal of this research is to determine the biological functions of 25 CLE genes
that encode a family of related signaling molecules in Arabidopsis thaliana. One
CLE gene product, called CLV3, communicates information between cells at the
growing shoot tips of plants, but the functions of the other CLE signaling
molecules are unknown. Information on where each CLE gene acts in the plant, and
on analysis of experimental plants in which each CLE gene function is either
impaired or artificially enhanced will be delivered through a public database
developed for this project (www.pgec.usda.gov/Fletcher/CLEproject.html). These
gene function data will consist of qualitative and quantitative measurements of
root, shoot, leaf and flower development and environmental responses. The
investigators will provide CLE clones and experimental plants without cost for
other researchers to use in further experiments, and the research results will
be communicated widely and in a timely fashion through meeting presentations and
scientific publications. The CLE genes encode completely novel signaling
molecules, and thus their analysis will be essential to reach the 2010 Project
goal to determine the function of all Arabidopsis genes. Further, because plant
growth and survival is critically dependent on the communication of information
between cells, and because so little is known about the signaling molecules that
convey this information, understanding CLE gene functions should provide
fundamental new insights into how plants develop and respond to their
environment.

An important component of the project is to integrate research and education to
increase the general understanding of how cell-to-cell communication works.
Postdoctoral associates as well as University of California at Berkeley and
Caltech graduate students will be trained. Undergraduate students from these
same institutions, including those from underrepresented groups will be enlisted
to receive training in modern functional genomics theory and methods, which can
be applied to a wide variety of biological systems. All graduate students and
postdocs will assist in various aspects of the research, including the
supervision of undergraduates, providing valuable training not only in science
but also in mentoring.