* 0313047
* Converting 2D Video to 3D with Applications to 3D-TV, Video Analysis and Compression
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Marc Pollefeys, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2007
* USD 285,969.00

The aim of this project is to augment traditional 2D-video content with depth
using computer vision approaches. To achieve this goal the camera motion and
settings will also have to be recovered from the video data. The main
application that is envisioned is converting existing 2D-video to 3D-video to
provide sufficient content for stereoscopic displays and enable applications
such 3D-TV to emerge and flourish. Besides this, the intended research
potentially also has important applications in the context of video analysis and
compression. Advances in 3D from video will also have a broader impact in areas
such as archaeology, cultural heritage, movie special effects, medical,
forensics and military reconnaissance applications. The educational impact will
not be limited to students directly involved in this project, but will
potentially reach many more through tools for video analysis in art schools or
educational 3D-videos. We intend to develop a reliable fully automatic approach.
Since it will not always be possible to compute the depth from the available
image content (e.g. fixed camera), we intend to correctly deal with ambiguities
and provide perceptually acceptable results (e.g. fade depth when it can't be
computed anymore). Given a 2D video stream, we intend to (1) compute the
relative motion between the scene and the camera for each shot, (2) detect
independent moving objects and computer their motion and deformation, (3)
compute a detailed depth representation for each video.