* 0313148
* ITR: Improving the Performance of Web Servers under Overload
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Mor Harchol-Balter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 07/31/2007
* USD 280,000.00

This proposal aims to provide this deep understanding of server behavior during
overload, in the&lt;br/&gt;case of both static and dynamic content. The approach
is interdisciplinary: There is a theoretical&lt;br/&gt;component which aims to
prove new theorems on M/G/1 queues with time-dependent load; an
implementation&lt;br/&gt;component which performs a rigorous systematic study of
web server and database server&lt;br/&gt;performance under overload as a
function of various networking parameters; and a workload and
client&lt;br/&gt;characterization component which aims to understand statistical
properties of the request stream during&lt;br/&gt;transient overload and
incorporate these into the design of a web workload generator for
overload.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal also introduces a very simple idea for
improving the performance of web servers&lt;br/&gt;under overload: a kernel-
based implementation of SRPT connection scheduling. The idea is
simple&lt;br/&gt;and intuitive. Connection scheduling does not require
purchasing more hardware, or any other costly&lt;br/&gt;system upgrades. It
appears to allow the server to survive much longer periods of overload, and to
allow&lt;br/&gt;clients to experience better performance during these periods of
overload. Furthermore, it appears&lt;br/&gt;to enable the server to recuperate
from overload much faster. The proposal will provide a
detailed&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of the benefits of SRPT connection scheduling and
will aim to introduce similar scheduling&lt;br/&gt;policies for databases. The
above concludes the intellectual merit portion of the proposal.&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity include online availability
of all source&lt;br/&gt;code generated during the project including
modifications to the Apache code and to Linux, as well&lt;br/&gt;as online
availability of all trace logs collected during this project, and a web workload
generator for&lt;br/&gt;overload. The project initiates collaborations across
various academic disciplines including: mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;computer systems,
and operations management, as well as between universities and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;The project will also provide a research opportunity for a
minority undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal involves 1 faculty member
(1 summer month only), 1.5 graduate students, and 1&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate,
over the course of 3 years.