* 0313234
* ITR:     Stateless Quality of Service Routing in IP Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Marwan Krunz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2008
* USD 349,999.00

This project is aimed at developing and experimentally evaluating a framework
for stateless quality of service routing in IP networks (SQUARN). The need for
QoS routing solutions has been recognized in several recent studies and has led
to several ongoing efforts to introduce QoS extensions in IP routing protocols.
Until now, the work on QoS routing has been carried out under the assumption
that the underlying network architecture is reservation based. In such an
architecture, routers must maintain per-flow state information and end systems
must use explicit signaling messages to convey their QoS requirements. This
explicit-reservation model, though attractive from a network control viewpoint,
suffers from scalability problems. The proposed SQUARN model is intended to
provide stateless QoS routing solutions that can be integrated into reservation-
less QoS frameworks (e.g., DiffServ). SQUARN relies on dynamic packet forwarding
mechanisms that make novel use of the TOS and TTL fields in the header of an IP
packet. It also uses a probing procedure for exploration of viable QoS paths.
Link metrics are disseminated in a scalable fashion using a subset of routers
that form a "dominating" graph. "Repair" algorithms are used to dynamically
update this dominating graph. Protocols and algorithms in support of the SQUARN
framework will be developed in the course of this project, with emphasis on
computational efficiency and backward compatibility with existing Internet
routing protocols. The research agenda also includes an experimental component
for evaluating the efficacy of the proposed solutions on a testbed of IP
routers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides its intellectual merits, the proposed
project is expected to have a profound broader impact. The enabling of stateless
QoS routing solutions will lead to successful commercialization of real-time
voice (and video) applications, resulting in a significant reduction in long-
distance phone rates and wide deployment of real-time multimedia applications
(e.g., video telephony over IP). The source code of solutions developed in the
course of this project will be publicly released. Various aspects of the
proposed project will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses at
the University of Arizona. The project will be used as a vehicle to promote the
understanding of and appreciation for networked multimedia applications among
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;