* 0313468
* Electronic, Chemical and Structural Properties of Metamorphic III-V Compound Heterojunctions and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Wu Lu, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 933,480.00

This FRG (focused research group) project addresses materials science issues of
metamorphic--compositionally-graded, relaxed interlayers used to relieve strain
between a substrate and desired heterostructures-III-V semiconductor
heterostructures and the design and performance of metamorphic III-V devices.
Objectives are to: understand complex inter-relationships between growth, nano-
scale interface properties (electronic, chemical, structural), and bulk material
properties for metamorphic and strained heterostructures and to use this
understanding to generate novel, metamorphic devices that extend beyond current
high speed devices. Several representative but related material systems that
impact advances in device technology and in fundamental materials science are
considered. The interdisciplinary team consists of researchers who combine
complementary expertise in epitaxial growth, characterization, device design and
fabrication, and theory with a shared interest to explore and exploit the
relationships between growth, interface properties, electronic and structural
properties, and device characteristics for lattice-mismatched heterostructures.
Core activities include: (1) developing novel, anion-based III-V compound graded
buffers that expand the possible material combinations for heterojunctions; (2)
creating interface characterization techniques that provide key electronic,
chemical, and structural information on heterojunctions formed under different
controlled growth conditions; (3) using the flexibility of metamorphic
transition layers to create novel device structures with advanced electronic
features; and (4) developing theoretical methods that accurately describe
heterojunction band offsets and deep levels based on atomic composition and
geometrical structure. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;An important impact of the
project is in education and human resource development through the integration
of research and education. The multi-disciplinary nature of the FRG team
provides an environment where students can appreciate and learn a broad
perspective on the research process. Individual student research topics are
highly interdependent, which will provide an initial research experience that
promotes the notion of teaming in their future careers. Overlapping interests
with complementary skills among the principal investigators will allow students
to broaden their experience beyond the norm by learning new techniques and
participating in related research normally outside their advisor's activities.
Thus, student education is integrated with research through a natural student-
teacher exchange amongst all student FRG members. The research infrastructure
being applied to this project is substantial, ranging from materials growth, to
nano-scale characterization and advanced device fabrication and testing. Hence,
students will be trained in state-of-the-art methods that will be cornerstones
for their future careers that enhance the future infrastructure for research and
education. The project is co-supported by the MPS/DMR/EM and ENG/ECS/EPDT
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;