* 0314054
* FRG: Multiscale Simulation of Atomistic Processes in Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Rajiv Kalia, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/2005
* USD 490,522.00

0085344&lt;br/&gt;Kalia&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a Focused Research Group
at Louisiana State University for research and education on computational
materials. The grant is jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research
and the Division for Advanced Computational Infrastructure and Research and is a
blend of condensed matter physics, materials science and computer science. The
objective of the research is to understand how the bonding between dissimilar
materials at the atomic level determines structure and macroscopic properties
such as adhesion, friction, stiffness, and fracture toughness. The research will
focus on: (1) ceramic composites (SiC fibers coated with silica in a Si3N4
matrix and aluminum oxide matrix containing aluminum oxide fibers coated with
LaPO4); (2) metal/ceramic interfaces (Al/SiC and Ti/TiO2) and nanostructured
composites of passivated metallic nanoparticles; and (3) oxidation, fracture and
nanoindentation in these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These applications
require a methodology that can describe physical and mechanical processes over
several decades of length scales. Quantum mechanical (QM) simulations based on
the density functional theory will be preformed in regions where atomic bonds
are formed or broken; molecular dynamics (MD) simulations will be carried out in
nonlinear regions surrounding the QM region; and the finite-element (FE)
approach with constitutive input from QM or MD calculations will be used in
regions far away from the process zones. The QM, MD, and FE schemes will be
integrated with an approach based on control theory. Algorithms will be designed
to carry out these hybrid QM/MD/FE simulations in a metacomputing environment
with multiple parallel machines, mass storage devices, and immersive and
interactive virtual environments on a Grid with high-speed
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Concurrent Computing Laboratory for Materials
Simulation, where the research will be performed, has a record of innovative
educational activities including a joint MS/PhD program in computer science and
physics. Efforts are underway for a joint masters degree in computer science and
applied physics. In addition, a web-based computational physics course is being
taught simultaneously at LSU and the Delft University of Technology in The
Netherlands. As part of this grant, a workshop will be established to mentor and
recruit minority students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a Focused
Research Group at Louisiana State University for research and education on
computational materials. The grant is jointly supported by the Division of
Materials Research and the Division for Advanced Computational Infrastructure
and Research and is a blend of condensed matter physics, materials science and
computer science. The objective of the research is to understand how the bonding
between dissimilar materials at the atomic level determines structure and
macroscopic properties such as adhesion, friction, stiffness, and fracture
toughness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Concurrent Computing Laboratory for
Materials Simulation, where the research will be performed, has a record of
innovative educational activities including a joint MS/PhD program in computer
science and physics. Efforts are underway for a joint masters degree in computer
science and applied physics. In addition, a web-based computational physics
course is being taught simultaneously at LSU and the Delft University of
Technology in The Netherlands. As part of this grant, a workshop will be
established to mentor and recruit minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;