* 0314411
* The Origins of Domesticity in the Late Upper Paleolithic: The Use of GIS Spatial Analysis at the French Magdalenian Site of Verberie
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Scott Branting, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 44,073.00

With National Science Foundation support, Ezra Zubrow and Scott Branting will
analyze spatial organization in the eight occupation levels of the Magdalenian
site of Verberie in the Paris Basin. They will collaborate with an international
team of researchers headed by Francoise Andouze (CNRS) and Jim Enloe (U Iowa).
Verberie is exceptional for many reasons. Foremost, the data are of excellent
quality on a very fine scale because a single researcher - Andouze - excavated
the site continuously between 1975 and 2002. The resulting dataset locates more
than 150,000 artifacts from eight occupation levels to the nearest 0.25
centimeters. Verberie potentially will reveal how people organized their
communities in the Upper Palaeolithic of the Paris Basin. Regular flooding of
the site preserved the patterns left by Verberie's residents during their daily
activities. Verberie provides an opportunity to identify nuclear family units
and observe changes in community structure between the different occupations of
the site. This project will be the most extensive analysis done to date, on one
of the highest-resolution excavations ever done of a Palaeolithic site.

New methods and tools will be used in the spatial analysis of Verberie.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) is one of the most powerful tools,
employing a variety of very appropriate methods for spatial analysis. The team
will construct a GIS database containing locational and descriptive information
on all of the artifacts, and apply sophisticated intra-site spatial analysis
methods to the dataset (locational cluster analysis - kernel density estimation;
and Whallon's and Djindjian Class Composition analyses - unconstrained). These
methods should reveal activity areas on each of the eight occupation floors.
Initial results from spatial analysis of level II.1 (the most recent occupation
floor) show three structures and several hearths, as well as significant
clustering of and correlations between the many artifact and tool types in the
activity areas. Using various ethnographic and archaeological models of hunter-
gatherer site structure, conclusions will be drawn about the behavioral
organization of the site and the social relations of the occupants. In
particular, the project aims to test a nuclear family area model and its
relevance to the origins and development of communal domesticity.

This study has both intellectual merit and a broad potential impact. The
intellectual merit is that this is the first study to apply new and
sophisticated spatial analysis methods to the origins of domestic life and the
origins of community. It makes public a new set of data (Verberie), as well as
the interpretations and analyses of a technically proficient international team
of scholars. The potential impact of the research is that it explores the origin
and development of community and domesticity, the building blocks of society. It
thus enhances our scientific understanding of ourselves. The results will be
disseminated broadly on both sides of the Atlantic to promote scientific and
technological understanding via a specific website, conference and publication
schedule in conjunction with CNRS. Finally, the project will help to inspire
undergraduate student participants, and establish the scholarly careers of the
graduate students participating in the research and the dissemination of the
results.

