* 0314158
* Dissertation Research: Meanings of Aging and Chronic Illness
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Keith Marshall, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

The incidence of chronic illness and the need for healthcare increase with age.
Older adults may regard physical changes such as tremor or slowness as normal
biological aging. However, these physical manifestations are also symptoms of
the progressive neurological condition, Parkinson's Disease (PD). PD causes
disability, produces embarrassing symptoms, and requires access to costly
prescriptions and the care of medical specialists. This research investigates
how a cultural model of aging as a period of inevitable physical decline affects
elderly persons' experience of physical changes that may be due to normal aging
or to progressive disease. The study examines why older persons with PD made the
decision to seek medical treatment. Autobiographical interviews with PD
sufferers, observations at support group meetings, interviews with family
caregivers and physicians, and focus groups with older adults who do not have
PD, will provide information regarding individuals' perceptions of the signs of
aging and the relationship between those perceptions and their subjective need
for healthcare. A questionnaire that measures health status will be used to
explore the connections between participants' beliefs and their disease burden.
The aging of the US population underscores the importance of designing services
that account for cultural models of health, disease, and aging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study explores the relationships
among beliefs, biology, and healthcare, and incorporates older adults'
perspectives within a larger examination of healthcare. The study may provide
recommendations for improving diagnosis, healthcare policy, and doctor-patient
communication. The project highlights the needs of a stigmatized population and
contributes to the education of a young social scientist.&lt;br/&gt;