* 0314153
* US-Brazil  Collaborative Research:  Planning Visit - Collaboration On Ion Beam Studies of High-k Dielectric Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Robert Wallace, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 2,840.00

In this planning visit funded by the Americas Program of the Office of
International Science and Engineering, Robert M. Wallace will travel to the
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (FURGS) in Porto Alegre, Brazil to
coordinate plans for a collaborative research project with Prof. Israel J.
Baumvol. The subjects of the potential project are ion-beam characterization of
hafnium-based materials and diffusion mechanisms of film constituents with the
silicon substrate after various thermal treatments. The laboratories at both UNT
and FURGS have complementary research capabilities that can be used to study the
apparent contradictions in conclusions reached at each institution regarding
interdiffusion effects in hafnium-based dielectrics. They can study these
effects by synthesizing and characterizing films with identical interfacial
layer properties. The effect of oxidation annealing on nitrided Hf-silicate
films can also be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning visit will allow
Dr. Wallace to examine the facilities and techniques available at FURGS in order
to compare them with the high-k dielectric materials-synthesis capabilities at
the University of North Texas (UNT). It will also give the two researchers the
opportunity to define the projects for the proposals they will submit to their
respective funding agencies. This research should have direct technological
interest and relevance to the global semiconductor industry. The visit will also
enable the researchers to discuss teaching and training of the students
associated with each group in terms of expected student exchanges. Such
exchanges would not only transfer research knowledge and expertise directly, but
they also contribute to the students' cultural education.&lt;br/&gt;