* 0314356
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Linguistic Uses of Fundamental Frequency in Mandarin and English: Implications for Second-language Speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Janet Fodor, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,526.00

Under the direction of Dr. Janet Dean Fodor, Ms. Tanya Viger will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation on the prosodic features of English and Mandarin
as spoken by second-language learners. The goal of this research is to identify
acoustic properties of speech that may contribute to what is perceived as non-
native or foreign accent. Previous research on second-language phonological
competence has emphasized individual speech sounds, but recent studies have
found that the pitch and timing in sentence prosody also contributes to non-
native accent. English and Mandarin differ radically in their use of pitch
contours. English uses pitch contours to mark phrase boundaries and convey
sentence type (e.g., question, statement). Mandarin is a tone language in which
pitch contours distinguish one word from another. Comparing a tone language with
a non-tone language makes it possible to determine how learners' use of prosody
in a second language is affected by the linguistic function of pitch contours in
their native language. Controlled sets of English and Mandarin sentences will be
read by native speakers of Taiwan Mandarin learning English, and by native
speakers of North American English learning Mandarin. The recordings will be
acoustically analyzed to determine properties such as the direction, timing and
slope of the pitch contours at phrase boundaries. Measurements will then be
compared across the utterances produced by native and non-native speakers of
each language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant both for
psycholinguistic theory and for language pedagogy. It will contribute new data
and theoretical constructs for understanding the prosodic aspects of second-
language acquisition, as well as the ways that learning is influenced by native
language experience. Language pedagogy is a matter of increasing importance as
global interactions call for more communication in non-native languages. Yet,
prosodic training is rarely emphasized even though non-native prosody is a major
cause of speech being perceived as foreign-accented and difficult to comprehend.
The knowledge gained from this research can be applied in the development of
prosodic instruction units for use in second-language teaching and language-
learning software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;