* 0314332
* RUI:  Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Lysosome Assembly and Stability in C. Elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Greg Hermann, Lewis and Clark College
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 321,682.00

Lysosomes are ubiquitous cellular compartments with well-characterized roles in
the degradation and turnover of cellular components. Lysosomes function in a
diverse array of important cellular processes including the presentation of
antigens to the immune system, the turnover of cell surface signaling molecules,
tissue remodeling, and the destruction of pathogens. While much is known
regarding the cellular and biochemical function of lysosomes, the processes
involved in lysosome assembly and maintenance in multicellular animals remain
poorly understood. To aid in the understanding of these processes, the Hermann
lab has begun to identify genes necessary for the assembly/stability of
lysosomes in the intestinal cells of the model multicellular organism, C.
elegans. One of the genes identified, glo-1, encodes a Rab GTPase that may
regulate transport between cellular compartments. This work aims to determine
whether glo-1 functions in the assembly or the maintenance of lysosomes and if
glo-1 prevents the inappropriate fusion of lysosomes with the cell membrane. To
learn which step in lysosome assembly/stability requires GLO-1 protein function,
this research will determine the sub-cellular localization of GLO-1. Finally,
this project will extend the pilot genetic screen that led to the identification
of glo-1 to identify additional genes that are necessary for lysosome
assembly/maintenance. &lt;br/&gt;This research will identify and characterize
the activity of genes that are likely to function in the assembly/maintenance of
lysosomes in all multicellular animals. Regulation of lysosome content
effectively prevents the accumulation of dysfunctional proteins and organelles
in cells. The project is being conducted at an undergraduate insitution, and
large numbers of undergraduate students will receive training in research as
part of their formal course work and in independent research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;