* 0314456
* Spin Transport Theory Beyond Drift-Diffusion Equation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Shufeng Zhang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 225,000.00

The focus of this theoretical research is to generalize spin transport theory
without using the drift-diffusion equation and to investigate the effect of non-
adiabatic processes of spin transport. Many novel spin-dependent phenomena have
recently been discovered, but the understanding of these phenomena is largely
based on simple macroscopic equations such as drift-diffusion spin equations
whose validity has not been theoretically justified. By introducing the idea of
representing the terms in the semiclassical Boltzmann equation in terms of
diagrams, spin transport properties can be extended beyond the drift-diffusion
equation. These diagrams are extremely useful for providing an insight into
physical processes which these terms represent. Another focus of this research
will be on the development of the time-dependent spin transport theory without
making an adiabatic approximation. Non-adiabatic processes between non-
equilibrium carriers and local magnetic moments create a friction torque that
provides a Gilbert damping mechanism of magnetic systems. The time-dependence of
the Boltzmann equation will be solved by diagrammatic techniques without
adiabatically freezing the degree of freedom of the local
magnetization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated success of this research
will enhance fundamental understanding of spin transport phenomena in various
inhomogeneous systems including magnetic multilayers, semiconductor
heterostructure, and magnetic nanostructure. The research results will supply
theoretical criteria on those commonly used drift-diffusion equations and
provide a new set of rules to interpret vast experimental data. In addition to
providing training for graduate students and postdoctoral associates, the
project will have a broad impact of resulting in exchanges of knowledge between
the Missouri group and collaborators around the world. Also, the PI interacts
with industry through his participation in the Information Storage Industry
Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical research studies magnetic
transport in various structures. The anticipated success of this research will
enhance fundamental understanding of spin transport phenomena in various
inhomogeneous systems including magnetic multilayers, semiconductor
heterostructure, and magnetic nanostructure. The research results will supply
theoretical criteria on those commonly used drift-diffusion equations and
provide a new set of rules to interpret vast experimental data. In addition to
providing training for graduate students and postdoctoral associates, the
project will have a broad impact of resulting in exchanges of knowledge between
the Missouri group and collaborators around the world. Also, the PI interacts
with industry through his participation in the Information Storage Industry
Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;