* 0314058
* U.S.-Japan Short-Term Visit: High -Tc Superconductors and other Spin-Gap Magnetic Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 06/30/2004
* USD 6,784.00

0314058&lt;br/&gt;Uemura&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-month
collaborative research project between Professor Yasutomo Uemura at Columbia
University in New York and Professor Shin-ichi Uchida at the University of Tokyo
in Japan. They will be undertaking research on High-Tc Superconductors and other
Spin-gap Magnetic Systems. They will be collaborating on the muon spin
relaxation, transport and optical measurements of high-Tc cuprate
superconductors (HTSC). Muen spin relaxation is a powerful probe of magnetism
and superconductivity. It is sensitive to spin fluctuations in a wide range of
frequencies, and spin freezing of periodic/random/dilute spin configurations
with an average ordered moment. It also provides volume-differential information
for systems with coexisting regions with/without spin freezing. Magnetic field
penetration depth of type-11 Superconductors can be determined accurately by
muon spin relaxation. The collaborators will work on analyses of existing data.
The experimental results will be compared to detailed computer simulation to
estimate the volume fraction of the specimen subject to static spin freezing in
high magnetic field. In addition to the effect of applied magnetic field as a
single perturbation, they will also study what would happen when a high magnetic
field is applied to systems which are already subject to other perturbations,
such as Zn-doping or magnetic nano-island formation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
expertise and research capabilities. The U.S. researcher provides expertise in
the data analyses and interpretations and the Japanese collaborator is a world
leader in optical and transport physics. Superconducting materials are fertile
areas for research crucial to a number of applications areas such as the
transmission of electricity, advanced electric motors, the storage of energy via
flywheels, and advanced opto-electronic devices and sensors. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. Results of
the research will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific
journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;