* 0314025
* Platinum Metal Complexes as DNA-Protein Cross-Linking Agents
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Nicholas Farrell, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2006
* USD 445,000.00

Dr. Nicolas P. Farrell, Chemistry Department, Virginia Commonwealth University,
is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division for research into the fundamental chemistry of
DNA-protein crosslinking through ternary adduct formation by platinum and other
metal compounds. The interactions of structurally distinct proteins based on
topoisomerases and zinc-finger containing proteins with the bifunctional
transplatinum compounds trans-[PtCl2(L)(L')] (L = NH3 and L' = pyridine,
thiazole, quinoline, etc. or L = L' = pyridine, thiazole) will be examined. The
platinum compounds have previously been shown to produce cellular protein-
associated strand breaks in DNA and have now been shown to specifically
stabilize the DNA-topoisomerase complex in leukemia cells. The hypothesis that
ternary adduct formation arises from binding a DNA guanine N7 site and a protein
(most likely methionine or cysteine) site to the mononuclear platinum center
will be tested. Next, the chemical factors controlling preferential DNA-protein
binding rather than the 'classical' DNA-DNA binding will be examined. The
interactions of a model compound such as trans-[PtCl(9-Ethylguanine or
5'-Guanosinemonophosphate)(L)(L')]+ with the model protein ubiquitin will be
studied. Ubiquitin is a useful model as it presents only two potential platinum
binding sites (a methionine and a histidine). A functional chemical model for
tyrosinephosphoester formation using a trans-platinum scaffold will be
attempted. The properties of site-specific monofunctional DNA adducts will be
assessed and the sites of DNA and topoisomerase binding in the ternary complexes
will be delineated. A further sub-set of proteins containing the zinc- finger
motif will be examined. Platinum compounds are capable of ejecting zinc from the
zinc-finger sites. The fundamental chemistry underlying this novel metal
exchange on bioligands will be examined by model compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to a better understanding of the
role of DNA conformation in protein recognition, how the nature of DNA damage
affects downstream protein processing and DNA repair, and perhaps the eventual
isolation of DNA-protein adducts in vivo. Additionally, the results may suggest
new mechanisms of action for anticancer-active metal compounds. This work will
also give a molecular explanation to the observations of significant
cytotoxicity of the transplatinum geometry - an observation violating a
fundamental structure-activity relationship on which the vast majority of
platinum-based drug development has been based. Further, the new paradigms of
genomics and proteomics emphasize target (protein)-oriented drug design. The
basic chemical studies undertaken in this project will contribute to that
understanding. The broader impacts will be to include undergraduate as well as
graduate researchers in the activities. International collaborations with, for
example, the Czech Republic and Israel will be fostered. Underrepresented groups
may participate broadly in this research program. &lt;br/&gt;