* 0314701
* SGER: Role of CREB in Regulating Neuropeptide Synthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Nancy Wayne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 91,006.00

PI: Nancy Lynne Wayne NSF SGER proposal #031407 Title: "Role of CREB in
regulating neuropeptide synthesis"

Neuropeptides are responsible for controlling different aspects of physiology
and behavior including body growth, eating, drinking, sex, etc. The broad goal
of this proposal is to understand cellular mechanisms controlling synthesis of a
neuropeptide hormone using neurons that control reproduction in the mollusk
Aplysia. Earlier studies from this laboratory showed that electrical excitation
of the reproductive neuroendocrine bag-cell neurons (BCNs) led to large amounts
of secretion of the neuropeptide egg laying hormone (ELH). The releasable amount
of ELH was replenished by upregulating ELH synthesis at the expense of most
other proteins in the BCNs. It was revealed that electrical excitation of the
BCNs stimulated a novel protein-synthetic pathway involving a special code on
ELH mRNA called an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES). This is similar to how
viruses control protein synthesis in cells following infection, and was not
thought to play a physiological role in cellular systems. The aim of the
proposed studies is to understand how stimulation of the BCNs activates the IRES
on ELH mRNA. Based on earlier work, it is hypothesized that the cyclic AMP
second messenger pathway (via cyclic AMP response-element binding protein, or
CREB) is playing an important role in mediating the effects of electrical
excitation on IRES activation, leading to upregulation of ELH synthesis. To test
this hypothesis, expression of CREB will be obstructed by RNA inhibition, and
the effects on electrical excitation of ELH synthesis and IRES activation will
be documented. This experiment uses a combination of molecular, biochemical,
electrophysiological, and optical imaging techniques. It is expected that
inhibition of CREB will prevent electrical activation of the IRES and subsequent
upregulation of ELH synthesis. This work is at the forefront of a completely new
way of thinking about the way that cellular systems can regulate synthesis of
proteins