* 0314095
* Undergraduate Design Projects for Developing Assistive Technology for Recreational Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Karen May-Newman, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Robert J. Jaeger
* 06/30/2007
* USD 73,457.00

0314095 Lambert The Department of Mechanical Engineering (ME) at San Diego State
University (SDSU) has partnered with the Interwork Institute in the College of
Education, the Disabled Businesspersons' Association (DBA), and the American
Institute of Marine Studies (AIMS) to design and implement assistive technology
in aquatic-related recreational applications as part of the undergraduate senior
design project course sequence. The broad goal of this partnership is to develop
technology solutions to allow physically challenged individuals to safely and
independently participate in various aquatic recreational activities. The senior
undergraduates in the SDSU ME program are required to work in teams on a
sponsored design project during their last two semesters. Five projects each
semester are to be focused on improving access to a specific recreational
activity, primarily sailing, to specific individuals with disabilities. In
addition, the usual team structure is to be expanded to include students
enrolled in the Certificate of Rehabilitation Technology program co-sponsored by
the College of Engineering and the Interwork Institute, and to work directly
with disabled sailors in the "Challenged American" program sponsored by DBA and
AIMS to make modifications of their sailboats and enable a broader range of
physically challenged individuals to participate in aquatic recreation. The
sailors and other athletes with physical disabilities are in the best position
to identify necessary modifications of their sailboats and enable a broader
range of other physically challenged individuals to participate in aquatic
recreation.

The project partnership builds on a successful relationship between the SDSU
Colleges of Education and Engineering in the area of assistive technology. Ten
undergraduate senior design teams are to be formed each year to develop
assistive technology to improve access for the disabled to aquatic recreational
activities. By teaming the undergraduate engineers with members from the
rehabilitation technology program as well as the disabled users, a
multidisciplinary approach is pursued that is expected to yield more robust and
effective designs. This type of longer-term, team-based design project is the
capstone learning experience for mechanical engineering students, providing a
critical part of their development into competent professional engineers.