* 0314686
* Chan: The Rise and Demise of an Ancient Maya Agrarian Village
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Cynthia Robin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2008
* USD 196,922.00

&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support Dr. Cynthia Robin and her
colleagues will conduct three field seasons (2004-2006) of archaeological
excavations at the ancient Maya agrarian village of Chan in Belize, Central
America. The ancient inhabitants of Chan constructed a productive landscape of
agricultural terraces across Chan's hilly terrain and occupied this agrarian
village for around 1800 years (900 B.C.-A.D. 890) from the Middle Preclassic to
Terminal Classic periods of Maya civilization. Research at Chan will bring
together a team of archaeologists, botanists, and geomorphologists to conduct a
coordinated investigation into the nature and complexities of ancient Maya
agrarian life. Most significantly, given the longevity of occupation at Chan,
researchers will be able to document changes in village life across the period
of the rise and decline of Classic Maya civilization and examine how changes in
ordinary village life affected and were affected by broader socio-political
changes in Maya society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of rural producers, such
as the inhabitants of Chan, are critical for understanding ancient complex
societies. This is particularly the case in agrarian-based complex societies
like the ancient Maya. Investigations at Chan provide an ideal case study to
explore how changes in village life relate to broader social, political, and
economic changes in a complex society. After an initial 1500-year occupation in
a provincial region of the Maya area, Chan is incorporated into the intrusive
and late-flourishing Xunantunich polity. During the short-lived period of
Xunantunich polity expansion, Chan's occupation increases dramatically. Then
alongside the abandonment of the polity-capital of Xunantunich, the long-lived
village of Chan is abandoned. The parallel trajectories of Chan and Xunantunich
suggest a relationship between the local dynamics of village life at Chan and
the political-economic system centered at Xunantunich. Researchers at Chan will
excavate a representative sample of agrarian households and agricultural fields
and terraces to document how Chan was transformed through its interaction with
the center of Xunantunich and how the center of Xunantunich may have had to
accommodate to preexisting social and economic networks in the village of
Chan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at Chan is important for several reasons. At
a most basic level this village-focused study will document the development and
demise of an agrarian village. Due to Chan's long occupation, researchers will
also be able to investigate the impact that village life had on larger socio-
political changes in Maya society and vice versa. In terms of archaeological
methods, research at Chan expands upon the traditional range of archaeological
data that archaeologists typically examine to assess ancient life by
incorporating botanical and geomorphological studies into a coordinated
archaeological investigation. On a broader level US and Belizean archaeology
students will be involved in each step of the Chan research which will provide a
dynamic training ground for young archaeologists. As the research of the Chan
project will be of interest to a wide range of persons from archaeologists to
the broader public, a web site will disseminate project results to as wide an
audience as possible.&lt;br/&gt;