* 0314446
* Dissertation Research: The Corporation Next Door: Pharmaceutical Companies in Puerto Rico's Public Health and Public Trust
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Peter Brown, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2006
* USD 10,530.00

Developing areas in the world often seek to improve their economies by
attracting large corporations to site production facilities locally. Puerto Rico
has often been cited as a model of development for other Latin American nations
and the rest of the developing world because of this strategy. However, capital-
intensive (as opposed to labor-intensive) industries like the pharmaceutical
industry have created successful sites for private corporations while incurring
public costs like pollution of the local environment, while not creating
significant numbers of jobs for local workers. This anthropological dissertation
research project will investigate the ways corporations contribute to a local
community in which there are five multinational pharmaceutical production
facilities, several Superfund sites (federally-recognized areas of environmental
contamination), and chronically high unemployment. It will consider the
perspectives of corporate managers, local government officials and community
leaders, and local residents and their interest groups. The project will examine
whether the corporations are seen as a successful means for improving the local
economy, and what local residents perceive to be the risks or drawbacks to the
factories. It is specifically designed to identify whether there is a standard
working model of "community", based upon mutually recognized benefits or
exchanges, that is shared across these diverse sub-populations. The research
expands typical corporate-impact research beyond the workers to the surrounding
residents, and broadens the scope of social theory to consider how corporations
act as citizens in the social-political-economic arena.&lt;br/&gt; Broader
Impacts: The findings of the study will be of interest to policy makers
concerned with how for-profit institutions relate to the communities in which
they effectively "live." The project will also contribute significantly to the
training of a young social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;