* 0314317
* Melting Kinetics of Faceted and Non-Faceted Crystals
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Reza Abbaschian, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 04/30/2006
* USD 247,000.00

Melting is among the most common physical phenomena known to mankind, yet it has
been the most difficult to understand. This grant is aimed at a greater
understanding of melting behavior of metals and alloys. The research will
provide accurate data on the solid-liquid interface kinetics as a function of
the interface superheating, melting rate, and composition. The interface
superheating will be measured directly from the Seebeck potential difference
generated across two solid-liquid interfaces; one stationary and the other
melting at a given velocity. An important feature of the measurement technique
is that it allows for a precise, non-intrusive and continuous monitoring of the
interface temperature. The materials selected for the study will consist of
single crystals of pure Sn (a non-facet forming metal) and Bi (a facet former),
and Sn-Bi single crystals containing up to 4 at % Bi. The primary objective of
the research is to obtain quantitative information on the interfacial kinetics
as a function of melting velocity for single crystals, and on the solute
redistribution during melting.

The scientific significance of the investigation stems from the fact that
melting kinetics provide information on the nature of the interface as it
responds to deviations from local equilibrium. Such information will delineate
whether the melting interface is diffuse, or whether it behaves similar to that
during solidification. In addition to its theoretical significance, the melting
kinetics laws are of interest for a series of technical problems such as in the
formation of equiaxed structures in castings. Formation of such structures
strongly depends on the melting and dissolution kinetics of inoculants,
intrinsic solid particles, as well as on the local solidification conditions.
The project will expose graduate students to fundamental research and
measurement techniques in materials science and engineering.