* 0314228
* Quantum Information Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Mary Beth Ruskai, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2006
* USD 146,100.00

PI: Mary Beth Ruskai, University of Massachusetts Lowell&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0203211&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; *******************
********************************************&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is concerned with a number of mathematical problems&lt;br/&gt;which arise when
quantum particles are used to process and/or&lt;br/&gt;transmit information. The
P.I. plans to continue the analysis &lt;br/&gt;and refinement of models of
noise; these are important in both&lt;br/&gt;quantum communication and error
analysis in quantum computation. &lt;br/&gt;Work in quantum communication
includes a proposal which may resolve&lt;br/&gt;the long-standing question of
whether or not entangled inputs can&lt;br/&gt;enhance the capacity of quantum
channels to transmit classical&lt;br/&gt;information. The P.I. also plans to
construct new classes of error&lt;br/&gt;correcting codes as prototypes for
codes which can be designed &lt;br/&gt;to deal with those errors to which a
particular implementation &lt;br/&gt;of quantum computation is most vulnerable.
Such codes could&lt;br/&gt;be combined with other techniques to reduced the
overall code&lt;br/&gt;length. The P.I. will also consider a random
Hamiltonian&lt;br/&gt;approach to the analysis of the efficiency of a proposed
scheme&lt;br/&gt;for adiabatic quantum computation. Finally, the P.I. plans
to&lt;br/&gt;continue the study of metrics in information geometry, and
their&lt;br/&gt;connection to measures of purity, relative entropy, and
distances&lt;br/&gt;between states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has now been
established that quantum particles have the potential&lt;br/&gt;to provide the
basis for vastly more powerful computers, and new methods&lt;br/&gt;of secure
communication. Although building quantum computers remains&lt;br/&gt;a
formidable experimental challenge, the feasibility of several
methods&lt;br/&gt;of quantum communication and encryption have already been
convincingly&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated. However, it is also clear that all
practical &lt;br/&gt;instrumentation is imperfect and subject to noise and
errors.&lt;br/&gt;This is not surprising; dealing with noise has long been an
important&lt;br/&gt;facet of classical communication. However, quantum
information devices&lt;br/&gt;are subject to a much larger and more complex
variety of errors arising&lt;br/&gt;from noise. This gives rise to new
mathematical challenges. This&lt;br/&gt;proposal deals with a number of these
questions. Effective methods&lt;br/&gt;of dealing with noise are essential to
the success of the nation's&lt;br/&gt;ability to exploit the power of quantum
theory for next generation of&lt;br/&gt;computers and cryptographic
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; ***********************************************
****************&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;