* 0314866
* Promoting Rigorous Outcomes in Mathematics/Science Education (PROM/SE)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2012
* Peter Bates, Michigan State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 02/29/2012
* USD 35,000,000.00

Promoting Rigorous Outcomes in Mathematics and Science Education (PROM/SE) is a
five-year effort by a joint partnership between Michigan State University (MSU)
and five consortia of school districts in Michigan and Ohio. The consortia
includes three Intermediate School Districts in Michigan, Ingham, Calhoun, and
St. Clair County, and two consortia in Ohio, the High AIMS Consortium and the
SMART Consortium. The sixty-nine districts represent the broad range of social,
economic, and cultural characteristics found in the United States as a whole
being situated in large urban cities (Cleveland and Cincinnati) and their
suburbs, in medium size cities with large minority populations such as Lansing,
and in very rural areas such as those in St. Clair and Calhoun Counties.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Partnership utilizes a unique combination of research
and practice. Detailed data from all students and teachers using instruments
from the Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMMS) is gathered.
On the basis of these data Action Teams of mathematicians, scientists, teacher
educators and K-12 personnel collaborate to develop more focused and challenging
content standards, align standards with instructional materials and improve
mathematics and science teaching. Evidence-based and content focused
professional development improves the subject matter knowledge of over 4,500
teachers of mathematics and science. Associates for mathematics and for science
are fully prepared and engaged in the complex work of helping undertake
substantial reform in all 715 schools. The mathematics and science opportunities
for approximately 400,000 students improve and tracking disappears in all
schools by 2006. 800 preservice students participate and MSU reforms the
preparation of future teachers through revision of preservice education courses
and programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partner sites mirror the diversity of the
nation as a whole and the prototype is exportable and replicable on a larger
scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;