* 0314557
* Puerto Rico Math and Science Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2013
* Yolanda Norat, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Cooperative Agreement
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2013
* USD 35,599,846.00

The Puerto Rico Math and Science Partnership (PR-MSP) involves four universities
within the Puerto Rico System (The University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras,
Mayaguez, Cayey and Humacao campuses) in partnership with the Puerto Rico
Department of Education and supporting institutions that include the other seven
campuses of the UPR system, the Inter American University of Puerto Rico System,
and the Arecibo Observatory as well as informal science education centers and
industry partners. The Partnership's activities center on four goals:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Empowering schools through challenging K-12 Math and Science
curriculum and professional development&lt;br/&gt;2. Increasing K-12 mathematics
and science teacher quality through the preparation of future teachers and
certified teachers&lt;br/&gt;3. Strengthening the mathematics and science
knowledge base through educational research, assessment, and
evaluation&lt;br/&gt;4. Creating sustainable K-20 partnerships &lt;br/&gt;Over
300 mathematics and science faculty and scientists from university partners and
supporting organizations, forming four regional supporting teams, are working
directly with K-12 Mathematics and science teachers and school and district
personnel to provide professional development supporting the implementation and
evaluation of challenging research-based curriculum and assessment to optimize
math and science education for 305,000 students in 584 K-12 schools across the
Island. The provision of new professional development and credentialing
opportunities for mathematics and science teachers is impacting over 5,000 in-
service teachers. The partnership is establishing 30 school-based Math and
Science Resource Centers and a Math and Science Education Website to disseminate
the challenging curricular and educational improvements among all schools in
Puerto Rico. School Learning Communities and Mathematics and Science Leading
Teachers at each school are working with science and mathematics faculty from
the partnering institutions and industry to implement the curricular enhancement
activities. Teams of teachers, faculty, and researchers are designing curricular
activities that incorporate field trips using the local context as science
laboratory, and engage students as active learners, enhancing their motivation
and preparation for M&amp;S advanced courses and research opportunities. Core
partner universities are engaged in reform of teacher preparation programs
reaching over 3,000 future K-12 teachers to ensure they are highly qualified to
implement and sustain the PR-MSP educational improvements. Preservice students
participate in structured scientific research experiences in collaboration with
the supporting partners including the Arecibo Observatory, the U.S. Forest
Service Institute of Tropical Forestry, and industry labs. Teams of teachers and
faculty are conducting action research on student learning to provide evidence
on the effectiveness of their innovations in the classroom. The impact of the
PR-MSP on student achievement is measured through standardized tests based on
TIMSS and NAEP assessments. &lt;br/&gt;