* 0314739
* RUI: Continuum Models of DNA and Protein Coils
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2008
* Robert Manning, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/2008
* USD 94,554.00

Manning&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his students and colleagues
study&lt;br/&gt;elastic rod models of biological molecules, including DNA
and&lt;br/&gt;coiled-coil proteins. In the case of DNA, a classical rod
model&lt;br/&gt;is enhanced by including intrinsic curvature, flexibility,
and&lt;br/&gt;deformations imposed by protein-binding. Among
other&lt;br/&gt;applications, this model is used to analyze
cyclization&lt;br/&gt;experiments, which can probe DNA and protein structure
and&lt;br/&gt;flexibility under biologically realistic solvent conditions.
The&lt;br/&gt;large deformations imposed on DNA by cyclization and
bound&lt;br/&gt;proteins require the consideration of DNA self-contact, a
topic&lt;br/&gt;of contemporary interest in elasticity theory. The stability
of&lt;br/&gt;configurations in the presence of such self-contact is a
major&lt;br/&gt;mathematical focus of the investigator's work. On the
protein&lt;br/&gt;side, the rod model is applied to alpha-helical protein
regions&lt;br/&gt;that are interwound into coiled coils. The application of
this&lt;br/&gt;model to classical polymer physics experiments, such as
atomic&lt;br/&gt;force microscopy and single-molecule pulling experiments,
should&lt;br/&gt;shed light on the mechanical properties of these coiled coils,
in&lt;br/&gt;much the same way as this combination has done for DNA.&lt;br/&gt;
The past several decades have seen the mathematical theory&lt;br/&gt;of elastic
rods contribute considerably to the understanding of&lt;br/&gt;DNA. Enhancements
in both the model and DNA experiments have&lt;br/&gt;allowed researchers to
address more and more biologically&lt;br/&gt;interesting questions, such as the
connection between base-pair&lt;br/&gt;sequence and DNA structure. The
investigator has contributed to&lt;br/&gt;this research field, via several
recent projects involving&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate research students on such
questions as the&lt;br/&gt;flexibility of the TATA box sequence in DNA (which
plays an&lt;br/&gt;important role in the transcribing of the genetic code to
RNA)&lt;br/&gt;and the stability of rods in contact with obstacles (an
important&lt;br/&gt;precursor to understanding the stability of DNA
supercoiled&lt;br/&gt;around itself). In addition to further pursuing these
studies,&lt;br/&gt;the investigator extends these techniques to an area where
they&lt;br/&gt;have seen little application: proteins. There has been a
growth&lt;br/&gt;in recent interest in coiled coils, a subset of proteins
with&lt;br/&gt;basic structure plausibly like DNA. The investigator is in
an&lt;br/&gt;active collaboration with a group of protein
biologists,&lt;br/&gt;chemists, and physicists on a nanotechnology project to
design&lt;br/&gt;protein wires using coiled coils. The expertise developed
from&lt;br/&gt;this collaboration, combined with the investigator's
experience&lt;br/&gt;in modeling DNA, provides an excellent opportunity to make
a&lt;br/&gt;first step at designing a rod theory for coiled coils, which
will&lt;br/&gt;be a useful theoretical tool in the engineering of protein
wires,&lt;br/&gt;in much the same way that the rod model has proven useful
for&lt;br/&gt;understanding DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;