* 0314427
* Numerical Analysis and Methods for Eigenvalue Problem of Algebraically Structured Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Hongguo Xu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 83,340.00

This project will develop efficient, robust and reliable numerical methods for
computing the eigen-structure of matrices and pencils with special algebraic
structure. Its goals include building a foundation for algorithm development
from the mathematical, numerical, perturbation, and bifurcation properties of
structured matrices and pencils. This will provide effective and reliable
computational tools for solving computational problems in science, engineering
and industry. As an initial application, numerical algorithms will be developed
for applications in robust control and stability analysis of dynamic systems.
The investigator will develop structured eigenvalue methods that take advantage
of symmetries among the eigenvalues and the invariant or deflating subspaces of
algebraically structured matrices and pencils. He will use matrix splitting,
embedding techniques, matrix transformations, and other novel techniques to
decouple, extend or factor structured matrices to get matrices with simpler
eigen-structures that can be computed in a relatively easy
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structured eigenvalue problems arise in almost every
discipline of science and engineering. Applications include the study of planet
motion, energy distribution in electron systems, stabilization of satellites,
and vibration in nuclear power plants. All these applications require efficient,
accurate information about both the eigen-structure and its geometry. Properties
of the physical system under study often lead to eigenvalue problems with
special structures and symmetries among eigenvalues and the invariant or
deflating subspaces. Unfortunately, rounding errors in conventional numerical
methods sometimes destroy these symmetries and lead to physically unrealistic
computed results. Rounding errors in numerical methods that preserve special
structure do not lead to unrealistic results. Such methods are typically more
efficient, robust and accurate than conventional numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;