* 0314428
* RUI:    Blending Polymers:    The Influence of Copolymer Additives on Phase Separation Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Dean Waldow, Pacific Lutheran University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

The development of new polymer-based materials with tailored properties is often
attempted through the mixing of currently existing materials. Successful mixing
has often been challenging to accomplish and to aid in the mixing an additive is
commonly introduced in an attempt to compatibilize the blends. As the effects of
different additives are better understood, the knowledge can be applied to
industrial systems with the aim of improving the processing and performance of
polymer-based materials. The research plan of this Research in Undergraduate
Institution (RUI) proposal investigates ternary equilibrium thermodynamic
properties and how copolymer additive can influence phase evolution and
consequently polymer blend compatibilities. The research will take place in a
predominantly undergraduate institution (PUI) providing research experiences for
undergraduate students. This works builds on previous results, which demonstrate
that copolymer additives can be used to tailor equilibrium and kinetic
properties of blends in a number of ways. The structure and monomer composition
of the copolymers in this study will complement previous work. The specific
experimental ternary system is a blend of polybutadiene, polystyrene, and
copolymers of butadiene and styrene. These systems will be studied
experimentally using cloud point measurements, temperature jump wide-angle light
scattering, small angle neutron scattering (SANS), and dynamic light scattering
techniques. Lastly, Monte Carol computer simulation techniques will be employed
to model the experiemental polymer systems both in equilibrium settings and
kinetic situations. The proposal includes components that support the NSF
criteria of broader impacts. Undergraduate reseach students will be tutored in
conducting publishable research where these experiences can be carried with them
into future pursuits whether those are in academic research, health related
fields, industry, or education. The research experience is also an important
part of the student's undergraduate education where our chemistry department
integrates reseach into the curriculum. The principal investigator also is
incorporating research-rich activities into the physical chemistry curriculum
through kinetic studies of current synthetic techniques like atom transfer
radical polymerization and using static and dynamic light scattering to study
macromolecular systems. Activities will also be pursued which bring
underrepresented high school students from a local Mathematics, Engineering, and
Science Achievement (MESA) program into our labs for a workshop. The
undergraduate research students will mentor the high school students on polymer
science through experimental learning activities. The undergraduate
participation in this workshop is in accord with our university's interest in
service activities for students.