* 0314577
* Enforced Folding of Oligo(phenylene ethynylenes)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Xiao Cheng Zeng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 420,000.00

Unnatural oligomers and polymers consisting of benzene rings linked by ethynyl
groups (phenyleneethynylenes) are designed to fold into porous helical
structures, enforced by localized intramolecular hydrogen bonds. An oligomer
with a sufficiently long backbone folds back on itself, leading to left- and
right-handed helices. Such a backbone-based helical programming affords stable
helical structures regardless of structural variation of the side groups that
determine the outside surface properties. The interior of the resulting helices
is lined by aromatic hydrogen atoms, making these tubular cavities rather
hydrophobic. The internal diameters of the helices are adjustable (8 angstrom to
40 angstrom and larger), providing access to novel unnatural folding nanotubes
with adjustable interior cavities. Furthermore, these unnatural foldamers have
backbones that are both helical and unsaturated, features that may endow unusual
and useful physical and chemical properties. The design and synthesis of helices
with superhydrophobic (fluorinated) or amphiphilic interior cavities, resolution
of enantiomers, and induction of helical twist sense by chiral side chains and
chiral solvents are also addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanosized cavities and
channels have numerous potential applications in catalysis, separations,
nanodevices (sensors, fluidics, etc.), nanoscaffolds for building larger
structures, and design of other nanoporous materials. With the support of the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Bing Gong, of the
Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York - Buffalo and
Professor Xiao Cheng Zeng, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Nebraska - Lincoln, are studying the synthesis and properties of carbon-based
molecules designed to fold selectively and efficiently into helical structures.
These helical structures contain nanosized channels of adjustable size and
functionality, allowing tuning of their properties and their interactions with
other molecules. These studies also provide fundamental information about the
folding of other large molecules, both natural and unnatural, Students carrying
out these interdisciplinary studies gain skills in organic synthesis, bioorganic
and supramolecular organic chemistry, and theoretical chemistry.