* 0314832
* A High-Resolution Record of Holocene Climate Variability from Lake Edward, Central Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Tom Johnson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2006
* USD 190,856.00

Tropical Africa is one of three major centers of deep atmospheric convection
that energize the Earth's atmosphere through latent heating. There is much to be
learned about how tropical Africa's climate contributes to global climate. Lake
Edward is a 120-m deep rift lake situated on the eastern edge of the Congo
basin, and is perfectly situated to record climate variability in one of the
most immense monsoon systems on the planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will generate a decade- to century-scale record of moisture balance based on
Holocene sediments from Lake Edward. The main goal of this research is to
understand the causes of multi-decade to millennial-scale Holocene climate
events in Africa. The research is designed to build upon and refine previous
studies by focusing high-resolution analyses on time intervals previously not
analyzed in the Lake Edward region: the last 1,000 years and the early Holocene.
Results from these analyses will complement ongoing high-resolution studies of
the interval 1,000 to 5,000 yr BP in Lake Edward. The combined dataset will
allow testing of linkages between continental Africa, the tropical oceans, high-
latitudes, and external forcing (i.e. solar variability) at a variety of time-
scales. The researcher will develop high-resolution geochemical and stable
isotopic stratigraphies from sediment cores already taken from both Lake Edward
and nearby crater lakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research could
significantly advance our understanding of tropical paleoclimate dynamics. This
research relates to several areas of paleoclimate research priorities, including
the need for analysis of the full range of climate variability over the past
11,000 years from an important monsoon system, and the testing of regional
patterns and phasing of climate change within tropical Africa and the global
climate system.