* 0314718
* Cellular and Molecular Events in Early Leech Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* David Weisblat, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 12/31/2006
* USD 399,997.00

0314718 Weisblat

Intellectual merit: This is an Accomplishment-Based Renewal of a project
supported by NSF since 1984. The research seeks to understand development at the
cellular and molecular levels in leeches (phylum Annelida). Comparing
development in various animals should contribute to understanding how body plans
of modern animals evolved from those of ancestral species.

Recent years have seen the reorganization of most animal phyla into three main
clades, Deuterostomia, Ecdysozoa and Lophotrochozoa. Most invertebrate phyla,
including Annelida, belong the latter group, but most of our understanding of
development has come from Deuterostomia [vertebrates, sea urchins] or Ecdysozoa
[insects, nematodes]. Work on the leech Helobdella make it a useful point of
departure for comparisons with other annelids (oligochaetes and polychaetes),
other lophotrochozoans (e.g. flatworms and mollusks) and the "model" systems.
Helobdella is useful for studying development because its embryos are suited for
cellular and molecular techniques. This proposal is to continue investigations
of cell fate determination, combining reverse genetic approaches (injecting
anti-sense morpholino oligonucleotides to knock down gene expression or mRNAs
synthesized in vitro to ectopically express native genes, fluorescent proteins
or dominant negative constructs) with embryological techniques already available
for Helobdella. Specific topics include: 1. Significance of the maternally
inherited Hro-nos, a nanos-class gene in Helobdella . We propose to test the
hypothesis that gradually declining levels of HRO-NOS protein, translated from
maternally inherited transcripts, control the duration of blast cell (segmental
founder cell) production in individual embryonic stem cells (teloblasts). 2. The
dynamics of early WNT and NOTCH signaling in Helobdella. Immunostaining for HRO-
WNTA protein reveals a dynamic pattern during the 2-cell stage; HRO-WNTA
signaling seems to regulate cell-cell adhesion following the first cell
division. In situ staining for Hro-notch transcripts shows a similar pattern,
but time shifted about 30 minutes ahead of the HRO-WNTA pattern. We propose to
test the hypothesis that Notch and Wnt signaling pathways interact in the 2-cell
stage, to investigate the mechanisms by which this interaction is achieved.
Broader impacts: 1) The PI remains committed to expanding the national pool of
scientific talent by recruiting and training women and members of
underrepresented groups. Currently, the lab group consists of 1 assistant
researcher (woman), 5 graduate students (3 women, including 1 of Mexican/native
American origins) and 2 undergraduates (both of Filipino origin). One of the
current undergrads, joined the lab via the "Junior Transfer Consortium", a
program to identify, recruit and mentor science students who transfer to
Berkeley with junior status from community colleges. A previous undergrad and
postbac researcher (African-American male) from the PI's lab matriculated at
UCSF medical school in the summer of 2002. 2) The PI also works to enhance the
undergraduate experience at this large, research university by evaluating
applicants for various research programs, and by participating in various
faculty-undergrad forums. 3) The PI is active in promoting scientific goodwill
and collaborations between the USA and developing nations. To this end, he has
helped to organize and teach intensive and interactive lab and lecture courses
in development and neurodevelopment, for students at the graduate level and
beyond in Mexico, India and Brazil.

