* 0314289
* Dissertation Research:  A Preliminary Ethnobotanical Investigation of the Identification of Trees by the Aguaruna Jivaro of the Peruvian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Brent Berlin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation research studies tree identification methods among the
Aguaruna Jivaro, an indigenous group of the Peruvian Amazon. Anecdotal evidence
indicates that many tropical forest peoples can identify tree species simply by
observing the visual, olfactory and gustatory characteristics of the trunk and
bark This stands in contrast to the identification methods outlined in Western
taxonomic keys that rely heavily on floral, fruit and leaf characteristics to
make tree identifications. Fruit and floral characteristics show a high degree
of similarity among trees of the new world tropics, making them more problematic
for use in identifying these trees. Additionally, they tend to appear
seasonally, and may be difficult to reach if they are high up in the canopy. For
this reason, indigenous methods of tree identification, especially those
involving trunk characteristics, would be useful to study. However, to date,
little in depth research exists on the ways that indigenous peoples recognize
and identify the organisms in their local environments. This project will
address the question: What are the perceptual and ecological clues that allow
the Aguaruna to recognize and identify tropical forest trees? Broader impacts:
Aside from contributing to the education of a young social scientist, the
research findings will also be beneficial for tropical forestry and conservation
projects in the Peru and adjacent countries by adding to efforts to find easier
methods for identifying new world tropical trees based on sterile
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;