* 0314515
* Gordon Research Conference:  2003 Chemistry of Electronic Materials, New London, CT; July 13-18, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Melissa Hines, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

A Gordon Research Conference will be held July 13-18, 2003 on the Chemistry of
Electronic Materials. Topics include new materials, new devices, and novel
approaches to synthesis and characterization. Sessions will be held on:
fundamentals of semiconductor growth, molecular and nanocrystal devices,
frontiers of electronic and magnetic materials, nanoelectronics and structures,
semiconductor processing, novel deposition techniques, self-assembly in
molecular electronic devices, and semiconductor surface chemistry. Objectives
are to stimulate communications among researchers from a variety of disciplinary
backgrounds--chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science, and to
formulate and delineate critical research necessary to further basic
understanding and move concepts closer to technological success. The conference
is expected to provide an effective forum for discussion of critical scientific
issues in the area of synthesis, processing and characterization of electronic
materials. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future directions,
it is expected that new ties will be established between universities, research
institutions, and industry. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An evaluation of the
progress and status of synthesis and processing phenomena involved in the growth
and processing of electronic materials and device related structures along with
current assessments of the most important developments in this field will be of
great value to the understanding and enhanced utilization of materials in
computing, data processing, and communications. The requested NSF funds will be
used to facilitate participation in the meeting by young faculty, postdoctoral
research associates and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;