* 0314284
* Scholars Award in Methodological Training in Agent-Based Models and Evolutionary Game Theory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Eric Smith, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2005
* USD 54,994.00

This Scholars Award in Methodological Training for a cultural anthropology
researcher will allow him to gain sufficient expertise in agent-based modeling
and evolutionary game theory to engage in an active research program applying
these methods to important problems in cultural and ecological anthropology.
These methods are of growing importance in various fields in the social and
biological sciences, and provide a common framework for much current
interdisciplinary research on behavior and adaptation. The Principal
Investigator will collaborate with senior colleagues who have expertise in these
methods, at the Santa Fe Institute and at the University of Massachusetts-
Amherst.&lt;br/&gt; Evolutionary game theory and agent-based modeling provide
complementary tools for analyzing social processes in terms of their .micro-
foundations (the actions and motivations of individuals) and dynamics (how
change and stability are determined). The substantive focus of this project is
on collective action problems and the emergence of inequality in the context of
small-scale (non-stratified) human societies. The central research questions to
be addressed include 1) the social and ecological conditions which might favor
the development of individually costly but group-beneficial norms through
processes of within-group status competition and bargaining; 2) the roles of
enforcement, signaling, partner choice, and linguistic communication in solving
collective action problems; 3) and the elaboration of game-theoretical
frameworks for analyzing the effects of resource control, status competition,
and inter-group conflict in the emergence and stability of institutionalized
sociopolitical inequality.&lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts of the proposed research
include enhancing the effectiveness of interdisciplinary collaboration on
important topics of interest to many social scientists and behavioral biologists
by framing analyses in terms of modeling methods used across these disciplines;
and offering insights into the generation and solution of collective action
problems (e.g., management of resources held in common) that may be of value for
applied social science; as well as helping generate tools for more effective
teaching of social and biological science concepts, particularly through the use
of simulation methods that invite active learning. &lt;br/&gt;