* 0314049
* Microphysics of Clouds and Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Ramesh Srivastava, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 06/30/2007
* USD 332,302.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ATM-0314049&lt;br/&gt;Srivastava, Ramesh
C.&lt;br/&gt;University of Chicago&lt;br/&gt;Title: Microphysics of Clouds and
Precipitation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a continuation of theoretical
and observational investigations of certain aspects of cloud and precipitation
physics. It comprises the following three topics:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Growth
of cloud drops by condensation. A long-standing puzzle in cloud physics is the
discrepancy between observed drop-size distributions in clouds and the
distributions predicted from classical condensation-diffusion theory. The
observed distributions are broader than those predicted, with important
implications for the development of rain by the collision-coalescence process,
because broad distributions favor collisions and a more rapid production of
large drops. Many mechanisms have been suggested in the past for explaining the
discrepancy, though none is generally accepted. This project focuses on two
effects: the slow broadening of the distribution caused by the greater
equilibrium vapor pressure over the smaller drops, and the broadening caused by
fine-scale fluctuations of humidity in the vicinity of drops.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Growth of drops by the simultaneous action of condensation and coalescence. The
rate of growth of drops by the collision-coalescence process increases in a
rapid and nonlinear way with increasing drop size. The usual approach is to
calculate growth by condensation until the drops become large enough for
collisions to occur, and to calculate growth by collision-coalescence from there
on, because it quickly becomes much more important than condensation. However,
even a small increase in drop size by condensation causes a substantial increase
in the collision efficiency, so the two processes acting simultaneously produce
more rapid growth than obtained by treating them separately and adding the
results. The project will develop new computational methods of treating
condensation and coalescence simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;3. Evaporation of rain
from stratiform clouds. Rain falling through subsaturated air below cloud base
evaporates and cools the air. The effect should be taken into account in large-
scale models that include parameterizations for the effects of clouds and
precipitation. The approach here is to compute the dependence of sub-cloud
evaporation on the drop-size distribution and the vertical profiles of
temperature, humidity, and vertical air velocity. An objective is to develop
ways of estimating the evaporation from the vertical profile of radar
reflectivity below the cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies contribute to
the fundamental understanding of precipitation development and to applications
such as the remote measurement of precipitation by radar.&lt;br/&gt;