* 0315636
* Acquisition of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Frank Blum, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 158,111.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectrometer for materials research and education in the Departments of
Chemistry, Ceramic Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and Graduate Center for
Materials Research at the University of Missouri-Rolla. This NMR system will be
used in research and analysis of solid materials, and to train students across
disciplines on the use of NMR for the characterization of materials. This
equipment will provide considerable new capabilities and allow important new
experiments to be conducted. It will provide capabilities for cross-polarization
(CP) and magic-angle spinning (MAS) and extended temperature capability, to
allow researchers to probe the dynamics of polymers, phosphate glasses, hybrid
and nano-filled composites. A high temperature, wide-line deuterium probe will
allow the extension of current work on interfacial polymers to explore their
behavior at higher temperatures, well above current temperature limits. Advances
in materials science and engineering will take place because of our better
understanding of the structure and behavior of solid-state materials. Next
generation materials will need to be understood at the molecular level if we are
to exploit their potential properties. Polymer thin films, inorganic glasses and
other materials are difficult to characterize with many techniques. NMR studies
provide a distinct view of the structure and dynamics of these systems that is
unavailable from other methods.

The research discoveries supported by this instrumentation will be of
considerable importance in our understanding of novel materials, helping to keep
the U.S. at the forefront of materials research. This will be done through the
resulting research being disseminated in journals, at scientific meetings, and
on the world-wide web. The impact of the work will be in areas where thin films
and glass materials are used, such as in electronics, composites, adhesives,
sealants and coatings. The students trained on this instrumentation will be from
a wide variety of backgrounds and their exposure to this powerful technique, and
the breadth of problems that it can help solve, will broaden their horizons
considerably.