* 0315388
* GHz-THz Dynamics and the Glass Transition in Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Alexei Sokolov, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2006
* USD 355,000.00

Understanding the fundamentals of molecular motions is crucial for understanding
many properties of polymers from macro- to nano- scale. Among various aspects of
polymer dynamics the dynamics in the GHz-THz frequency range deserves particular
attention because of its importance for applications in information and
communication technologies and in photonics. The GHz-THz dynamics of polymeric
systems in a broad temperature range, from deep in a solid state up to deep in a
liquid state, is studied in this program. Three experimental techniques, light
and neutron scattering and dielectric relaxation spectroscopy, are employed.
This combination provides detailed microscopic information on the fast dynamics
and helps to understand its relationship with macroscopic properties of
polymers. This program will advance understanding of microscopic mechanisms
behind GHz-THz properties of polymeric materials and molecular motions on a
nanometer scale. It will create a solid experimental basis for developments of
new theoretical approaches. Expected results will have significant implications
on polymer science, and in broader aspect on dynamics of complex systems,
Materials Science and Physics in general, and also on Biophysics through better
understanding of bio-polymers dynamics. The program includes broad
collaborations with a few groups in the US and in
Europe.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Advanced knowledge of the GHz-THz dynamics has
significant impact on design and synthesis of materials for current and future
communication, information and computation technologies, on developments of
materials for photonic applications, and on a progress in some bio-technologies.
The proposed program has also significant impact on education of specialists for
future technologies through active involvement of graduate and undergraduate
students in this research, developments of graduate courses. Advances in the
proposed directions will impact various fields of Materials Science, Physics and
Biophysics. The proposed program promotes active international cooperation and
collaboration with national multi-user facilities at NIST and ANL.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;