* 0315822
* Continuing Workshops on Physical Organic Chemistry (2003-2005)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Jacquelyn Gervay-Hague, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

The Workshop on Physical Organic Chemistry, an annual conference for the
discussion of topics that span bioorganic chemistry to gas-phase reactions, will
be convened for the next three years. Although the range of topics is wide, all
focus on the methodology used by physical organic chemists. Attendance will be
limited to about twenty persons, all of whom present informal talks on new,
unpublished results. Conferences will be held at remote sites in order to
minimize distractions and encourage informal discussion. Strong efforts will be
made to include minorities and females and, in keeping with past tradition,
there will be a large number of younger investigators along with some senior
investigators.

This award from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing meeting of
Workshops on Physical Organic Chemistry, which is organized by Professor
Jacquelyn Gervay-Hague of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
California at Davis. The workshops will provide opportunities for the generation
of new ideas, facilitate collaborations and introduce young investigators to
their senior peers. The number of attendees and location of the meetings are
designed to facilitate these goals. The workshop benefits the Organic Dynamics
Program by identifying new and imaginative research projects and young
investigators that will strengthen the Program as new awardees and reviewers.