* 0315909
* Creating the First International Probabilistic Planning Competition
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Michael Littman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Edwina L. Rissland
* 04/30/2004
* USD 10,232.00

This small planning grant will support efforts to launch the first international
probabilistic planning competition, slated to be held in conjunction with the
2004 International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS-04).
The competition is being organized as a parallel track of the Fourth
International Planning Competition (IPC) at ICAPS-04. The IPC was first held in
1998 in conjunction with the Artificial Intelligence Planning and Scheduling
conference (AIPS). Follow-up competitions were held in 2000 and 2002, and it is
widely believed that the competitions have been enormously valuable to the
planning community, spurring advances in algorithms and representations and
rapidly disseminating them throughout the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
organizers of ICAPS-04 will be hosting the 4th IPC, which has focused
exclusively on classical planning, involving sequential decision making when the
effects of all decisions are deterministic. Over the past decade, as computers
have become more and more integrated with the physical world, researchers have
begun to study models that can represent the inherent uncertainty present in the
effects of many decisions. In this setting, plans are evaluated by how likely
they are to achieve desired outcomes. The dominant mathematical model in this
community is the Markov decision process (MDP) model, and there are research
groups all over the world studying MDPs for planning. However, progress in the
field is inhibited by the lack of a unified metric for progress and little
sharing of results between groups. A probabilistic planning competition could
give the probabilistic planning community a much needed opportunity to come
together and move forward. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support
adaptation of a plan validator program and travel to facilitate organizing of
the competition. Its broader impacts include training a graduate student and
improvement of computerized planning systems to plan many kinds of real-world
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;