* 0315715
* Acquisition of a UV Photon Sourse for Novel Electronic Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Hong Ding, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2004
* USD 93,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a vacuum ultraviolet (VUV)
photon source for novel electronic materials research and education at Boston
College.&lt;br/&gt;Comparing to a conventional VUV source, this microwave driven
VUV source has the capability of generating 200 times more flux and improving
the resolution by 10 times. Several research projects require this new
instrument: (1) Measuring the electronic structures of the single-layered
cuprate thin films. The single-crystalline thin films can be easily controlled
to a continuous doping level over a wide range. To overcome the difficulty of
cleaving, we propose to anneal thin films in situ and transfer them to a
measurement chamber. (2) Searching for evidence of spin-charge separation in
well-aligned carbon nanotubes. With the capability of growing well-aligned
carbon nanotubes, we plan to directly observe the phenomenon of spin-charge
separation. (3) Probing electronic structures of quasi-1D organic
superconductors. The unprecedented capability of this new VUV source will enable
us to design and conduct many new experiments to study various novel electronic
materials in an on-campus laboratory. These research projects will advance our
understanding of Mott physics, novel superconductivity, Luttinger liquid, and
Fermi liquid, all of which are the essential parts of modern condensed matter
physics. In addition, modifications and improvements on this VUV source will be
a major contribution to the instrumentation development in the photoemission
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this powerful VUV photon
source will make a significant impact to the education and training of post-
docs, graduate and undergraduate students by attracting them to a much-improved
research facility. This is especially true for undergraduate students due to its
on-campus location. We will encourage underrepresented minorities to participate
the proposed projects. This will introduce them to exciting new materials,
cutting-edge techniques, and fundamental condensed matter physics. The
collaborative nature of this project will be beneficial to their long-term
academic development. Finally, this project will greatly enhance the
infrastructure at our university as well as in the regional photoemission
community. &lt;br/&gt;