* 0315174
* Integrated Studies on Cellular and Physiological Roles of Higher Plant Plasmodesmata
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* William Lucas, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 07/31/2007
* USD 473,000.00

Although it has long been known that, in plants, plasmodesmata (PD) establish
cytoplasmic continuity between neighboring cells, it has only recently been
established that these intercellular organelles play a role in the cell-to-cell
trafficking of information macromolecules (proteins and RNA). The first direct
evidence for this role came from genetic, molecular and cellular studies of
viral infection in plants. In these infected plants, viral encoded movement
proteins (MPs) traffic cell to cell through PD and, in this process, they
mediate the spread of infectious RNA/DNA. In view of this finding, the
hypothesis was advanced that plants similarly utilize this PD macromolecular
trafficking pathway to exert positional-dependent control over developmental and
physiological processes. The corollary to this hypothesis was advanced that
plants function as unique supracellular, rather than multicellular, organisms.
Support for this supracellular model has been accumulating; in this regard, a
seminal discovery was that a number of plant transcription factors have now been
shown to function in a non-cell-autonomous manner, via movement through PD. The
picture that is emerging is that this ability of PD to transport macromolecules
extended the properties evolved by the eukaryotic nuclear pore complex to the
junctions between neighboring cells, and thereby allowed plants to develop this
novel regulatory pathway.

In the present work, experiments are aimed at characterizing the molecular
constituents of PD and the non-cell-autonomous protein (NCAP) translocation
pathway. For these studies a range of experimental techniques will be employed
that combine genetic, molecular, cellular, physiological and developmental
approaches. The major goal over this funding period will be to identify
potential regulators of NCAP trafficking/PD function using a mutant screening
approach in Arabidopsis. These studies should provide much needed information on
the molecular components that function in the establishment and regulation of
the non-cell-autonomous translocation pathway of plants. The importance of this
information to the areas of integrative plant biology and development will
likely be through the development of a greater understanding of the events that
underlie whole plant signaling. These long-distance signals, delivered via the
plant vascular system, are presently thought to function in the integration of
the plant's response to environmental and biotic stresses.

The requested funds will permit the training of junior scientists in this area
of integrative plant biology. The importance of these scientists to our society
will be through the application of knowledge towards the development of novel
controls over plant processes, including the allocation of resources to targeted
organs. Such applications could well have major ramifications in terms of
agriculture and animal/human nutrition/health.