* 0315561
* Development and Acquisition of Instrumentation for Nanomechanics Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Horacio Espinosa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 155,000.00

This grant provides support for the development and acquisition of
instrumentation for research and education in mechanics on the nano-scale at
Northwestern University. A major challenge in materials science and engineering
is the design and characterization of novel functional materials through atomic
and molecular level control. New materials with superior electro-mechanical
properties, e.g., ultra-nano-scale crystalline diamond, are ideal candidates for
the design of micro and nano-scale electromechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS). These
so-called nanostructured materials possess the potential to radically impact
major emerging technologies such as nanoelectronics, bio-chips, and lightweight
materials. In fact, world market volumes for nanostructured materials are
expected to reach billions of dollars by the year 2005. Nonetheless, several
main challenges along the path to new commercially viable products still exist,
including: synthesis, processing and handling, characterization at the atomic
level, and economics. In this project we will develop unique experimental tools
that are needed for the electro-mechanical characterization of nanocrystalline
materials, carbon nanotubes and nanowires. The device will be used within a
transmission electron microscope, an ultra-high vacuum scanning tunneling
microscope, and in conjunction with atomic force microscopy. We fully expect
these experiments to identify novel inelastic deformation and electronic
conduction mechanisms, which can be used advantageously in the development of
novel NEMS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation to be developed and
acquired will be employed primarily by graduate students, who will contribute to
both research and educational components. Since nano-scale mechanical
experiments are becoming central to materials engineering education, we will
transition main developments of this research to the classroom. Simplified
versions of the experimental procedures and developed models will be offered as
lab modules in dual level (undergraduate/graduate) classes and new labs will be
developed for a new graduate course. Dissemination of teaching and research
activities through classes via the Internet, presentations at national and
international conferences and workshops, and publication of manuscripts in
educational and scientific journals will be pursued&lt;br/&gt;