* 0315349
* RUI: Production and Characterization of Membrane Steroid Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Yong Zhu, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 362,911.00

Steroid hormones play important roles in vertebrate physiology and disease
processes such as sexual behavior, reproduction, and cancer. Steroid hormones
are generally known to modulate gene transcription through interactions with
classical nuclear receptors. Steroids also initiate transcription-independent
signaling events (nongenomic) at the cell surface through interactions with an
unknown class of membrane receptors. Studies of these nongenomic steroid actions
have been impaired for many years due to the lack of structure and sequence
information for the membrane steroid receptors. Recently, a novel membrane
steroid receptor family with high affinity to progestins and similar structure
to G protein-coupled receptors has been cloned and characterized in fishes and
other vertebrates. However, the recombinant proteins produced by the E. coli in
previous studies have several disadvantages, such as their inability to bind its
purported natural ligand and thus to allow functional and structural analyses of
the receptors. The present research will produce functional zebrafish membrane
receptor proteins using insect and mammalian cell lines, determine the steroid
binding characteristics of the recombinant proteins, and investigate the
involvement of the proteins in cell-surface signaling pathways. In addition, the
proposed study will characterize and compare the function of the membrane
steroid receptor subtypes that have been characterized in zebrafish, thus
providing the molecular basis for future research and applications of the
membrane steroid receptors. The long-term goal of the proposed study is to
establish the functions of the membrane steroid receptor family in vertebrates.
The study will be executed with the assistance from graduate and undergraduate
students from rural areas of North Carolina. This grant will enable the training
of these students in the latest knowledge and techniques in the fields of
endocrinology and molecular biology.