* 0315603
* Acquisition of a Beowulf Cluster for Computational Materials Research, Education and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Michael Falk, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 10/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a Beowulf cluster for
computational materials research, education and student training at the
University of Michigan. Due to phenomenal advances in computer power and
accessibility, simulation now guides discovery and understanding of materials
processes in nanoscience and technology, microelectronics, polymer processing,
photonics, designed materials, autonomic materials systems, and many other
technologically important areas. The simulation techniques required to solve
materials problems are inherently multidisciplinary, involving length and time
scales that span many orders of magnitude. As such, they require the combined
use of disparate computational methodologies originally conceived for specific
applications in particular disciplines. Expertise in these different techniques
tends to remain isolated within their fields of origin. These disciplinary
boundaries must be eliminated in order to develop scale-spanning simulation
methodologies that coordinate and integrate complementary computational methods
and thereby facilitate the investigation of problems too complex to be tackled
by a single technique. The goal is three-fold: (1) to foster interdisciplinary
and innovative research and education in computational materials at the
University of Michigan; (2) to lead in the development and application of
cutting-edge, scale-spanning simulation methods for materials research; and (3)
to educate and train students in computational methods that span the length and
time scales from molecules to macroscopic properties for materials discovery,
design, and development. We anticipate our graduates to be vigorously recruited
by industry, government laboratories, and universities. A center format is
imperative for this endeavor because of the need to pool expertise in diverse
computational methodologies. Through the various programs planned, this center
will provide a forum for interaction among faculty and students to promote the
cross-fertilization between the many areas of specialization that drive advances
in computational materials research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This cluster will
permit the simultaneous use by multiple users for education, training, and
research, and will allow simulations of materials and materials processes over
an order of magnitude larger in some instances than previously attainable. Such
improvements in scale are crucial to advancing fundamental understanding and
scientific discovery. A broader impact of this project is achieved both through
the development of innovative computational methodologies and the training of
highly skilled computational scientists and engineers, capable of addressing the
growing need for the advancement of materials technologies in today's society.
Our vision is to be a highly visible leader in research and education in
computational materials science and engineering, developing simulation
techniques, curricula, and outreach programs at Michigan that will serve as
models for the materials community around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;