* 0315200
* Bacterial Regulation of Organic Sulfur Cycling in the Ocean: A Genomic Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Ronald Kiene, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2009
* USD 528,769.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Mary Ann Moran, William B. Whitman, and Anne O.
Summers of the University of Georgia, and Ronald P. Kiene of the University of
South Alabama to investigate the microbes mediating a key step in the marine
sulfur cycle. Dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) is an abundant organic sulfur
compound synthesized by marine algae. When marine bacteria degrade DMSP, they
can produce dimethylsulfide (DMS), a volatile compound that is the largest
natural source of organic sulfur to the atmosphere. However there are competing
bacterial degradation pathways for DMSP, the end products of which play only a
minor role in ocean-atmosphere flux of organic sulfur. The genetic basis for
these competing degradation pathways and how they are regulated within marine
bacterial cells is unknown. Further, it is not understood how environmental
conditions in the ocean influence the pathways by which marine bacteria degrade
DMSP. In this project, analysis of the genomic sequence of a DMSP-degrading
marine bacterium (Silicibacter pomeroyi) will be used in conjunction with
molecular biology approaches to identify metabolic and regulatory genes involved
in DMSP degradation. Identified genes will be used to retrieve genes with the
same function from uncultured and potentially novel marine bacteria from surface
waters of coastal and open ocean environments. An important goal of the project
is to develop molecular tools for studying the marine bacteria that degrade DMSP
in seawater, including how they interact with one another and the environment.