* 0315698
* INTERRELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN SUCCESS AND LEARNING STRATEGIES APPLIED BY ENGINEERING STUDENTS Year 2: Design, Development, and Pilot Testing of Interventions
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Leonhard Bernold, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2005
* USD 179,377.00

This project addresses the question -- what can be done to help engineering
students to be successful in college and in their profession. The multi-phased
study has the following components: Phase 1 (currently underway): Understanding
of learning strategies, attitudes, and success of engineering freshmen; Phase 2:
Design, Development, and Pilot Testing of Interventions; and Phase 3:
Interventions and Their Longitudinal Effect on Cognitive Empowerment During and
Beyond Freshman Year. In this phase, the data being collected and analyzed will
provide the baseline information for the design of a series of interventions
targeted to students rather than the teaching environment; that is, rather than
proposing new courses, teaching methods, or instructional delivery systems, we
will focus on identifying and providing cognitive and learning strategies that
foster healthy habits and coach students to remove weaknesses in the context of
the existing culture in engineering education into which first-year students are
immersed, both at NC State and in many other engineering programs. Throughout
the duration of the project, the established Website for the LESSONS research
team (Learning Styles and Strategies Of ENgineering Students)
http://www.engr.ncsu.edu/LESSONS/ will be constantly enlarged with the new
results as well as new scientific work from the literature. Publications and
conference papers will disseminate the results of our research and share
educational strategies broadly.