* 0315756
* Acquisition of Instruments for Polymer Fiber Characterization and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Robert Shambaugh, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 110,000.00

This grant is for the purchase of three instruments designed to improve the
fabrication and characterization of polymer fibers: a differential scanning
calorimeter (DSC), a tensile tester (TT) and an infrared camera (IRC). These
three instruments allow examination of the fabrication of fibers both on-line
(as the fiber is being formed) and off-line. Projects that will utilize these
instruments include carbon nanotubes that are mixed with a variety of
thermoplastic polymers and drawn into fibers in order to increase the modulus
and tenacity of the final product. The DSC measures how the nanotubes affect the
crystallinity and glass transition of the product. The TT measures the
mechanical properties of the product as a function of different draw rates and
temperatures. The IRC permits on-line temperature measurements during the
formation of the fibers; such knowledge is used to mathematically model and
improve the fiber formation process. The three instruments will also be used in
several other active projects involving the high speed formation of nonwoven
webs of fiber during the process known as melt blowing. Another very active area
involves fiber-based composites that use a filler modification technique termed
admicellar polymerization; both the DSC and TT are integral to this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal are primarily related
to improved student education. With the new instruments, the students will work
with instrumentation that they will contact in their subsequent careers. Several
undergraduates are employed in the laboratory during the year. Presently, more
than half of these undergraduates are under-represented students (women,
Hispanics, and African-Americans). The students participate in the
academic/industrial fiber consortium at the university, give oral presentations
at conferences, and act as coauthors on papers. The instrumentation will be used
in the training of students and in classroom demonstrations. This proposal will
also allow the expansion of the academic/industrial interface that exists at the
University of Oklahoma. As alluded to above, the university has an
academic/industrial consortium for the development of nonwoven fiber technology.
For more than a decade this organization has been supported by a number of
Fortune 500 companies (e.g., 3M, DuPont and Procter &amp; Gamble. &lt;br/&gt;