* 0315798
* Lipid Rafts and Signal Transduction by MHC Class II Molecules
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2006
* William Wade, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/2006
* USD 292,759.00

The goal of this project is to explore interactions of lipid rafts, discrete
small regions of the cell membrane having unique lipid compositions, with an
important class of proteins, called Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class
II molecules, on the surfaces of B lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell.
Lipid rafts are believed to be the sites where membrane proteins transmit
information concerning extracellular conditions across the cell surface to
initiate intracellular responses. MHC class II molecules help regulate B cell
responses to T cells and to foreign antigenic peptides. The specific objectives
are 1) to examine where and when specific class II molecules associate with
lipid rafts and how this association relates to the number and type of class II
molecules on the cell and 2) to assess how class II structural mutations and
treatment with peptides and/or crosslinking reagents affect raft association.
These studies will employ innovative optical measurements allowing protein-raft
association to be evaluated on intact cells, including fluorescence energy
transfer from labeled proteins to raft lipids and cholera toxin perturbation of
protein rotation, as supported by density gradient centrifugation analysis of
membrane lysates.

The raft hypothesis, namely that lipid rafts are a key site for signal
transduction events, is becoming a major paradigm in cell biology. However, most
studies in this area have been performed by biochemical methods on disrupted
cells. This project will employ optical approaches to evaluate the nature of
raft-protein interactions on living cell surfaces. Thus the results will have
wide implication for understanding how cells of all types, not just those to be
examined in the project, respond to environmental factors. To promote teaching,
training and learning, two graduate students will be key participants in the
proposed project and the biophysical techniques to be refined during the project
will contribute to research infrastructure of the biological sciences generally.
Work will be conducted in collaboration with investigators at Dartmouth College
which will facilitate disseminating modern science between researchers in
diverse fields.