* 0315637
* Development of Molecular Level Adhesion Measurement Apparatus for Student Training and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Marek Urban, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 400,000.00

This grant supports the design and development of a Molecular Adhesion
Measurement Apparatus (MAMA) capable of detecting adhesion between adjacent
polymeric films, as well as the adhesion between polymeric films and other
substrates. Fundamental principles governing rheo-photoacoustics will be
examined in the context of the measurements of the adhesion. Since physico-
chemical changes at the interface between two polymer surfaces have a
significant effect on adhesion and molecular level processes associated with it,
it is fair to utilize this approach which ultimately will lead to the
advancement of our knowledge of adhesion. Furthermore, the development of a
unique instrumentation capable of measuring molecular forces responsible for
adhesion will open new avenues for studies of interfacial forces at nano-levels.
An interdisciplinary group of polymer/material scientists at USM who are
extensively involved in nationally important research programs request this
instrument development. This apparatus will have significant impact on numerous
existing and future research programs not only at USM, but nation and worldwide,
as well as on the education of future generations of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation has application to experimental
research efforts and student training in the areas of nano-composites, micro-
domains, environmentally complaint composites, thin films and coatings,
biomaterials, and biological studies. The instrument will enhance resolution
along with improved instrumentation control capabilities, thereby increasing
data throughput. Although the long-term benefits of the proposed instrument
development are in the areas noted above, there are inherent tasks in education
and training of the future cadre of scientists and researchers that necessitate
the development of this instrument. Not only USM researchers and students
benefit, but also over fifty major corporations that conduct sponsored research
at USM have access to this instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;