* 0315829
* Accelerating the Molecular/Morphological Bioinventory of Meiofauna: Marine Nematodes of Mexico's Threatened Gulf of California
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* James Baldwin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 550,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: DEB-0315829&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. James
G. Baldwin and Dr. Paul De Ley of the University of California-Riverside and Dr.
William K. Thomas of the University of New Hampshire to collaborate in a
systematic inventory of marine nematodes. The inventory will include and
preserve morphological records linked by database to DNA sequences selected to
highlight unique features of each nematode species. The research site is
Mexico's ecologically threatened Gulf of California and specifically the work
will focus on five divergent Gulf localities designated as urgent priorities for
biodiversity research by Mexican and international agencies. Special emphasis
will be given to the ecologically rich northern region, adversely impacted by
diversion of Colorado River freshwater and by agricultural runoff. Why focus on
nematodes? Nematodes are the most abundant invertebrate on the planet, and yet
most species, particularly subtropical and tropical marine forms, remain
undiscovered and unnamed. By developing an inventory of nematode species in this
unique region, new insight will be gained into the planet's biodiversity; the
impact will be enhanced because new methods employed with this study are
designed to accelerate bioinventory of marine nematodes at additional sites
worldwide. The study will provide the "raw material" for ecological conservation
work and as a source of previously undiscovered specimens it will support
separate studies designed to understand nematode evolution. Outreach is enhanced
by providing databases resources on marine nematodes that will be available
worldwide to scientists, the public, teachers and policy makers. The project
will develop new identification aids for nematodes that will assist scientists
in various systematic and ecological work, including non-specialists (in
nematodes), worldwide. This study is designed to train undergraduate and
graduate students including a significant proportion from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;