* 0315208
* RUI: Bottom-Up and Top-Down Influences on Processing Chain Interactions in Detritus-Based Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Christopher Paradise, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2008
* USD 200,000.00

Project Abstract: RUI: Bottom-Up and Top-Down Influences on Processing Chain
Interactions in Detritus-Based Communities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detritus is the
major food source for many communities of organisms, and detritivores provide an
ecosystem service by breaking down and consuming dead organic matter. Leaf
litter is the primary energy input to several of these detritus-based
communities and forms the basis of a processing chain, where leaves decay over
time and consumers specialize on resources in different states. Some
detritivores, called processors, may facilitate other detritivores by breaking
down organic matter and changing it from whole leaves to smaller particles upon
which other detritivores feed. This processing chain interaction may increase
the diversity of species by increasing the types of resources available for
consumption. One objective of this research is to understand how processing of
resources regulates community structure. Bottom-up and top-down forces may also
influence resources and processing chains. Bottom-up influences, such as the
amount of leaf litter, may determine whether processing chain interactions are
facilitative or competitive, and how strongly they affect other consumers. Top-
down forces, such as top predators, may affect individual consumers, or
indirectly affect the rate of processing by adversely affecting processors. This
research will determine the relative strengths of bottom-up and top-down
influences on processing chain interactions in treeholes, a model detritus-based
food web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water-filled treeholes are small decomposer
communities that are easily manipulated and contain processing chain
interactions. Field mesocosm and natural habitat experiments will be used to
determine the effects on detritivore communities and processing chains when
resources, processor density, and presence of predators are systematically
varied. Variables to be measured include changes in particle size distribution
of leaf litter, the density and diversity of species of insects, and the
diversity of microbes. The hypotheses to be tested are: 1) processing chain
interactions and processors increase the diversity and abundance of resources in
treeholes, which influences diversity and abundance of other detritivorous
insects and microbes, 2) processors have a greater positive impact on diversity
and abundance of detritivores when resources are limiting than when resources
are abundant, and 3) a top generalist predator will decrease competition amongst
detritivores, decreasing the impact of the processors, and affecting species
richness. Understanding the relative strengths of bottom-up and top-down factors
on detrital processing and processing chains will lead to a more complete
understanding of how those factors affect community structure and
function.&lt;br/&gt;