* 0315588
* SBIR Phase I:  Soft Magnetic Nanocomposites for High Frequency Electronic and Electrical Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Anit Giri, Nanomat, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 03/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research project will develop soft magnetic
nanocomposite materials for applications in electronic and electrical devices
operating at high frequency. AC electronic and electrical devices operating at
high frequencies require soft magnetic core materials that possess high
saturation magnetization, high initial permeability, and low loss. Various
metals and alloys e.g. Fe, Fe-Si, Fe-Ni Permalloys, Fe-Co are used in
applications. These materials have high saturation magnetization, low coercivity
and high permeability but because of low resistivity of these materials, the
loss is very high at high frequencies. Ferrites on the other hand have low loss
because of its high resistivity but have lower saturation magnetization compared
to the soft magnetic metals and alloys. This project aims to synthesize a new
kind of nanocomposites consisting of some ferromagnetic and ferrite materials.
These novel nanocomposites will be manufactured utilizing an inexpensive and
easily scalable process. These nanocomposite powders will be compacted to near
theoretical densities to produce bulk materials with different shapes and sizes.
The synthesis, structure and frequency dependent magnetic properties of these
materials will be evaluated in the Phase I research effort.

Commercially the principal applications of these nanocomposites are in
alternating current machines operating at high frequency e.g. transformers,
generators, motors, inductor cores, magnetic amplifiers, power converters and
motor drivers for military and commercial satellites, aircrafts and spacecrafts,
tunable filters for cellular handset, loading coils for impedance loading in
audio industry, etc.

