* 0315995
* A Survey of the Deep Bank Marine Macroalgae and Macrocrustaceans in the Gulf of Mexico
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Darryl Felder, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 06/30/2007
* USD 476,740.00

The Gulf of Mexico constitutes one of the world's most unique and productive
ocean basins, characterized by a relatively shallow but well-developed
continental shelf with an extensive system of offshore hard banks which are
among the least sampled habitats in US waters. These unique hard banks, in most
cases located in or adjacent to areas of intensive oil and gas production and
transportation or in some cases near expanding areas of anthropogenic
eutrophication, harbor diverse benthic assemblages including large numbers of
undescribed species. The goal of this project, to be conducted by Drs. Fredericq
and Felder at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette in conjunction with a
network of US and Mexican collaborators, is an intensive three year program to
sample macroalgae and macrocrustaceans from 45-90 m depths on deep banks in the
NE Gulf (vicinity of the Florida Middle Ground), SE Gulf (vicinity of the Dry
Tortugas) and SW Gulf (off Yucatan, Mexico). Data from this project will be
combined with information from available NW Gulf collections to establish
comprehensive biodiversity inventories as well as descriptions of anticipated
numerous new species, while increasing knowledge of endemism and distribution
ranges of these dominant biotic assemblages. All seaweeds, as well as crabs,
shrimp, lobsters, mantis shrimp, and related crustaceans will be identified
using morphological and molecular evidence. The project produces a specimen
database from new and existing collections that will be web-accessible and will
include taxonomic, accession and life history data along with illustrations,
photographs, checklists, new species descriptions, identification keys to
problematic groups, sources of available DNA extracts and references to relevant
DNA sequences.&lt;br/&gt; In the absence of documented diversity, and because
most hard banks are afforded little attention in conservation and management
plans that might otherwise protect them from negative impacts of oil and gas
production or impacts from adjacent areas of regional anthropogenic
eutrophication, the project provides resources essential to future research and
educational training of students in taxonomy, phylogenetics, population
genetics, ecology and conservation of the dominant groups in the Gulf of
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;