* 0315901
* Investigation of the Influence of Social Interactions on the Genetics and Joint Evolution of Aggressiveness and Body Size
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Susan Riechert, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 258,999.00

This study investigates the influence of a social trait (aggressiveness) on
other traits that are associated with general body condition (e.g., rate of
growth, body size and mass). Because the usual approach of genetic analyses of
traits is to carefully control for environmental variation, the potential for
social or competitive interactions is usually eliminated. This produces an
inaccurate view of the genetic architecture of sets of characters that may co-
evolve in a competitive environment. Here, a quantitative genetic study of an
invertebrate test system will compare the genetic variance-covariance structure
of aggressiveness and growth rate and size at maturation under social vs non-
social environments. The findings will be used in the development of a
theoretical model that explores the evolution of these characters, predicting
the dynamics of the social and general condition traits in natural environments.

Understanding the genetic architecture of traits is the major goal of applied
quantitative genetics, allowing us to predict response to artificial selection
for improvement in crops and livestock. Most agriculturally important characters
are probably influenced by social or competitive interactions, yet the
interaction effect has not been considered. This study should significantly
advance our ability to predict how characters important to yield and production
evolve in agricultural systems.