* 0315865
* The Role of Flightin Phosphorylation in Thick Filament Assembly and Flight Muscle Mechanics in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Jim Vigoreaux, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 07/31/2008
* USD 547,866.00

Muscle is one of the most abundant tissues in the animal body and the primary
producer of force for movement. A remarkable feature of muscle, at the cellular
level, is the organized interdigitation of chemically distinct thin and thick
protein filaments that translate the nanometer movements of molecular motors in
the thick filament into animal locomotion. Thick filaments are known to be
composed of the motor protein myosin, but the manner by which myosin molecules
assemble into thick filaments of uniform length is still unknown and most likely
involves additional regulatory proteins. This project studies potential roles
for the regulatory protein flightin in the organization and function of muscle
thick filaments in a model system, the flight muscle of the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster. Insect flight muscle is known to be one of the most powerful
muscles in the animal kingdom. A combination of biochemical and genetic
experiments are used to define the functional properties of flightin, which
generates oscillatory work, much like vertebrate cardiac muscle. The research
also investigates the mechanism by which flightin contributes to the mechanical
properties of flight muscle. This project combines classical genetics approaches
with molecular biology, biochemistry, cell structure, and state-of-the-art
molecular imaging and muscle physiology techniques. This multidisciplinary
approach will result in a coherent, integrated view of the functional roles of
flightin and provide valuable insight into the mechanism of thick filament
assembly during muscle development, and the mechanism by which oscillatory
muscles produce high power output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
considerable broader impact both in both education and in the generation of
biological reagents for the Drosophila and muscle research communities. Previous
NSF funding to this lab has been instrumental in training undergraduate and
graduate students, including the participation of students from underrepresented
groups, and the current project continues this tradition. &lt;br/&gt;