* 0316056
* Catalase Expression to Study Information Flow to and From the Circadian Clock
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* C. Robertson McClung, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2006
* USD 190,000.00

Although there is considerable conservation of clock components and mechanisms
among diverse taxa, it is equally clear that there is diversity in the molecular
basis of circadian rhythmicity. Thus, investigation of circadian rhythmicity in
multiple systems is important for the elucidation of common themes in circadian
timekeeping as well as the definition of novel clock molecules and mechanisms of
information input to and temporal output from clocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
of the dominant themes in recent studies of circadian systems among
multicellular organisms is the spatial separation of distinct clocks that
regulate circadian behavior of distinct organs (e.g., heart, liver, skeletal
muscle, retina). In vertebrates, the major circadian oscillator resides in the
brain and is thought to provide coordinating temporal information to synchronize
a series of organ specific "peripheral" oscillators. However, recent results
suggest that the peripheral oscillators may function more autonomously than
previously thought. A number of experimental results suggest that plants, too,
have multiple clocks. The majority of these data are based on the observation of
rhythms with distinct periods within a plant. Although is suggestive of two
distinct clocks, it is by no means conclusive. One of the most effective means
to study the circadian clock is by monitoring the effect of pulses of light or
temperature on clock phase. If two rhythms respond to the same pulse with
different phase shifts, it is quite likely that the two rhythms are responding
to distinct clocks. Recent experiments in Arabidopsis have established that
there are two clocks in the cotyledon, one driving CAB2 transcription and the
other driving CAT3 transcription. Moreover, the clock driving CAT3 is
considerably more sensitive to temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work is designed to distinguish between these two clocks in greater detail.
There are two specific aims. The first is to more thoroughly characterize the
temperature sensitivity of the circadian oscillator regulating CAT3. The
mechanism by which temperature signals are perceived and transmitted to the
clock is not well understood. Because thermosensing in general is not well
understood, investigations in this area are likely to have influence well beyond
the study of circadian biology. This work asks a number of specific questions.
Is the circadian system perturbed by mutations that alter membrane properties?
Is the potency of a temperature cycle determined by the temperature differential
between warm and cold or, instead, by the absolute value of the cold
temperature? Experiments are proposed to more fully document the effects of
release from stratification, a cold and dark treatment of hydrated seeds. The
goal is to determine if the temperature or light onset signals are individually
sufficient to reset the clock. Finally, genetic screens to identify loci
required for appropriate input of temperature signals to the clock will be
carried out. The second aim is to identify mutantations that differentially
affect either the CAB2 clock or the CAT3 clock. It is not clear if the two
clocks are assembled from identical or overlapping sets of components, and this
aim provides a genetic test to address this critical puzzle. These results are
likely to have broad influence on knowledge of all circadian
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;