* 0316675
* Experimental Hydrodynamics and Evolution: function of median fins in ray-finned fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* George Lauder, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 425,742.00

Organisms that live in the water represent a substantial fraction of life's
diversity, and understanding how animals move through water, exert forces on
their environment, and control their body position in a turbulent environment is
critical to developing insights into the diversity of aquatic life. However,
attempts to study this question over the past 20 years have met with many
difficulties. Chief among these has been the considerable technical difficulty
of quantifying the forces exerted by the movement of organisms on the water. On
land such measurements are technically easy (stepping on a scale, for example,
gives a force measurement of the body on the ground), but our inability to
quantify forces exerted by organisms in the water has made it very difficult to
understand the functional significance of different body and fin
shapes.&lt;br/&gt;This study adopts from the field of engineering a new flow
visualization technique called Digital Particle Image Velocimetry (DPIV) and
modifies it to study fish body and fin motion. This technique provides, for the
first time, a means of experimentally quantifying water movement in the wake of
freely swimming fishes, and calculating the magnitudes and directions of forces
exerted on the water by fins and the body of freely-moving aquatic organisms.
Progress on previous NSF grants has demonstrated the ability of DPIV to provide
data critical to understanding mechanisms of aquatic locomotion in organisms,
and has shown how using this new approach to measuring the motion of water leads
to previously unexpected insights into the diversity of aquatic organisms. The
general objectives of this research are to study the hydrodynamic function of
fins in fishes, focusing on the dorsal and caudal fins in sunfish, trout, and
sturgeon with the aim of testing several long-standing hypotheses in the
literature regarding the mechanisms by which these fins generate force and allow
fishes to maneuver and position themselves in the water. Of special interest is
the hypothesis of "wake interception" : that fishes can enhance the force
generated by their tail fin by having the tail intercept the hydrodynamic wake
shed by the dorsal fin. If this hypothesis is corroborated, it will represent an
important new general mechanism by which both organisms and man-made
submersibles could increase their propulsive efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;This
research project contributes to advanced training of undergraduates in new
approaches and technologies for the study of animal biomechanics and evolution
through individual student research projects in an advanced undergraduate course
co-taught by the Principal Investigator (PI), the interdisciplinary training of
biology graduate students in engineering approaches to the study of organismal
function, and post-doctoral training for the next generation of academic
faculty. The research proposed here will have increased breadth of impact
through a broad new training program in biomechanics at Harvard University which
integrates biomechanics graduate training in biology, chemistry, physics, and
engineering. The PI is one of the faculty on this grant, and the research
proposed will serve as projects for students undertaking mandatory rotations,
thus introducing a wide diversity of chemistry, physics and engineering graduate
students to concepts and approaches in organismic functional biology that they
would not otherwise be exposed to. &lt;br/&gt;