* 0316130
* RUI: Acoustic Detection in Free-Swimming Toadfish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Allen Mensinger, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 08/31/2009
* USD 403,562.00

Neuroethology involves the study of brain mechanisms underlying behavior, but
requirements for restraint and anesthesia for recording stability often have
made it impossible to record activity of nerve cells while an animal is behaving
normally in its environment. New advances in microelectrode recording and
telemetry now are making such studies possible. The study here addresses the
auditory sensitivity of a hardy teleost fish, the toadfish, which has been well
studied for its sound production and hearing related to social and mating
behavior. However, the specific parameters of the calls that guide female
toadfish and mate selection under field conditions are poorly understood. The
sound environment in shallow water is complex, and how females discriminate
among sound sources is unclear. This project uses innovative novel technology
and telemetry, including a multichannel 'sieve' electrode through which the
auditory nerve has regenerated to allow long-term recording from single nerve
fibers, and an implantable rechargeable radiotelemetry device. These experiments
address physiological mechanisms underlying behavioral detection of underwater
sound, detection and modulation of self-generated sound, and sound localization
of relevant sources. There is some risk to this work given the technological and
interpretive issues, but the potential impact is high.&lt;br/&gt; Results will
be important beyond sensory neuroscience to neuroethology and animal behavior,
and potentially to a variety of applications in engineering and robotics. This
RUI activity will promote the career of a new PI who involves undergraduates,
including Native Americans and other under-served groups, in an upper Midwest
EPSCoR state in quality research, and who adds a unique opportunity for students
to work in the summer at the outstanding facilities and educational center of
the Marine Biological Laboratories in Woods Hole,
Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;