* 0316771
* Simulating Large-Scale Conformational Rearrangements and Reaction Kinetics Profiles in DNA Polymerase Beta to Interpret DNA Synthesis Fidelity Mechanisms
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2013
* Tamar Schlick, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 865,846.00

Studying large-scale, long-time biological processes such as enzyme catalysis,
protein folding, and macromolecular assembly is a challenging task in
computational biophysics. Since these processes occur over microseconds to
seconds, much beyond the scope of traditional dynamics simulations, new
techniques are needed to provide insights into detailed, local motions to
supplement experiments. In this project, funded jointly by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Computational Math Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the PI will
develop, compare, and apply two rigorous and complementary path-generation
methods, Elber's stochastic path approach (SPA) and Chandler's transition path
sampling (TPS), to study the conformational transitions between closed and open
states for human DNA polymerase beta (pol beta) complexed with DNA
template/primer. This millisecond process is thought to be key in maintaining
DNA synthesis fidelity. With these new tools, the PI will pursue several
fundamental biological questions related to DNA synthesis fidelity, including
the identification of slow conformational steps that steer the enzyme toward the
chemistry-competent state and determination of rate-limiting steps in the
enzyme's pathway. Atomic-level mechanistic insights, as well as associated free-
energy barriers, will be delineated and related to enzyme function. The
methodology developed is widely applicable to many other fundamental processes
in molecular biophysics, and the biological findings will provide atomic-level
interpretations to puzzling experimental variations in catalytic rates and error
frequencies. Thus, the biological findings will help interpret fundamental
fidelity mechanisms employed by DNA polymerases to replicate and repair DNA
faithfully from one generation to the next.

DNA polymerases maintain genomic integrity in the cell by replicating DNA and
repairing damages in the genome from generation to generation. The goal of this
project is to dissect the conformational aspects of the selectivity and fidelity
of DNA repair process. Fidelity refers to the ability of DNA polymerases to
discriminate among the various nucleotide building blocks as each base unit is
synthesized and choose the correct base (parent strand's partner) for insertion
and extension. The PI will employ modeling and simulation by novel path-
generation schemes that can capture large-scale long-time processes to study
these polymerase mechanisms to explain fidelity. Such information has important
ramifications to our understanding the fundamental DNA synthesis and repair
fidelity processes. This project represents a collaboration with theoreticians
and experimentalists with expertise in nucleic-acid structure, polymerase
mechanisms, and simulation methodology, and relies on solid groundwork in both
methodology for biomolecular modeling. The tools developed are also widely
applicable to many other important problems in biology. Involving undergraduate
and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, the project offers important
multidisciplinary educational and training opportunities to young scientists,
including women and minorities, in molecular modeling and computational biology,
fields of growing importance to science and society.