* 0316308
* Revision and Phylogeographic Analysis of Pacific Island Succineid Land Snails
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Marta deMaintenon, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 400,086.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert H. Cowie of the University of Hawaii to
work on the evolutionary biology of a major group of Pacific island land snails.
The project will undertake a systematic revision of about 80 species that occur
only on the islands of the Pacific and that are currently disappearing in the
wake of habitat destruction and the depredations of alien species. In addition,
the project will investigate the evolutionary and geographic origins of the
species and the routes via which, over evolutionary time, they have colonized
these myriad islands. The investigators will use both traditional analysis of
anatomical variation among the different species of snails as well as modern DNA
sequencing approaches and analytical methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are more known species of snails than of any other group of land animals except
insects. Understanding the biology of this important component of biodiversity
is therefore of basic significance in evolutionary biology, ecology, and
conservation. Nowhere, in relation to land area does land snail diversity reach
that in the tropical/subtropical Pacific. Although previous studies have
investigated the origins and diversification of Pacific island plants and
animals, primarily of Hawaii, almost no work on any group has addressed both
their geographic origins and their routes of colonization throughout the
Pacific. The project therefore has the potential to dramatically advance
understanding of Pacific biodiversity and create a model of its overall origins
and evolutionary diversification. In addition, graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in techniques ranging from DNA sequencing to modern
museum curatorial practices, thereby integrating research with a broad training
experience. The undergraduates will likely be from minority community groups.
Furthermore, by involving faculty and students from two University of Hawaii
campuses, the project will enhance the research base of both and foster valuable
collaboration between them.&lt;br/&gt;