* 0316353
* The Evolution of Cranial Neural Crest in Mammals:  The Genetic Origins of Heterochronic Change
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Kathleen Smith, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 07/31/2007
* USD 336,173.00

0316353&lt;br/&gt;Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marsupial and placental mammals are
distinguished by their reproductive and life history strategies. All marsupials
are highly altricial at birth, but must possess sufficient functional
independence to function at this altricial state. Previous work has shown that
when compared to other mammals, the cranial neural crest differentiates early
relative to the neural or mesodermal tissues in marsupials. This is of interest
as proper craniofacial patterning depends on a series of intricate relations
between these tissues. The current proposal will examine the relation between
genetic differentiation of the neural plate differentiation and neural crest
differentiation and migration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific aims: The specific
aims of the current proposal are: 1) To test hypotheses that subpopulations of
first arch crest, must be segregated in order to establish proper muscular-
skeletal patterning in the first arch. 2) To examine the possible role of the
isthmus as an organizing center in at the midbrain/hindbrain boundary, by
establishing the relation between FGF8 expression, and Hoxa2 expression in the
neural plate and migrating neural crest cells into aches 1 and 2. 3) To test the
hypothesis that genetic differentiation of R3 and R5 as exhibited by Krox 20
expression is a necessary component of the suppression of neural crest migration
from these zones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This study will
contribute to the understanding of a number of specific mechanisms of
craniofacial patterning in vertebrates and in particular the role of neural
crest in that patterning. Further, this project is part of a long-term study of
the ways that developmental changes produce evolutionary changes. Finally, the
study speaks to the constraints and possibilities of change in development, and
helps reveal the ways in which developmental mechanisms may
evolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The most important is educational.
The previous grant supported the work of 14 undergraduates. Two were supported
on REU supplements, including a woman of African American descent and a woman of
Latin-American descent. Thirteen of these students were women. Educating
undergraduates (and in particular under-represented groups) by providing
research experience has been a life long pattern, and support by NSF will allow
the Smith lab to continue to contribute to science education. In addition,
during the past 10- years of NSF funding one of the larger collections of
marsupial embryos in the world has accumulated. In the past two years this
collection has been used by individuals from Finland, Germany, Brazil and the
US. Further funding will support this collection. &lt;br/&gt;.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;