* 0316157
* Evolutionary Dynamics of Transposable Elements in Selfing Arabidopsis Thaliana and its Outcrossing Relative
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Brandon Gaut, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2007
* USD 535,970.00

Transposable elements (TEs) are mobile genetic elements that increase their copy
number throughout a genome. They often constitute a substantial proportion of a
genome; for example, the maize genome consists of ~ 50% to 70% TEs. Despite
their prevalence, TEs' genomic effects are relatively unknown. They can insert
into functional genes, interrupt gene function, and negatively affect an
organism. However, their prevalence also suggests that they may be beneficial on
occasion. The goal of this project is to use evolutionary approaches to
systematically evaluate the evolutionary effect of TE insertions throughout the
Arabidopsis thaliana genome. To do this, we will identify TEs in the A. thaliana
genome sequence and then assess whether the TEs are found in many different
individuals. By assessing their prevalence among individuals, we will be able to
infer evolutionary histories, thereby providing important insights into the
effect of TEs on genome function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
impact science it two ways. First, it will be the first comprehensive, genome-
wide evaluation of the evolutionary effect of TE insertion. In the process, it
will contribute much needed information about the evolutionary dynamics of
different TE types and genome biology. Second, the proposal has been designed
around undergraduate education. Undergraduates will conduct much of the
laboratory component, and they will receive training in lab research,
bioinformatics, scientific writing and scientific presentation through a weekly
course taught by the PI. The students will also be expected to contribute to
ongoing outreach efforts at UC Irvine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;