* 0316442
* RUI: Experimental Analysis of Territoriality in the Common Loon
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Charles Walcott, Chapman University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2007
* USD 185,442.00

PIs: Walter H. Piper and Charles Walcott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EXPERIMENTAL
ANALYSIS OF TERRITORIALITY IN THE COMMON LOON&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many animals
require a territory to breed. Among such animals, a crucial step is acquiring a
territory for the first time. Surprisingly, scientists studying animal behavior
are only beginning to learn about the strategies young animals use to obtain
territories. One difficulty faced by scientists in this area is that young
animals usually move great distances from their birthplace to breeding site.
&lt;br/&gt;Common loons (Gavia immer) offer a unique opportunity to learn about
territory acquisition. Ten years of field research on a marked population of
these large aquatic diving birds has shown that young loons search for breeding
territories very close to their natal lakes. Under the current study,
investigators are experimentally testing hypotheses in two key areas: 1)
strategies of young nonbreeders for learning about and taking over territories
and 2) defense of territories against nonbreeders by established loons through
acoustic signalling. A unique dimension of the project is a growing pool of
nonbreeders marked as chicks in the study area that are being tracked as they
acquire territories. &lt;br/&gt;The project has a number of impacts beyond its
scientific merit. It is a partnership between a small college and a major
research university that will support training of a doctoral student and 10-15
undergraduate interns, many of whom will continue into graduate programs. Data
on juvenile survivorship and territory establishment, which are only available
through this project, will be shared with the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources, which requires them for a model of loon population stability.
Finally, many findings of the research team will be featured on the website of
Journey North, an online educational service that reaches about 400,000
schoolchildren in the U. S. and Canada. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;