* 0316436
* The Emergence of Social Movements: A Pilot Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Kathleen Blee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2004
* USD 57,280.00

SES-0316436&lt;br/&gt;Kathleen Blee&lt;br/&gt;University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project examines the formation of groups
that propose collective action for social change or emerging social movement
groups. Using the framework of time-geography and its applications in the study
of place, this study analyzes the processes that underlie the emergence of
social movements in the U.S. today. In most studies, a social movement group is
selected for study when it is fairly unified, at the stage when it is most
visible to researchers. At this point, a group generally has some coherence: a
shared range of ideas or ideologies, interpersonal routines, and a definable
organization. In contrast to the standard focus on established groups, this
project examines ESMGs. Among ESMGs, the question of how the group will be made
is unresolved. The principles that the group stands for, its outward
presentation of beliefs, the degree to which members are permitted to challenge
leaders, who counts or is sought as members, and many other issues are in flux.
This project collects comparative data on the universe of ESMGs over a one-year
period in Pittsburgh and intensive, contemporaneous, longitudinal data for
another year on a purposive sample of these ESMGs. Data are gathered through
ethnographic observation of group events and meetings, together with structured
and unstructured interviews with movement participants, potential participants,
and defecting members. The goals of this project are: (1) to identify the social
processes within emerging social movement groups; and (2) to develop a set of
testable propositions for future comparative research on social movement
formation. Specifically, (1) it explores the mechanisms that underlie
civic&lt;br/&gt;participation and civic disengagement by analyzing what happens
in groups that attempt to organize to challenge existing authorities; (2) it is
responsive to recent calls for longitudinal data on social movements, for
multiple case studies within a single political field, for the inclusion of
conservative and right wing social movements along with the traditional focus on
progressive social movements, and for attention to the internal dynamics and
tensions of social movement organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this study are: (1) a contribution to methodology and
scientific&lt;br/&gt;knowledge about the internal processes of emergent social
movements; (2) an enhancement of student training and research through the
incorporation of undergraduate interns, the development of a graduate seminar
and an undergraduate course using data collected in this study, and the
distribution of data on local emergent social movements for student papers,
theses, and dissertations; and (3) the dissemination of findings to both
academic and non-academic audiences interested in understanding how to stimulate
robust and diverse involvement in movements for social change.&lt;br/&gt;