* 0316005
* Polyamines Metabolism in Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Chung-Dar Lu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 130,000.00

Polyamines (putrescine, spermidine, and spermine) are the major organic
polycations found in all living organisms with an essential but poorly
understood biological role in cell growth. The importance of polyamines has been
implicated in the biosynthesis of macromolecules including RNA, DNA, and
protein. Polyamine metabolism is being extensively studied as a target for drug
design in treatment of cancers and parasite infection in humans. Development of
new antibiotics along this line has lagged behind, mostly due to the lack of
information on polyamine catabolism in bacteria. It is the goal of this project
to elucidate polyamine catabolism and regulation in P. aeruginosa, which can
grow very efficiently on polyamine as the sole source of carbon and nitrogen. A
complete genomic sequence annotation and the availability of DNA microarrays of
this organism make P. aeruginosa an excellent model organism for the exploration
of polyamine catabolism. Preliminary studies with DNA microarrays and
comparative genomics approaches have identified more than eighty genes that are
differentially induced by exogenous agmatine and/or putrescine. The putative
biochemical functions of these genes revealed possible routes of polyamine
catabolism and regulation as well as the linkage of polyamine metabolism to
other metabolic activities, including organic sulfur uptake/utilization and
induction of heat shock response. The specific aims of this project are: (i) to
continue the characterization of these genes related to the uptake, catabolism
and regulation of putrescine; and (ii) to identify additional genes involved in
the catabolism of spermidine and spermine and its regulation. These will be
accomplished through the use of transcriptional profiling analyses, computer-
aided data mining, genetics manipulation, and enzyme purification and
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research are expected
to provide novel and significant information on polyamines metabolism which
could be beneficial to several fields of biology, including pharmaceutical
science, bacterial pathogenesis, and agriculture. Students participating in this
project will receive cross-disciplinary training in genetics, biochemistry, and
bioinformatics, and thus developing an integrative view of bacterial physiology.
Further, the concepts of DNA microarrays and data mining for transcriptional
profiling analyses will be classroom assignments to help prepare the new
generation of students in scientific work and research in the post-genomics era.
&lt;br/&gt;