* 0316192
* Formulation and Analysis of Deterministic Models of Predation Among Acarine Populations
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Gardner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2006
* USD 126,000.00

Gardner The investigator develops and analyzes models of persistent behavior of
locally self-annihilating populations of predatory and herbivorous mites. The
project is stimulated by Huffaker's classic experiment, which provided the first
demonstration of the mediating role of spatial processes in certain ecological
interactions. Huffaker noted that synchronies in the phases of population cycles
of localized aggregates within host plants of herbivorous mites and of the mites
that preyed upon them occasionally spread over an entire area, but that the
synchrony can be broken by demographic and environmental stochasticity. He
conjectured that the complementary regularizing mechanisms that generate
synchrony, and the complementary stochastic mechanisms that generate asynchrony,
together generate the complex waves and patterns seen in these predator-prey
interactions in nature. Existing stochastic patch models have been formulated
that successfully simulate complex, and evidently chaotic, spatio-temporal
patterns that have typically accompanied persistent dynamics. Accordingly, such
models have difficulty in providing reliable predictions of behavior due to the
large variance seen in replicate data sets. This substantially limits their
practical application to the biological control of crop pests. In previous work,
the investigator formulated a family of deterministic models, including an
idealized paradigm defining a class of reaction-diffusion systems. He studies
two general issues relating to the analysis and practical applications of the
reaction-diffusion system and related models. First, he investigates the
presence of several distinct families of stable waves and spatial patterns of
these equations, their instabilities and bifurcations, and the presence of
exotic wave-like patterns. By combined analytical and approximate methods, he
describes theoretical mechanisms by which such unstable waves can form the
organizing center of spatio-temporal chaos, while in other regimes, complex but
non-chaotic, stable spatio-temporal patterns appear spontaneously. A second
topic concerns the derivation of the model, which is based on experiment. This
addresses the manner in which the reaction-diffusion model simulates
stochasticity through postulated low-density thresholds in the growth rates. The
investigator studies hybrid numerical procedures addressing the crucial issue of
parameter estimation, which can be problematic both for stochastic patch models
and for the reaction-diffusion model, but at opposite spatio-temporal scales.
For example, the low-density thresholds involve the micro-local dynamics of a
small number of individuals, whereas large-scale emigration over large regions
is difficult to measure in a laboratory. However, simple stable waves may
suggest one instance in which this may be possible. The investigator examines
this in numerical simulations with patch models, which may form the basis for
new and simpler experimental designs that can detect such behavior. Together,
these two approaches present a unified picture of how "dynamic stochasticity"
driven by the presence of certain unstable waves and spatio-temporal patterns is
theoretically linked to parameters of population change governing behavior at
the smallest micro-local scales, and thus the generation of asynchrony through
demographic and environmental stochasticity. Plant-eating mites, and the mites
that eat them in turn, often show cycles of growth and decline in numbers that
are closely related. Sometimes the populations decline rapidly to near-
extinction levels. But in a classic experiment Huffaker and colleagues showed
that these strongly coupled cycles can be moderated by small changes in
demographic or geographic factors, leading to a long-term survival of both
species that shows itself in patterns, in time and space, of the numbers of
predator and prey mites. Of course, when the prey mite is eating a valuable
crop, one wants both mite populations to go extinct. So issues of how mite
populations vary together are of considerable practical importance in the
biological control of crop pests. The economic impact of phytophageous species
is considerable, and although the use of predatory mites as a biological control
is widespread in certain local agricultures, many agricultural enterprises rely
on chemical pest controls. Chemical controls provide a short-term solution, but
have many damaging long-term effects. However, the risks and uncertainties of
biological pest control are difficult to quantify due to their complex and
unpredictable patterns of behavior. The investigator's numerical simulations
indicate the presence of many different kinds of chaos, some of which achieve
better levels of suppression of both herbivore populations and crop damage. The
project explores new theoretical and computational tools that may find practical
application in the biological control of crop pests and, in other contexts, in
inoculative control of certain exotic species.