* 0316877
* Transcription Factors Regulating Compound Leaf Development in Tomato
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Neelima Sinha, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 07/31/2006
* USD 395,000.00

0316877 Sinha

Generally, the upper (adaxial) part of the leaf is anatomically and
physiologically different from the bottom (abaxial) part of the leaf in higher
plants. This asymmetry (ab-adaxiality) is established early in the leaf
primordium and the shoot apical meristem (SAM) seems to provide positional cues
for the initial establishment of this asymmetry. The KNOX1 genes play an
important role in maintaining indeterminacy in the SAM and in subsequent shoot
development while several genes, like PHAN, PHAV, PHAB, REV, in several species
are thought to specify the adaxial and abaxial domains of lateral organs. PHAN
is reported to be a negative regulator of KNOX genes and the expression domains
of PHAN and KNOX genes do not overlap in apices making simple leaves. However,
in tomato expression of the KNOX1 genes TKN1 and LeT6 and PHAN is detected in
the center of the SAM. This proposal aims to understand the molecular basis of
compound leaf development in the model organism Lycopersicon esculentum (tomato)
using both forward and reverse genetics and then to see if the developmental
principles discovered in tomato are applicable to various types of compound
leaves of independent evolutionary origins. Preliminary data suggests that the
KNOX1 genes are an important part of the developmental cascade leading to
compound leaves in a variety of species. Further, the domain and amount of PHAN
expression regulates leaflet placement in diverse compound leaves. The proposed
research will utilize a combination of methods involving analysis of
developmental mutations in KNOX1 interacting genes and promoters comparisons for
orthologous KNOX1 genes and PHAN from simple and compound leafed species. In
addition transgenic approaches will exchange promoter:reporter gene fusions
between simple and compound leafed species, and downregulate and upregulate
expression of the KNOX1 interacting proteins and proteins that regulate ab-
adaxiality in leaves will used to thoroughly dissect compound leaf development
in tomato. The long-term goal of this research is to eventually apply the
principles learnt in tomato to understanding leaf development in an evolutionary
context.

Broader impacts of this activity included the training of post-doctoral fellows,
graduate students and undergraduates in research methodology. Several
undergraduate students have been trained in research and have co-authored papers
in the past funding period and many of the undergraduate students come from
minority groups. These activities will be maintained in the current funding
period.

