* 0316614
* PBI: Solanum: A Worldwide Treatment
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2013
* David Spooner, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2013
* USD 4,380,008.00

Prof. Lynn Bohs of the University of Utah and her colleagues Michael Nee at the
New York Botanical Garden, David Spooner of the University of Wisconsin-USDA
Vegetable Crops Research Unit, and Sandra Knapp of the Natural History Museum in
London and several additional colleagues are creating a comprehensive taxonomic
inventory of the large, economically important plant genus Solanum, with an
estimated 1500 species worldwide. The genus includes such major crops as
tomatoes, potatoes, and eggplants and numerous lesser-known crops of tropical
and subtropical regions, as well as sources of pharmaceutical agents and also
poisonous weeds (like deadly nightshade). Solanum is the focus of several large-
scale genomics initiatives and also serves as a model system for the
investigation of plant breeding systems, pollination biology, and fruit
dispersal. Yet, no comprehensive modern treatment exists for the taxonomy and
phylogeny of the genus on a worldwide basis. This project will produce a
species-level treatment for the entire group, using existing herbarium and
germplasm resources augmented by targeted field collecting with colleagues in
South America, Africa, and Madagascar, and organized by a framework of
phylogenetic relationships among the species, sections, and subgenera
constructed from DNA sequence data integrated with selected morphological
characters. The primary goal is creation of a Web-accessible relational database
mirrored in the U.S. and the U.K. that supports five modules: new and archival
information on species names and supporting vouchers and literature; interactive
identification keys with pictorial glossary of plant parts; digital images of
plants and habitats and associated pollinators and herbivores where known;
specimen database to herbarium vouchers and geo-referenced collections; and
molecular sequence and phylogenetic information, linked to GenBank and to
resources in the plant genomics field. &lt;br/&gt; Because of the worldwide
economic importance of Solanum in agriculture, information obtained from this
project will benefit society as a whole by enhancing breeding programs for the
improvement of cultivated species, adding systematic and phylogenetic value to
genomics initiatives, and contributing to the conservation of wild Solanum
species including those that may be useful as germplasm resources. Students at
all levels, from undergraduate to postdoctoral, will participate in field,
herbarium, and laboratory research, along with colleagues on five continents.
Outreach to the public will be achieved through presentations by the
investigators and colleagues in popular media and through interaction with the
Darwin Centre Live program in England, in which scientific presentations are
live-streamed to the Internet and archived and available on-line. Co-funding for
this ambitious, challenging taxonomic enterprise comes from the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering and from the Plant Genome Research
Program. &lt;br/&gt;