* 0316664
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Preparation of Precious Metals Nanoparticles within Mesoporous Titania from Industrial Wastes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* S. Ismat Shah, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 29,000.00

0316664&lt;br/&gt;Shah &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports a
joint research project between Dr. S. Ismat Shah, Department of Physics,
University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware and Dr. Mohamed Barakat, Central
Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Egypt.
Precious metal doped and decorated titania nanoparticles have the potential to
be efficient photocatalysts for the degradation of harmful chemicals in water
and air. The economic feasibility of the synthesis process is unknown. Also
unknown is the difference in the photocatalytic behaviors of doped titania and
the decorated titania, where the decorated titania refers to nano-TiO2 surfaces
on which nanostructured noble metals have been deposited. In this project the
PIs will test a method to synergize two processes to make use of precious metal
doped/decorated titania as a feasible material for the degradation of
environmental pollutants. The initial process involves the extraction of the
precious metals from industrial wastes followed by the use of the extracted
metals in doping and decorating nano-titania and a comparative evaluation of the
performance of the two types of catalyst for the destruction of industrial
pollutants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This collaborative research will
involve a U.S. post-doctorate, a graduate student, and an undergraduate student.
In addition to the advanced material physics concepts that these young
scientists and students will be exposed to during the course of the project, the
participation in this research will provide them an opportunity to interact with
their Egyptian counterparts during the mutual visits of the scientists and the
students. Funds for one student to visit CMRDI are included in the budget. In
addition this project will provide several prospects for societal benefits. The
recycling of the industrial waste and the remediation of air and water are the
two expected immediate and direct outcomes of the proposed scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;