* 0316057
* SGER:    Fluorescent Detection of the Common Terrorist Explosive Triacetone Triperoxide (TATP)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Nathaniel Finney, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,860.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Nathaniel Finney of the University of California- San Diego will
perform research that will provide a simple, sensitive method for detecting
triacetone triperoxide (TATP), an explosive that is the overwhelming favorite of
terrorists. TATP is very easy to make, but difficult to detect. Beyond its
urgency, the proposal also represents a new approach to detecting explosives in
which the oxidizing nature of the explosive is exploited for detection. It is
possible that other important explosives such as metal perchlorates could be
detected in the same manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program supports Professor Nathaniel Finney whose research effort will
help detect the single most commonly used explosive used by terrorists. The
proposal outlines a novel approach to rapid detection of triacetone peroxide,
which is about 80% as powerful as trinitro toluene (TNT) and is unique in many
respects. It has extraordinary availability, widespread use, and is difficult to
detect. Current methods of detection are limited to sensitive but cumbersome,
expensive and slow direct analysis, or less sensitive but cheaper direct
analysis. The simplicity of Professor Finney's method will make it an excellent
preliminary "threat/no threat" screen for TATP on people or in packages and
luggage.&lt;br/&gt;