* 0316414
* Nonbinding Suggestions and Dispute Rates:  Uncertainty, Focal Points, and their Effects on Bargaining Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* David Dickinson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 43,978.00

Mediation and fact-finding are examples of non-binding dispute resolution since
these procedures do not implement binding settlements or guarantee resolution of
the conflict. The effectiveness of mediators, for example, lies in their ability
to facilitate voluntary settlements for those individuals in dispute. While
mediators use many different tools, this research will specifically examine the
use of non-binding suggestions as a way of improving dispute resolution.
Existing research suggests two conflicting effects of suggestions. Suggestions
may facilitate agreement by providing an anchor or "focal point" around which
the individuals can voluntarily settle their dispute. On the other hand,
bargaining research suggests that binding dispute resolution procedures (e.g.,
trials or arbitration hearings) will best promote voluntary settlement from risk
averse individuals only if trial or arbitration outcomes are uncertain. Since
mediation typically occurs prior to arbitration or trials, non-binding
suggestions may provide information as to what a binding settlement outcome
might be. Ironically, suggestions would then decrease the uncertainty about
binding settlement outcomes and, according to theory, reduce voluntary
settlement rates. The objective of this research is to examine which of these
two effects (focal point or uncertainty) dominates, by systematically
introducing suggestions into a controlled laboratory experiment. Financially
motivated subjects will engage in a bargaining experiment in which computer
generated suggestions may or may not occur, and these suggestions may be more or
less influential in altering computerized binding settlement outcomes. By
manipulating both the existence and the influence of the suggestion, it is
possible to not only determine whether suggestions increase voluntary
settlements, but it will also be possible to measure the separate focal point
versus uncertainty effects. These effects will be precisely measured using
appropriate statistical analysis, and both the design and the analysis of the
data will help achieve the main objective of this research-to gain insights into
designing and improving existing dispute resolution procedures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alternative dispute resolution, such as arbitration and
mediation, is growing in popularity largely due to its promise of resolving
disputes more effectively and at less cost than litigation. Non-binding dispute
resolution is especially popular since individuals generally prefer self-
determined outcomes to mandated outcomes. The National Association for Community
Mediation reported an increase of over 200% in the number of community mediation
programs in the U.S. in the 1990's (from 150 to 450). Though mediation abounds,
it remains to be seen whether its use actually increases voluntary settlements
and, if so, by what mechanisms does it work. This study focuses on the effects
of suggestions due to the prevalence of suggestions in resolving disputes in a
variety of settings. It may seem that, due to the popularity and success of
mediation, suggestions are already known to be effective at facilitating
settlements. However, existing data on naturally occurring disputes cannot
easily isolate the effects of suggestions from other tools that mediators might
use (e.g., trust building). Laboratory methods can overcome this limitation.
This project promises to help improve dispute resolution in a variety of
settings, from labor-management relations to international trade disputes, to
community mediation programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;