* 0317304
* Space Weather: Real-time Ionospheric Specification Using the Super Dual Auroral Radar Network
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2003,04/30/2006
* John Hughes, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 04/30/2006
* USD 239,098.00

This proposal will improve techniques used by the fifteen SuperDARN radars to
determine in real-time the critical frequency and layer height at the
ionospheric reflection point. These observations will be made over large
geographical regions that are currently sparsely sampled by ionosondes. This
effort represents a new use of the SuperDARN system in "sounding mode." This new
mode of operation has been developed and implemented by the PI at the Kodiak
radar. The sounding mode exploits the pause time (~10 sec) during the normal
azimuth scan mode, making use of ground reflections to determine the skip
distance of rays at various frequencies. By determining how the skip distance
varies with frequency, it will be possible to find the maximum useable frequency
as a function of ground range. The PI's main goals involve six distinct research
activities: (1) modification of current SuperDARN software to include angle-of-
arrival (AOA) information in the real-time data stream; (2) use of sounding mode
data to determine real-time ionospheric critical frequencies and layer heights;
(3) use of critical frequency determinations to observe, track, and study the
dynamics of large-scale high latitude ionospheric density irregularities; (4)
distribution of SuperDARN real-time foF2 values and virtual heights to the space
weather community via the internet; (5) continued development of the SuperDARN
sounding mode technique; and (6) use of sounding mode data to optimize the
operating frequency at each SuperDARN radar.