* 0317985
* Controlling and Transferring Status Effects of Gender
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Lisa Walker, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2006
* USD 150,474.00

SES-0317985 Lisa Slattery Rashotte University of North Carolina-Charlotte

This study consists of a two-year program of laboratory experiments that
investigates ways to control how gender status affects interaction in mixed
groups of women and men. A considerable body of research has demonstrated that
status characteristics such as gender confer advantages and disadvantages in
face-to-face groups, including differences in participation rates, influence
over individuals and over group decisions, and perceptions of skill at group
tasks. This study extends prior analytic work to develop and assess
theoretically guided interventions for the case of gender. The theory guiding
these experiments suggests three different kinds of interventions: (1)
overcoming status effects by introducing additional characteristics, (2)
reversing status effects by controlling task definitions, and (3) altering
performance expectations for a particular partner and allowing those to
generalize to other individuals possessing the same characteristic (here, same
gender). The experiments create each kind of intervention. Next, the theory
predicts that such treated expectations will transfer across actors and
situations to new group settings and new tasks. Other experimental conditions
permit assessing the theory's predictions regarding transfer effects. The
research seeks to (1) assess theoretical derivations regarding status organizing
processes, including the aggregation mechanism and a recent assumption regarding
transfer effects that has not been fully assessed empirically; (2) develop new
laboratory techniques to create complex status situations re; (3) develop
theory-driven intervention strategies to counter undesirable cases of status
advantages and disadvantages; and (4) provide a foundation for further research
on other status characteristics such as age or skin color. Broader Impacts The
study will provide research training in laboratory and interviewing techniques,
and in data analysis and report writing for both undergraduate and graduate
research assistants, and thus contributing to the infrastructure in the
Sociology Department. The study design and results of the experiments will be
integrated in the PI's advanced undergraduate and graduate theory courses that I
teach. Also, results can potentially contribute the conceptualization of a
coherent theoretical perspective for analyzing and intervening natural
situations of undesirable gender-linked inequalities.