* 0317811
* Estimating the World Distribution of Income
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Xavier Sala-i-Martin, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 10/31/2007
* USD 73,500.00

One of goals of economic development is to reduce poverty and income inequality.
To assess whether progress, we need good empirical estimates of the number of
poor. Unfortunately, all the estimates we have of world poverty come from a
single institution: the World Bank. The problem is that the World Bank
methodology is obscure and often controversial. Such obscure procedures and data
make it very hard for independent researchers to check the accuracy of the World
Bank numbers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes a new, simple and
clear methodology to estimate the number of poor citizens in the world by
estimating the world distributions of income and consumption and calculating the
fraction of the distribution that lies below a certain poverty line such as the
$1/day line. We propose to build on the PI's previous work by combining micro
survey data and aggregate GDP per capita data to estimate the income shares for
five quintiles for every country for every year between 1970 and 2000. The
individual distributions are then integrated to estimate the world distribution
of individual income using kernel density functions. The PI has estimated world
income distributions from 1970 to 1998. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will: expand the data to 2000, include countries from Eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union, assign regional income shares to the countries for
which there are no surveys, extend the income analysis to consumption, and check
the robustness of the approach by extending the non-parametric kernel approach
to parametric estimates of individual country distributions using different
distributions before integrating them to estimate the world distribution. The
results of the income distribution data will be used to estimate yearly poverty
rates for each country, each region, and the world as a whole. The poverty rates
can be used, for example, to see what policies and/or institutions favor the
increase in income of the poorest citizens of the economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have broader impact in three
areas---policy, research, and general public. The major outcome of this research
will be a new methodology to estimate the world distribution of individual
income and consumption. The data will make easier to conduct research into the
determinants of poverty. The data will also make it possible to craft as well as
evaluate poverty-reducing programs. This could have enormous consequences for
human welfare all over the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;