* 0317076
* Adaptive Mutations: A Consequence of Prokaryotic Differentiation
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Ronald Yasbin, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 10/31/2007
* USD 416,799.00

An award is being made to Dr. Ronald Yasbin of the University of Nevada Las
Vegas to study the interaction between processes of cellular differentiation and
genetic mechanisms for enhancing mutation rates in the Gram Positive bacterium,
Bacillus subtilis. Neo-Darwinian theory has counted heavily upon the ability of
the random mutagenesis processes to provide a considerable amount of the genetic
diversity necessary for the evolutionary process to continue. However, it is
clear from both mathematical modeling as well as just anecdotal observations
that completely random mutagenesis could not have provided all of the necessary
events to have gotten us from some very simple form of life to the complexity of
the human eye in the amount of time that has been available. The problem
therefore exists as to explain the necessary genetic diversity within the
legitimate confines of Mendelian genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last
few decades numerous examples of diversity generating mechanisms, that are
important parts of the natural genetic process, have been observed. DNA has been
shown to be mobile and cells have been demonstrated to be capable of enhancing
their mutation rates in response to environmental challenges. As cells replicate
or duplicate their genetic material, in the form of double stranded DNA, is has
been demonstrated that the rate at which mutations occur in the new genetic
material is not constant from one strand to other. Furthermore, it has been
suggested that the processes that exist to translate the genetic information
contained in the DNA into protein can also significantly effect mutation rates
and the location of generated mutations. This project explores additional
genetic mechanisms for enhancing mutation rates and for potentially influencing
in where the mutations will occur. Accordingly, three well characterized and
fully sequenced genes of the B. subtilis are being used to investigate the
mechanisms that generate mutations during periods of environmental stress. The
goal is to determine whether or not these mutations are being generated in a
subpopulation of the bacteria that have been differentiated in order to generate
essential genetic diversity within the culture. The analysis of the mutation
frequencies and the resultant colonies are being subjected to mathematical
modeling. Accordingly, this project represents an active collaboration between
molecular biologists/geneticists and statisticians and contains a very important
educational component.