* 0317018
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Fast Analog Ferroelectric Liquid Crystal Electro-Optics for Display Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Noel Clark, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 20,000.00

0317018&lt;br/&gt;Clark&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research project between Dr. Noel Clark, Department of
Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado and Dr. Mohamed Ewiss,
Department of Physics, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. The investigators will
pursue the current successful collaboration between the liquid crystal
researchers in these two universities to attack a challenging and interesting
problem in liquid crystal technology, namely obtaining fast (microsecond speed)
liquid crystal electro-optical light valves that are also analog, i.e. which
respond in a continuous way to change in applied voltage. Such devices would
open the way for development of advanced spatial light modulators for optical
data processing applications, as well as displays with unprecedented
performance. The proposed research will explore the dependence of dynamic
behavior on cell characteristics for a variety of prototype analog device types.
If such materials are developed, better understood, and integrated into spatial
light modulator prototypes, they may have important applications in optical
computing, optical signal processing, and small displays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The ferroelectric liquid crystal materials showing
V-shaped switching have a real possibility of becoming the next generation of
extremely fast and parallel light valves. The Ferroelectric Liquid Crystal
Materials Research Center (FLCMRC) at U. of Colorado is a world leader in
advancing this particular frontier. The University of Cairo group is fast
becoming a significant player due to its collaboration with the U.S. PI, and
brings a somewhat different expertise into the mix. That group found the first
explanation of thresholdless switching observed in ferroelectric liquid crystals
with high polarization.&lt;br/&gt;Educating students in new technological
developments will indirectly stimulate the growth of the interest in high-tech
devices all around the world. One U.S. graduate student will participate in the
project. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;