* 0317646
* Novel Approaches to Nanostructured Polymer Blends With Enhanced Benefits
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2010
* Joshua Otaigbe, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2010
* USD 414,713.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the
feasibility of reactive extrusion based on the fast anionic ring-opening
polymerization (ROP) of cyclic amides and aromatic carbonates, in a matrix of a
commercial polymer such as polypropylene (PP), to afford a nanostructured PP-
polyamide 6 or PP-polycarbonate blend with unique and interesting properties.
The word "nanostructured" is used to imply that the scale of dispersion of one
polymer phase in the other is below 100 nanometers. This work will demonstrate
proof of concept of the basic science and technology for generating
nanostructured PP-polyamide 6 and PP-polycarbonate blends in reactive extrusion
using ring-opening polymerization of cyclic monomers. The benefits of using ROP
of the oligomeric cyclic monomers include the fact that no byproducts are formed
in the polymerization step, the low viscosity of the oligomeric mixtures, the
fast reaction kinetics, the very high monomer conversion, and the elimination
from the polymer processing equipment of highly corrosive chemicals such as
phosgene. The targeted polymer blends would be useful because many of the
intrinsic properties of the PP, polyamide 6, and polycarbonate are
complementary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By testing whether (or not) these polymer
blends can be described by the limited blend viscoelasticity, polymer emulsion,
and reaction kinetics models in the literature, this work will attempt to make
progress in developing useful empirical quantitative relations that are based on
the experimental results. The differences between these blend systems and
traditional polymer blends and the unknown mechanisms of the phase structure
evolution require that any analysis of the former system be based on actual
experimental results. These will be obtained in this study so as to generate
accurate and useful information regarding the composition/processing/property
behavior of these materials. If successful, the resulting relations may reduce
or eliminate costly "trial and error" practice that is common in the literature
and industry. This research will provide a quantitative and qualitative
experimental basis for future model theory development of new nanostrutured
polymer blend materials and the prediction of their properties. If successful,
the work will also permit a better understanding of the reactive extrusion of
nanostrutured polymer blend materials (and other similar nanocomposites) under a
range of conditions that the materials will encounter during processing and
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work could
impact processing of new materials and may open up new vistas of polymer
reaction engineering research. The potential versatility of the nanostructured
polymer blends will make them useful in a variety of high performance
applications such as optics, drug delivery, tissue engineering and permeable
membranes for separation phenomena. The University of Southern Mississippi has a
sizable minority student population who could benefit from training in the broad
area of polymer reaction engineering.&lt;br/&gt;