* 0317182
* Adaptive Color Variation in the Ensatina "Ring Species" Complex: Implications for Ecological Speciation and Mimicry
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Barry Sinervo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2006
* USD 199,953.00

The salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii is a model ring species because it forms a
ring of populations around the arid Central Valley of California, with
reproductively isolated forms overlapping in southern CA but hybridization where
other populations contact. Color patterns of these salamanders are thought to
have evolved in response to two conflicting ecological pressures: selection
favoring bright warning coloration that mimics highly toxic California Newts
versus selection favoring cryptic patterns that blend into forest litter
(camouflage). Where these forms come into contact there should be strong
selection that favors reproductive isolation and that restricts mating within
each subspecies. Color patterns of salamanders at contact zones will be studied
with spectroradiographic measurements that record light wavelengths to determine
how cryptic forms are camouflaged on the background and how warning-colored
forms stand out against background patterns. Color patterns will be manipulated
on models to assess predator attacks on pure and hybrid forms.

This study addresses basic theories of crypsis and animal perception. It will
provide data on how ecological interactions shape evolution of cryptic and
warning-colored forms in the evolutionary long term. Such information is
important in a general explanation of the evolution of diversity in natural
populations.