* 0317553
* Conference Support: Language Variety in the South: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Catherine Davies, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2005
* USD 34,950.00

The National Science Foundation will support the third symposium on Language
Variety in the South: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives (LAVIS III), to
be held at the University of Alabama, April 15-17, 2004. LAVIS III will provide
a forum for scholarly exchange on a number of issues related to language in the
South. Historical emphases will include the role of indigenous languages and
trade jargons, links to the Caribbean, and the nature of the European linguistic
mix. Contemporary emphases will include the complex relationship between black
and white speech, current language contact, perceptual dialectology, discourse
analysis and pragmatics, language ideology, and the representation of Southern
speech in the media. The symposium will also showcase the latest applications in
quantitative analyses of linguistic data, as well as other new
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LAVIS III will stimulate the development of new
knowledge of Southern dialectology. Published and on-line resources associated
with the symposium will make the latest research widely accessible. The
symposium will also promote teaching and learning through special sessions
planned in collaboration with the University of Alabama's College of Education
and local school districts to provide professional development for K-12
teachers. The symposium will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups (especially Native Americans, African-Americans, and Latinos) through
sessions oriented to their concerns and through outreach to attract them to the
conference. The larger society will benefit in two direct ways. One is from the
transmission of sociolinguistic knowledge that will inform the practice of K-12
teachers in the public schools, facilitating a more positive engagement with
linguistically diverse students. Another, more immediate, impact will be from
public lectures oriented to a general audience to enhance public understanding
of language issues through topics of general interest (e.g., Choctaw code
talkers). &lt;br/&gt;