* 0317589
* Collaborative Research: Topics in Small Area Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Malay Ghosh, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2007
* USD 203,643.00

The term "small area" or "local area" usually refers to a small geographic area,
such as a county, municipality, a census tract, or a school district. It can
also refer to socio-demographic domains, such as a specific age-sex-race group
within a large geographic area. Small area estimation has become a topic of
growing importance in recent years because of the need for reliable small area
estimates by many agencies, both public and private, for making useful policy
decisions. This project is aimed at addressing several important aspects of
small area estimation. One basic question to address in this context is how to
use the survey weights (usually inverses of the selection probabilities of the
different units in the population) in conjunction with models to arrive at
meaningful small area estimators. While many exclusive model-based small area
estimators have been proposed, design-assisted model-based small area estimators
have been very sparse. The goal is to obtain such estimators for a very general
class of distributions. The method will be used to find the proportion and the
number of poor school-age children in different counties of the United States.
This is a very important problem for many Federal agencies, especially for the
Bureau of the Census. Another aspect of this research is to obtain small area
estimates by combining results from two or more surveys designed to estimate the
same quantity of interest. A typical application of this procedure consists of
combining data based on the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the newly
introduced American Community Survey (ACS) of the Bureau of the Census. The ACS
is intended to replace the decennial census long form in the year 2010. Finally,
Bayesian methods will be developed for detecting outliers in finite population
sampling, especially in the context of small area estimation.

The broader impact of this research is that it aims to achieve an interface
between survey methodology and survey practice. As an immediate example, the
research findings have direct bearing on small area income and poverty
estimation as well as small area estimation by combining estimates from two
surveys such as the CPS and the ACS. The findings also should be of interest to
staff at the National Center for Health Statistics who are interested in
estimating the proportion of uninsured people of different ethnicities,
proportion of people under Medicaid, and so on.