* 0317700
* Cladistic Asset Pricing
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Bart Taub, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2007
* USD 270,059.00

Understanding how asset prices respond to strategic interplay among
differentially informed agents is an important requirement for efficient
regulation security markets, yet this phenomenon is not well understood and
modeled. The proposed research will explore the behavior of stock markets when
there are speculative traders who possess information that is not available to
the market as a whole. In such an environment, one wishes to determine how the
strategic interplay between differentially-informed agents affects market
prices, volume and profits over time.

In many of the contexts in which speculative traders have private information
about a firm's value, they will continue to have access to new, long-lived
information over the time on a recurring basis. For example, corporate insiders
will not only have information about current and past earnings; they likely will
be privy to new information about earnings. Investors, too, often focus on a
small number of stocks or narrow sectors on which to do research. Their
accumulated expertise leaves them better situated to evaluate the information
both immediately after they learn it, and when it arrives in the future.

The profession has not developed a methodology that can analyze equilibrium
outcomes when multiple agents have recurring access to private information; much
less characterize outcomes in such environments. The proposed research will
develop new methods that can tractably encompass both current and past
information. The main innovation in the model is to assume that the information
received by each individual as an AR(1) process, thus allowing for an
equilibrium solution. This results then makes it possible to answer several
questions, such as: How do informed agents use current and past signals, and the
information in current and past prices, to determine how much to trade at each
date? What are the consequences for equilibrium price dynamics?

The scope of the methods makes it possible to explore the central issues in the
theory of asset markets such as: the effect of competition among informed agents
on strategic trading and equilibrium price dynamics; whether and when increased
competition leads to more information being revealed through price, and how this
is related to the 'age' of the information; how the structure of the information
affects the strategic trading behavior, pricing and information revelation;
characteristics of market when some traders are better informed than others; the
effects of information about one asset on the prices and dynamics of order flows
of other assets; and the effects of collusion on price and order flows, and ways
to detect such collusion empirically.

The methodology is tractable enough to be broadly used to study equity trading
models, as well as the analyses of a broad range of economic models in which
information is embodied in prices.

