* 0317973
* GPS Measurement Corrections for Geophysicists
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Kristine Larson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2007
* USD 102,474.00

0317973&lt;br/&gt;Larson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this grant will support
a graduate student at the University of Colorado and limited PI salary support
over a two year period to conduct controlled measurements of global positioning
system (GPS) pseudorange systematic errors for a variety of commercially
available dual frequency geodetic GPS receivers. Unexplained and observed
differences in the pseudoranges between available dual frequency GPS receivers
are known to exist from previous zero-baseline measurements where a single
antenna was used and the satellite signal was subsequently split and sent to two
or more GPS receivers for redundant signal processing. Such biases are likely a
result of a combination of biases imparted by the transmitting satellite,
environmental factors and timing but also may result from specific GPS receivers
use of differing observables on one or the other of the currently available GPS
satellite frequencies. The situation will get more complicated in the future as
the result of DOD plans to add another frequency (L5) and an additional civilian
code on the existing L2 frequency. In this project, the PI and student will
conduct further zero-baseline experiments to examine pseudorange biases of
multiple GPS receivers under controlled temperature conditions using a thermal
isolation chamber and for longer time periods than have been made to date.
Results of tests of several GPS receivers available through the UNAVCO, Inc. GPS
receiver pool will be compared to a single reference GPS receiver which will
remain in operation for all experiments. The results should provide for improved
algorithms for high accuracy and ultra precise GPS crustal motion estimates as
well as improved GPS-navigation. Other broader impacts include improved
confidence in sub-cm GPS estimates of position and baseline lengths for large
GPS networks projects already funded by NSF and other government agencies (e.g.,
the southern California Integrated GPS network, the EarthScope Plate Boundary
Observatory and the International GPS Service).
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;