* 0317693
* Collaborative Research: Past and Present Climatic Controls on the Stable Isotope Composition of Precipitation at Low Latitude Proxy Sites
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Mathias Vuille, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2006
* USD 145,514.00

This award helps build upon the researchers' previously NSF-funded research on
the climatic controls on stable water isotopes (i.e., delta 18-Oxygen, delta
Deuterium) in precipitation at low latitude proxy sites. The researchers' main
scientific goal is to evaluate the controls on stable isotope variability at
various low latitude ice core locations (i.e., Tropical Andes, Tibet, Himalaya)
in the modern world and in the past. This will help to resolve some of the
controversy surrounding the interpretation of paleoclimate records derived from
tropical ice cores. Specific research goals include:&lt;br/&gt;-- investigating
the modern climatic controls such as temperature, precipitation volume effect,
moisture source variability and atmospheric circulation on stable isotopes at
tropical ice core sites and analyzing the influence of climate modes such as El
Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) or Asian monsoon intensity on stable isotope
variability,&lt;br/&gt;-- analyzing the influence of changed orbital parameters
(mid-Holocene conditions) upon stable isotope distribution and potential
climatic controls related to tropical ice cores,&lt;br/&gt;-- investigating the
effect of Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) boundary conditions upon low latitude
stable isotope distribution by prescribing new and more realistic
reconstructions of glacial tropical sea surface temperature (SST)
data,&lt;br/&gt;-- exploring the use of the Deuterium excess in tropical ice
cores as an additional climate proxy for improved reconstructions of tropical
oceanic conditions, and&lt;br/&gt;-- performing model evaluation by comparing
the simulated results with the available proxy data and with International
Atomic Energy - Global Network of Isotopes in Precipitation (IAEA-GNIP) and
National Center for Environmental Prediction - National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCEP-NCAR) reanalysis data for the modern
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All experiments will be based on the GISS II
(4 degrees latitude x 5 degrees longitude, with new improved topographic control
over the Andes) model and the European Center-Hamburg ECHAM-4 (T30 and T106
spectral resolution) models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide
improved understanding of paleoclimatic records that are used to help understand
natural climate variability compared to anthropogenic influences on climate. The
data and model output resulting from this research will be made available to the
wider scientific community through the World Data Center-A for Paleoclimatology.