* 0317706
* Petra Garden and Pool-Complex Excavations
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Leigh-Ann Bedal, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 06/30/2006
* USD 89,889.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Bedal and her
colleagues will conduct two seasons of excavation in the garden and pool-complex
of Petra, Jordan. The site's monumental scale and central location, at the heart
of the city, suggest that it was part of the ceremonial, economic and political
center of the city, and therefore must have been of some importance to the
structure and organization of Petra during the Classical Nabataean (1st c. BCE
-1st c. CE) and Roman periods (2nd-4th c. CE). Bedal's identification of the
site as a garden (and not a marketplace as previously believed) during
preliminary investigations in 1998 prompts a re-examination of some of the long-
held perceptions of Petra's city center functioning primarily&lt;br/&gt;as a
commercial area. The closest contemporary parallels in the Hellenized East and
the Early Roman Empire, most often associated with royal complexes and imperial
cults, demonstrate that ornamental gardens are popular vehicles for political
metaphor. The planting of trees and other flora, in combination with grandiose
architecture and impressive displays of water, symbolize wealth, power and
prestige. Strongly influenced by the processes of acculturation, and despite a
severe shortage of water resources, the Nabataeans created a garden paradise in
their desert city. Dr. Bedal's research aims to address the role of politics and
power in the creation of the Petra Garden &amp; Pool-Complex and to shed light
on the social and political organization of the whole of Petra's city center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the only example of a Nabataean garden and one of the
few known archaeologically in the region, the Petra Garden &amp; Pool-Complex
offers a unique opportunity to learn about the garden traditions of the
Hellenistic-Roman Near East, and specifically of the Nabataeans. Its relatively
pristine state of preservation and unique context makes it an ideal site for
testing methods of&lt;br/&gt;garden archaeology and developing theories on
meaning and function. Utilizing a combination of traditional excavation
strategies, geophysical explorations with ground-penetrating radar, soils and
archaebotanical analysis, artifact analysis, hydraulic studies, and
architectural reconstruction, the overall design and historical development of
the garden site may be determined and the&lt;br/&gt;ancient activities and
engineering skills assessed. As a unique and undocumented garden site, the
investigation of the Petra Garden &amp; Pool-Complex will not only contribute to
the study of Petra and Nabataea, but will advance the understanding of the
processes of Hellenization and Romanization, and contribute to the development
of methodology in the field of garden archaeology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to utilizing the skills and knowledge of trained specialists the Petra
Garden &amp; Pool-Complex Excavation provides field experience to graduate and
undergraduate students pursing careers in archaeology, and other related fields.
Students have an opportunity to work closely with the more experienced
archaeologists and specialists and to receive hands-on experience with field
methods and processing archaeological materials. Finally, the project promotes
cooperative research and training between Americans and Jordanians, providing a
mutually beneficial learning and cultural experience for all
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;