* 0317838
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Codeswitching and the Interpreter - Multilingualism in New York Small Claims Court
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,10/31/2004
* John Singler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 10/31/2004
* USD 5,325.00

Under the direction of Dr. John Singler, Mr. Philipp Angermeyer will conduct
linguistic research on how immigrants alternate between English and their native
languages for his doctoral dissertation. He will collect data on arbitration
hearings in Small Claims Court in New York City that involve the participation
of litigants who speak a language other than English and who are assisted by a
court interpreter. He will investigate how immigrant litigants from a variety of
linguistic backgrounds alternate between languages (code-switch) as they make
use of their limited knowledge of English to communicate directly with the
arbitrator and other litigants. For example, they may repeat English words and
phrases just used by other participants in an attempt to make their own
statements connect better to the statements of others. Mr. Angermeyer will also
study how code-switching is treated by interpreters, and how it affects their
role. For example, interpreters may refrain from their usual practice of
translating in the first person if the litigant already has an English voice of
his own.

The results of this project may influence the development of training materials
for court interpreters, and they may be used in informational material available
to litigants preparing to appear in court. This research also contributes to the
understanding of bilingual speech. By comparing the speech of litigants from
various linguistic backgrounds, the project will establish whether the nature of
courtroom interaction leads speakers of different languages to code-switch in
the same way, or whether there are culture-specific differences. The findings
will be made available to the cooperating courts.