* 0317848
* Dynamics and Uncertainty in Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Noah Williams, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 147,957.00

In the past few years, macroeconomics has advanced in incorporating realistic
and empirically relevant sources of dynamics, and in the treatment of decision
making under uncertainty. The proposed research consists of two distinct but
related projects that explore aspects of economic dynamics and the effects of
uncertainty. The first project develops new empirical methods to specify and
measure uncertainty associated with economic models, and studies the effects of
uncertainty on decisions. The second project develops and applies methods to
study the quantitative importance of adaptive learning as a source of
amplification or propagation in economic models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty is pervasive in economics, and this
uncertainty must be faced continually by agents and policy makers. The first
project shows how to structure and measure the uncertainty associated with an
estimated model; develops estimation methods that explicitly account for model
uncertainty; provides estimates which minimize a measure of this uncertainty;
and uses these results to design decision rules which are robust to the
uncertainty that we estimate. This project provides a new, coherent framework
for dealing with uncertainty, allowing for a serious empirical evaluation of the
performance of alternative decision rules in an uncertain environment. These
methods are applied to the design of monetary policy rules, and the hedging of
financial risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although business cycle fluctuations are
a central issue in macroeconomics, many leading business cycle models have
difficulty matching the persistence and volatility of observed data. While much
of modern macroeconomics is based on the theory of rational expectations, a
growing literature has studied economies with less than fully rational agents
who learn over time. The second project shows how learning can provide
additional persistence in the propagation of economic shocks, and how in some
cases learning dynamics can provide a new source of economic fluctuations. The
project quantifies the importance of these learning dynamics in explaining and
generating business cycle fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Many of the results in the proposal have strong policy
implications.&lt;br/&gt;For example, if learning is an integral feature of
economic fluctuations, then policies which can improve information transmission
may be crucial in reducing fluctuations. More directly, a particular focus of
the first project is in measuring and dealing with uncertainty in monetary
policy. By analyzing the empirically relevant sources of uncertainty, this
research provides assistance in designing policy rules which will lead to good
economic performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;