* 0317652
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: New Fibers Through Spinning of Modified Cellulose / Modified Chitosan
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Samuel Hudson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

0317652 Hudson

Description: This award is to support a cooperative research project between Dr.
Samuel Hudson, Department of Textile Engineering, Chemistry & Science, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina and Dr. Ali Hebeish, National
Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. The PIs plan to study the development and testing
of properties of new fibers. New polyblend fibers based on modified
cellulose/modified chitosan blends will be prepared and their antibacterial
activities examined. The design of such fibers will be accomplished through
preparation of iminochitosan, chemically modified chitosan, oxidized and/or
hydrolyzed cellulose, the dissolution of the prepared substances in different
organic solvents, and examining the spinnability of the modified
cellulose/modified chitosan blends. Testing and analysis of these newly produced
fibers will be made and their utilization as medical textiles and for other uses
will be performed.

Scope: The research deals with materials that could have antibacterial
properties and thus have significant applications for surgery and other medical
purposes. They could also be used to treat natural fibers such as cotton to add
certain desirable properties. Despite their significance the production of these
materials has been limited because of the lack of needed scientific and
technological information. The results of this work will have applications in
the textile industries in the United States and in Egypt. The two collaborators
are well known for their past independent research and for the long experience
in textile research and in chemistry. Dr. Hebeish is among the most recognized
scientists in the field of textile chemistry in Egypt, and his experience will
benefit this project. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to carry out these cooperative activities.