* 0317625
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Legalities of Exception: Cotton and Criminality in Colonial Egypt (1882-1922)
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Christine Harrington, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 06/30/2004
* USD 14,000.00

This research studies criminal colonial law during British colonial rule in
Egypt (1882-1922) and considers its role in the formation of the Egyptian
colonial state. The research analyzes two sets of criminal justice reform. The
first reform is one that was directed specifically at managing the production of
cotton among the peasant population in large estates. The second legal reform is
one that reorganized the criminal justice system and was directed toward the
Egyptian population at large to define and punish actions disobedient of the
colonial order. The contention of this research is that colonial criminal law, a
model within the modern law, is based on exceptions and composed of multiple
legalities directed at regulating what the colonial state defines as dangerous
and economically unproductive activities. The research theorizes a relationship
between the "universal" "humane" character of the law and the exceptional
legalities within it. To consider these arguments, the research addresses the
criminalization of peasants working in cotton estates. In the Egyptian archives,
the research examines criminal trial records and classifies the new crimes, and
the novel logics, introduced into the criminal justice system during British
colonial rule. The research also examines the records of the inspectors who
monitored, on behalf of the central government, the work of the peasants in
rural areas. Additionally, the research looks at police reports to learn more
about the general activities of the state in rural areas. In the Public Record
Office in London, the research examines colonial commission reports and British
administrative correspondence on the reforms in the Egyptian criminal justice
system. These reveal the debates prevalent among British officials over the
suggested reforms. They also reveal their attempts to impose what they defined
as humane "order," and the mechanisms used in the process. This research
contributes to our understanding of the nature and workings of colonial criminal
law, a subject that has yet to receive sufficient attention. It also contributes
an empirical historical case study to the growing body of literature on
exceptional legalities. This research possesses broader impacts by studying a
historical case that will inform contemporary debates on the subject of "human
rights."

