* 0317319
* Athabascan Languages Conference 2003 to be held in Arcata, California
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Victor Golla, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2004
* USD 12,275.00

The National Science Foundation will support the Athabascan Languages
Conference. The conference will be held at Humboldt State University, in Arcata,
CA, on June 5-7, 2003. It will combine invited papers, workshops, a general
session, and cultural activities hosted by local Native American communities.
Participants will report on recent and ongoing research, and will discuss
emerging trends and paradigms of linguistic work on Athabascan languages. The
focus of the invited papers and many of the presentations will be on the
identification and analysis of the linguistic changes that have taken place, or
are in process, as these unwritten indigenous languages undergo a shift in
function from being the primary mode of communication and social solidarity in
their communities to being a consciously used marker of ethnic identity in
special social contexts. One workshop will consider the changes in function and
structure that take place when an Athabascan language is formally taught in
college classrooms and codified in pedagogical materials and reference books.
Another will consider historical and contemporary changes that have taken place
in the complex morphology of the Athabaskan verb as the result of functional
shifts in language use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptation and change in language
structure and use are important topics not only to linguists but also to the
thousands of members of Athabascan-speaking communities in the United States and
Canada. These communities are struggling to retain their cultural and linguistic
heritage in a society that is overwhelmingly English-speaking. Language
education and other retention or revitalization efforts can be improved by
understanding of the changes that are taking place in Athabascan languages -
even in such widely spoken examples as Navajo - as they move from mainly being
acquired as first languages in childhood to mainly being learned as second
languages in school and adult life. Conference participants will return to their
language revitalization efforts with a clearer sense of what "preservation"
entails.&lt;br/&gt;