* 0317014
* Collaborative Research: Andean Fossil Mammals--Phylogenetic and Geologic Implications
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Darin Croft, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Rafael O. de Sa
* 05/31/2005
* USD 250,000.00

Collaborative Research: Andean Fossil Mammals-Phylogenetic and Geologic
Implications.

A grant has been awarded to Dr. John J. Flynn of the Field Museum of Natural
History and Dr. Darin A. Croft of the University of Chicago to collect and study
fossil mammals from the Andes Mountains of central Chile, and to carry out
geological investigations of the region. This study will clarify poorly known
aspects of South American mammal evolution, and help unravel the complex
geologic history of the Andean mountain chain. Field collecting and
reconnaissance will be undertaken to discover new localities and assemblages of
fossil mammals of different ages. Once prepared, these fossils will be described
in the scientific literature and analyzed in order to understand how factors
such as climate change affect species diversity. The unusual occurrence of these
fossils in volcanic rocks will enable the application of various "absolute"
geologic dating methods, providing precise ages for these fossils and more
accurate scientific analyses.

South America was an isolated continent for most of the last 80 million years.
The highly peculiar mammals arising in response to this isolation have captured
the interest of biologists and paleontologists for more than two centuries. Some
15 years ago Dr. Flynn and his colleagues unexpectedly discovered the first
fossil mammals from this region of South America. By studying the fossil
mammals, the team showed that the fossil-containing rocks were nearly 100
million years younger than previously assumed. This discovery has revolutionized
understanding of the region's tectonic history. Moreover, this and other
discoveries have helped to fill in important "missing chapters" in South
American Mammal history, leading, for example, to the recent recognition of a
new South American Land Mammal Age and evidence of the world's oldest
grasslands. This project builds on earlier work, focusing on targeted geographic
areas and particular groups of mammals (rodents, extinct plant eating forms,
marsupials, etc.).



