* 0317825
* Acquisistion of a Gas Source Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences at the University of Rochester
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Carmala Garzione, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2007
* USD 173,156.00

EAR-0317825&lt;br/&gt;Garizone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will be used to
purchase a gas source isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) for analysis of O
and H isotopes in water; O and C isotopes in carbonate, dissolved inorganic
carbon, and CO2 gas; and C and N isotopes in organic matter. Primary users of
this equipment will be the faculty, students, and visiting researchers in the
Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences at the University of Rochester.
This equipment will help us meet our research and teaching needs in the
geological and environmental sciences, while continuing to develop strengths in
geochemistry and tectonics. Stable isotope techniques are fundamental to
paleoenvironmental studies. Understanding paleoclimate, paleoaltitude, and/or
paleovegetation in the context of the tectonic evolution of mountain belts
(P.I.'s main research focus) will potentially yield great advances in our
understanding of the impacts of tectonics on regional and global climate. The
proposed equipment will provide a wide range of applications enabling the
analysis of carbonate, organic matter, water and gas samples essential to
studies of ancient and modern environment, mantle processes, biological
processes, and paleoceanography. The broader impacts of this proposal are that
acquisition of an IRMS will greatly enhance undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral education at the University of Rochester by enabling students to get
training on equipment that is widely used within the geological and
environmental sciences. This proposal is part of a departmental effort that
emphasizes undergraduate/graduate-level laboratory based instruction and
independent research. In the courses that are taught within the Department of
Earth and Environmental Sciences there is a strong emphasis on stable isotope
applications in the geological and environmental sciences. There is an
additional course on Analytical Methods in Geochemistry, which gives both
undergraduate and graduate students hands-on training on existing equipment
within the department, enabling them to use the equipment to collect their own
data for senior thesis or graduate research projects.&lt;br/&gt;