* 0317220
* Topics in the Economic Theory of Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Rachel Kranton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 208,878.00

This project advances the economic theory of networks. Research in many other
disciplines documents the importance of networks for economic activity. Yet,
economists have only begun to develop theories of network interactions. This
research will provide economists a new way of thinking about who does business
with whom and why. It thus promises to change both economic theory and policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the proposal builds a network model of
industry, where several manufacturers deal with several suppliers, and vice
versa. The project takes a new look at a central policy question and theoretical
puzzle -- how do vertical mergers affect economic welfare? It has long been
argued - by both theorists and regulators - that vertical merger of two firms
can lead to better internal coordination and investments. The project challenges
this insight by considering the impact of merger on all investments, not just
those internal to the merger. The project shows firms can strategically compete
in these investment and demonstrates how a merged firm can manipulate its
investments to increase its profits, but at a loss to other firms. The results
should change the way theorists view industrial competition and inform how
policy makers evaluate vertical mergers. The second part of this project studies
social networks and the search for new technologies and information. Many
studies have argued that communication and learning from others is important for
economic activity and innovation. For example, before purchasing a new product
or investing in a new technology, people inquire into the experiences of
friends, neighbors, and colleagues. The project models this process. It
introduces a new model where individuals experiment, then communicate their
results to friends and colleagues. The project asks: how does the pattern of
communication links determine the pattern of search and experimentation? Do
people search themselves or rely on others? How do new links - links between
communities or firms, for example - affect experimentation, search patterns and
welfare? The answers to these questions should change the way people design
institutions and policies to increase communication between different parts of
the economy and society.&lt;br/&gt;