* 0317757
* NBER Summer Institute, 2003-2005
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Martin Feldstein, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This grant provides renewed funding for the participation of junior faculty in
the NBER Summer Institute. For more than two decades, NBER' s Summer Institute
has offered an ideal environment for developing new ideas and forging
collaborative work relationships. Summer Institute brings together economists
and scholars in other fields from universities, government, and international
organizations for a few days or a few weeks of seminars, workshops, conferences,
and cooperative research. Summer Institute is five to six weeks long, and
includes at least 40 sessions organized by over 60 individuals. There are more
than 900 attendees from over 200 universities and non-academic institutions, and
in 2002 more than 60% of the individuals who attended Summer Institute were not
NBER affiliates. While there are many presentations of work nearing completion,
emphasis is placed on the workshop aspects of the program where new ideas are
raised, preliminary research ideas are developed, and plans for joint or
coordinated research efforts are established. Efforts are made to include a wide
variety of new participants, and to reach out to women and minorities. Calls for
papers are circulated very widely and are available on the NBER web site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The NBER Summer Institutes generate
timely and influential research on important economic policy questions related
to such topics as international financial stability, economic productivity and
technology, environmental regulations, social security policy, and educational
policies. The workshops are an invaluable part of the research infrastructure in
economics and assist the research of a large number of economists.&lt;br/&gt;