* 0318583
* Who is the Past?  Collaborative Research on Ancestral Native American Cultural Affiliation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Michael Adler, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 90,094.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Adler and his colleagues
will work in concert with cultural resource advisors from four Native American
Pueblo tribes (Acoma, Laguna, Hopi, and Zuni) to enhance our understanding of
ethnic identity and ancestral cultural affiliation. Cultural affiliation is
essentially a claim that living groups make regarding their cultural and
biological ties to ancestral peoples. As such, cultural affiliation is
continually created and recreated as social groups tell themselves, and are told
by others, about the past. At the heart of this research is to better understand
the process of ethnogenesis, that is, the creation of ethnic group identity. We
will tackle the concepts of cultural affiliation and ethnogenesis through an
intensive study of the linkages between how present day communities, Pueblo
tribes in this case, utilize oral history, archaeological information, and other
sources of information on the past to define present and past cultural identity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research partnership will integrate
Pueblo oral history, archaeological observations, and ethnographic summaries of
cultural information to investigate the links between modern Pueblo communities
and Chaves-Hummingbird Pueblo, a 13th-14th century ancestral Pueblo
archaeological site located near Albuquerque, New Mexico. Tribal members with
traditional knowledge of ancestry, migration histories, and other perspectives
on the past will spend time with archaeologists at site, a place that is
presently not culturally affiliated with any single Pueblo community. The
collaboration will address the roles that native oral history, archaeological
data, recognized sacred places, shrines, trails and landscape features play in
the determination of cultural affiliation. Following the on-site consultations
and discussions, cultural resource advisors will partner with the project
specialists to write up the results of the findings. Drafts of research results
will be edited and approved by each of the Pueblo communities to ensure that
culturally sensitive or confidential information is not included in the reports.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will elucidate how present archaeological
approaches to ancestral cultural affiliation can better incorporate the views of
descendant populations into archaeological research. On a specific level,
concepts of social identity and cultural affiliation are implicated in most
archaeological research in the American Southwest. As such this research hopes
to provide a model for how we can expand the research arena within which
identity and affiliation are presently considered in the southwest. The research
has practical and intellectual applications. A better understanding of cultural
affiliation, the historically traceable shared identity between modern groups
and ancient peoples, will benefit ongoing legal questions of cultural identity.
Legal considerations of modern ethnic identity and ancestral origins presently
comprise a significant component of most court cases involving Native American
communities. Because claims of cultural affiliation can provide historically
legitimized access to control of natural resources, political power, and legal
rights to cultural patrimony, there is a real and significant benefit to
expanding our understanding of cultural affiliation. &lt;br/&gt;