* 0318954
* SBIR Phase I:     Photolithographic Patterning of Reactive Nano-scale Multilayer Materials for Hermetic Wafer Scale Packaging
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Tanya Snyder, MicroHouse Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves a feasibility
study of lithographically patterning reactive nanoscale multilayer foils for use
in hermetic waferscale packages for MEMS and other electronic devices. A
patterned reactive foil sandwiched between two wafers can be ignited and will
self-propagate, providing the heat needed for wafer bonding. Because the
reaction is very rapid, heat is localized to the vicinity of the foil. Therefore
high temperature hermetic bonds confined to the lithographic pattern are
obtainable, while temperature sensitive components inside of the sealed package
remain unaffected. These foils can also be used to join dissimilar materials
with dramatically different thermal expansion coefficients without creating
large residual stresses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A typical MEMS device produced
today, 80% of the manufacturing cost goes into packaging. Waferscale packaging
will dramatically reduce this cost because it leverages knowledge, equipment,
and cost models from the semiconductor industry. Features include hermeticity,
miniaturization, massively parallel assembly, automated equipment with increased
repeatability and yields, and substantial integration of electronic, optical,
and mechanical features. Patterning of reactive foils as covered in this
proposal will enable wafer bonding that can be generically used for low cost
miniaturized packaging of sensing, optical, medical, RF and other MEMS
devices.&lt;br/&gt;