* 0318161
* Political Institutions and Economic Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Alessandro Lizzeri, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 07/31/2005
* USD 136,715.00

This is an interdisciplinary project at the intersection of economics, history,
and political science. It integrates research from these disciplines to
understand some fundamental issues concerning democratic government and the
functioning of political institutions. More precisely, the issues that are
addressed concern the role of the right to vote (the franchise) and the
transparency of political institutions.

The extent of the franchise is one of the key features of a political system. It
largely determines the degree to which political system can be considered
democratic and it affects the scale and scope of government activity. The
franchise changed dramatically in the West in the century preceding World War I.
Can such changes account for some of the transformations in the role of
government during this century? The project considers this question and asks how
it came to happen that countries with very narrow electorates (most countries at
the beginning of the 19th century) offered the right to vote to a much larger
group of citizens. Recent models have interpreted this democratization as the
outcome of conflict between elites and the disenfranchised. This project
explores the power of an alternative explanation. Under some circumstances, the
shift in the mode of political competition caused by the extension of the
franchise more than compensates the elite for the dilution of their influence.
The theory is used to interpret some aspects of the British ``Age of Reform''
that include a major increase in spending on local public goods The research
will have broader on our understanding of how the franchise is extended from
elites to full democratic participation. This is a fundamental issue for
constitutional design and political science development. Additionally, the
insights gained from this research could be applicable to the issue of the
European Union expansion. The transparency of the political system is another
important element of democratic government since information about policy is
essential for voters to have an influence. If voters are imperfectly informed on
government policy, what are the consequences for government debt, the size of
government, the form of government transfers to voters, and the (in)efficiency
of government policy? The novel feature of the analysis is the form of
information imperfection. The lack of transparency leads to government debt and
to inefficient taxation. It also leads to the choice of inefficient instruments
of redistribution if such instruments are less transparent. The model also
suggests a resolution of the `fiscal churning' puzzle, namely, the fact that a
large number of individuals are both taxpayers and recipients of government
transfers. Fiscal churning is inefficient because it would often be more
effective to `net out' the fiscal positions of such individuals. The model
offers an explanation for this phenomenon and points to a way to reform fiscal
institutions to improve the functioning of the political system. A study of the
relationship between transparency and debt could have policy impacts,
particularly if greater transparency can imply a reduction in the public debt.

