* 0318209
* Complexity of Spatial and Categorical Scale in Landcover Characterization: A Statistical and Computational Framework
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Sucharita Gopal, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2007
* USD 535,914.00

Land cover characterization is essential for modeling, monitoring, and
prediction of the terrestrial ecosystem and climate. Such characterizations are
produced based largely on information extracted from satellite remote sensing
measurements. However, much of the global and regional land cover consists of
heterogeneous mixtures of different land cover types at varying spatial scales,
while standard methods for remote sensing land cover characterization operate at
a single scale and use a fixed set of categories. This research will develop an
integrated statistical and computational framework that will produce land cover
characterizations from remote sensing data that allow generalization in spatial
resolution and categorical scale simultaneously. The result of this land cover
characterization process will no longer be a land cover map, as a map implies a
single spatial scale, but rather a land cover database, which can be queried in
both traditional manners and ways currently unavailable. In essence, users will
be free to select a range of spatial and categorical scales most appropriate for
their needs. The key elements involved in the development of this framework
include new contributions to the fields of geography and remote sensing,
statistics, and computer science. At the foundation is a new class of multi-
scale statistical models , called mixlets, from which there will result a new
paradigm for representation and visualization of land cover categorization. In
turn, these advances will be integrated with new developments in spatial
database representations and spatial query systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Land
cover characterizations, critical for many studies involving terrestrial
ecosystems and climate, and the human impacts on the natural environment, are
needed at many different spatial scales and by a variety of user communities.
This project will develop a comprehensive framework and prototype system for
producing such characterizations in a manner that adapts automatically to
multiple scales of information using remote sensing and GIS data. Our research
has direct impact in the fields of ecology, biology, geography, forestry and
environmental sciences dealing with multiscale patterns and processes. More
broadly, the development and availability of these tools will contribute
significantly to the improved understanding within the scientific community, and
ultimately in the community at large, of the complexity of land
cover.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences as part of the Mathematical Sciences Priority
Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;