* 0318562
* High Magnetic Fields: Future Directions For Science, Engineering and Technology
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2005
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 11/30/2005
* USD 335,000.00

This project is a study to assess current work in the science and technology
associated with high magnetic fields. The purpose of the study is to identify
drivers for future research and to provide guidance for future scientific
developments and magnet technology. The study will be carried out by a committee
appointed by the National Academies, and the results will be published by the
National Academies Press.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High magnetic fields are
essential for scientific investigations in a wide range of areas. They have
traditionally been important in studies of the physical properties of
semiconductors and other forms of condensed matter. However, applications of
high fields have now expanded to include research in areas of biology,
chemistry, and geophysics, among others. For example, strong magnetic fields are
essential for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR, the research aspect of magnetic
resonance imaging, or MRI), which is being used to study the structure of
proteins and polymers. In addition, high fields are used to investigate magnetic
data storage, with obvious applications to information technology, and to study
the properties of high-temperature superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technology necessary to produce magnets with very high field strengths is at the
forefront of engineering practice, leading current industrial capabilities.
Because the high fields generate extremely strong forces within the magnet
structure itself, it is necessary to employ carefully designed, high-strength
materials in their construction. Further, because non-superconducting magnets
generate considerable heat - and because superconducting magnets must be
maintained at extremely low temperatures - it is essential to design such
magnets to allow for efficient cooling. These features push the frontiers of
engineering and materials science beyond their current
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the importance of the science and
technology associated with high magnetic fields, and because of the high cost of
research in these areas, it is essential to plan future research efforts
carefully. This study, under the auspices of the National Academy of Science,
will be conducted by a group of scientists and engineers with expertise spanning
the wide range of disciplines that are involved in high-field magnet research.
It will provide a "roadmap" for research in these areas over the coming
decade.&lt;br/&gt;