* 0318462
* Identification of Effective and Adaptive Responses to Peer Victimization Among Elementary School-aged Children
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Becky Kochenderfer-Ladd, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 07/31/2007
* USD 450,944.00

Bullying has become a top concern in U.S. schools with increasing societal
demands to reduce the amount of violence being perpetrated among children.
School districts are often pressured into responding hastily to these concerns
by implementing generic (broadbased, schoolwide) anti-bullying programs or
taking a "no tolerance" stance against bullying behaviors without really knowing
the degree to which such efforts will be effective at reducing overall school
bullying-or for whom they will be effective. Moreover, the focus on such
policies tends to be on the perpetrators of violence to the exclusion of
attending to the role of the victims in these interactions and the effects of
such experiences on their development. This project will expand our
understanding of why certain children seem to be a heightened risk for
classmates' bullying and what they can do to protect themselves. By learning how
elementary school-age children naturally respond to being bullied at school, we
will be able to identify responses that are both effective and ineffective at
stopping peer harassment as well as those that either increase or decrease
subsequent psychological distress. The implications of this study for preventive
interventions address the erroneous assumption of a one-kind-fits-all program in
which a single coping strategy (or set of strategies) can be taught that will
work for all children. Specifically, what is successful at stopping bullying is
expected to differ depending on individual children's characteristics, such as
how they react emotionally, why they believe they are being bullied, and what
social support (e.g., friends, teachers and parents) and resources (e.g., social
reputation, social competencies, physical strength) they have available.
Increased understanding of such differences will not only improve the
effectiveness of children's ability to reduce their own victimization, but could
simultaneously improve the effectiveness of school-based (generic) anti-bullying
programs in our nation's schools.&lt;br/&gt;