* 0318221
* Surge Protectors: Cultural Regulation in Contemporary India
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* William Mazzarella, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 07/31/2005
* USD 161,378.00

This project revises the way we think about censorship as a form of cultural
regulation in two ways: first, by analyzing formal (state-sanctioned) censorship
practices alongside and in relation to informal (spontaneous, activist and/or
violent) modes of public cultural regulation; second, by exploring the relation
between censorship and cultural globalization in the world's largest democracy,
India. Ethnographically, the study focuses on contemporary struggles over
"obscene" images and texts in the mass media. But in so doing, it also calls
into question the implications of applying legal norms and definitions
established under British colonial rule to a postcolonial context characterized
not only by democratic political institutions but also by major new
transnational media networks. Previous studies of censorship, particularly in
the so-called developing world, have understood censorship primarily as the
silencing or blocking action of states, and have reduced the social field of
censorship practices to struggles between "modern" and "traditional" agendas.
This study, in contrast, starts from the proposition that such interpretive
models cannot make sense of the cultural and political implications of
regulating the media in contemporary non-Western societies. Through archival
research and in-depth interviews with activists, cultural producers and
government officials in India, the study explores the hypothesis that censorship
is not primarily about blocking information flows per se but rather about
contesting acceptable boundaries of class, caste, religion and citizenship by
managing the public circulation of affect-intensive images and texts. This work
is urgent and timely because it offers a detailed and rigorous examination of
problems that are today of crucial interest to social scientists and policy
makers alike: the compatibility of media censorship and democracy, the
relationship between the consumption of media content and participation in civic
life, the tension between the national political citizenship and participation
in globalizing consumer markets, and the volatile public life of visual images,
not least in contexts of widespread illiteracy.