* 0318549
* Support for Existing Western U.S. GPS Networks
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2006
* William Prescott, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2006
* USD 2,782,290.00

0318549&lt;br/&gt;Prescott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant support the the
ongoing operation and maintenance of 255 continuously operated global
positioning system receivers (CGPS) that are a subset of 470 CGPS stations
currently operational in the western U.S and one laser strainmeter system for a
period of eighteen months. Through UNAVCO, Inc. governance, the
geodetic/geophysics community selected 255 CGPS stations that are part of six
heretofore independent regional GPS networks whose development and operational
costs have been previously supported through multiple sources including NSF,
NASA, NOAA, USGS and the Keck Foundation. Stations now a part of the Southern
California Integrated Geodetic Network (SGICN), the Bay Area Regional
Deformation Network (BARD), the Basin and Range Geodetic Network (BARGEN), the
Eastern Basin and Range-Yellowstone GPS network (EBRY), the Pacific Northwest
Geodetic Array (PANGA), and the Alaska Deformation Array (AKDA) will be operated
and maintained as a coherent unit, with oversight management, equipment
replacement coordination and engineering assistance from UNAVCO, Inc. facility
and headquarters employees and additional efforts by regional network scientists
and engineers through subcontracts to the University of Southern California
(SCIGN), UC-Berkeley (BARD), Caltech (BARGEN), Smithsonian Astrophysical
Observatory (BARGEN), University of Utah (EBRY), Central Washington University
(PANGA), and the University of Alaska (AKDA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary
goal of this project is to provide for the ultimate integration of CGPS
receivers in the above listed western U.S. regional GPS networks into the Plate
Boundary Observatory (PBO) component of EarthScope. The design goals of PBO
include: 1) the operation of 875 CGPS stations consisting of a backbone array of
CGPS receivers with approximate 200 km spacing extending along the western
margin of North America from Mexico to Alaska and from the west coast of the
U.S. eastward to the Rocky Mountain Plateau and additional denser clusters of
CGPS receivers proximal to selected volcanic and fault structures; 2) an array
of 175 distributed borehole strainmeters, and; 3) five long baseline laser
strainmeters. This proposal provides temporary funding for operations and
maintenance support for currently operating GPS stations in the western U.S.
that may ultimately become part of the PBO backbone and supported through the
NSF/MREFC EarthScope operations and maintenance budget five years hence A
lengthening of the available core PBO CGPS time series is intended to serve the
broader instrumentation system related goals of EarthScope/PBO to: 1) detect and
understand transient deformation process on timescales from days to decades; 2)
constrain uncertainties which can plague precise observation of the vertical
deformation field observed by CGPS receivers and thereby allow for
discrimination between various geophysical models of solid earth deformation,
and; 3) enhance our understanding of the various low frequency noise sources
that can preclude GPS observation of the most subtle tectonic
signals.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;