* 0318275
* Improving Prediction and Causal Inference with Graphical Methods and Models in Empirical Political Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Langche Zeng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 50,312.00

Prediction and causal inference are the central pursuits of empirical political
science. Critical to reliable prediction and causal inference is an
understanding of the structural relationships in the social and political
systems under study. Graphical models are excellent tools for conceptualizing
and representing relationships, such as relationships among the individual
actors under study, or relationships among the variables in a model.
Understanding the first type of relationship is critical particularly in the
study of relational data, such as data on international conflict. Understanding
the second type is at the core of causal inference aiming at clarifying the
structural relationships among various quantities of interest in the system
under study. This project explores the use of graphical methods and models in
political data analysis, particularly in the study of international and civil
conflict. International events take place not in isolation, but within a network
of intricate interdependence. The structural characteristics of the
international network, in addition to individual state or dyad level attributes,
therefore likely hold important explanatory and predictive power. Systematic
measurement and modeling of the characteristics and dependence structure of the
network has largely eluded previous research. In this project, the international
network of a given relation (e.g., the relation of "in conflict with") is
modeled as a (random) graph. Dependence structure is modeled endogenously, and a
rich array of well defined graph theoretic measures capturing the structure of
the entire network are obtained to augment the usual state/dyad level attribute
variables in the statistical model. Because causal models are more useful than
associational models for policy analysis, the project explores the
identification of causal structure from observed associational data using
methods from causal graph theory, and improves the assessment of causal effects
of key policy variables, such as level of democratization, by ensuring correct
specification of control variables with the aid of the causal
graph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and forecasting international and
civil conflict are of general interest, and the methods investigated in this
project are broadly relevant to other areas of political science and indeed
across disciplinary boundaries as prediction and causal inference are central to
most fields of scientific inquiry. The graphical methods and models investigated
in this project also will enrich the investigator's teaching of political
methodology.