* 0318008
* SBIR Phase I:  Heterogeneous Catalytic Peroxidation of Environmental Contaminants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* James Akse, Umpqua Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
continuous heterogeneous catalytic peroxidation process for destruction of
aqueous organic and inorganic heterogeneous contaminants. Fenton peroxidation
with Fe (II) as a homogeneous catalyst is used extensively for the oxidative
treatment of organic and inorganic contaminants in industrial wastewater. This
requires acidification, flocculation, iron recovery by precipitation, and is
generally limited to "batch operations." Homogeneous peroxidation often achieves
only partial oxidation of organic contaminants, yielding organic acids. This
project will develop a highly effective heterogeneous peroxidation catalyst and
reactor design for oxidation of organics using hydrogen peroxide as oxidant,
which will facilitate deeper oxidation of organic contaminants, simplify process
design, reduce power usage, and increase oxidation rates, especially for more
refractory organic contaminants such as carboxylic acids. Environmental
contaminants that will be studied include phenol, methyl-t-butyl ether (MTBE),
cyanide and toluene.

The commercial application of this project will be in pollution control and
remediation. The project will be run in collaboration with a major hydrogen
peroxide producer and a leading supplier to the pollution control market. The
project will benefit society by providing more effective processes for control
of pollution and cleanup of environmental contaminants.