* 0318513
* Jury Deliberation and Civic Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Philip Weiser, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 07/31/2005
* USD 176,494.00

A basic assumption of participatory democratic theory holds that civic
engagement boosts an individual's political efficacy and increases future
political participation. Though this empirical claim is important to political
philosophy, public deliberation, civic engagement, and constitutional law, it
has not been tested directly. To overcome the limitations of past research, this
project tests the participation hypothesis in relation to the impact jury
service has on electoral participation. The jury provides an ideal test because
it is a non-voluntary, institutionalized form of public service to which a broad
cross-section of the public is exposed. It is hypothesized that individuals who
serve on juries and reach verdicts become more likely to vote and engage in
other forms of civic activity than do those jurors who have inconclusive
experiences. It is also predicted that this relationship is mediated by an
increase in political efficacy and moderated by other aspects of the jury
experience, including the nature of the trial, jury size, and decision rule.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project undertakes an in-depth examination of the
experience of 2,000 jurors in a single jurisdiction. This test employs a panel
survey design to test the hypothesized links in the theoretical model.
Participants are interviewed at three points in time: when they enter the jury
pool, shortly after they serve as jurors, then long after completing their
service. This permits baseline measurement of demographics, attitudes and
behaviors, self-report data on the experience of jury deliberation, short-term
changes in political efficacy and other attitudes, and long-term changes in both
efficacy and political behaviors beyond electoral participation. In designing
this survey, as well as other activities, the project is assisted by an advisory
panel consisting of preeminent jury researchers and civic engagement scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most far-reaching potential impact of this research is
on the degree to which underrepresented groups are included in the legal and
political process. Unequal representation in juries may be among the underlying
causes of unequal registration and turnout across different social groups, and
the study could highlight the importance of enacting legal reforms to make the
jury pool and seated juries more representative. By revealing the civic impact
of jury service, research could also strengthen the case for maintaining the
vitality of the jury as a basic public institution.&lt;br/&gt;