* 0318037
* Acquisition of Replacement Equipment for the Experimental and Analytical Geochemistry Laboratory EAGL
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Ingrid Hendy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2005
* USD 194,684.00

This proposal involves acquisition of replacement laboratory instrumentation for
the Experimental and Analytical Geochemistry Laboratory (EAGL) in the Department
of Geological Sciences at the University of Michigan. Several of EAGL's main
analytical tools, a Leeman simultaneous ICP-OES, a Dionex ion chromatograph, UIC
coulometric titrators, and a GBC dual beam spectrophotometer, have been used
routinely in research and teaching since they were purchased in 1986, and are
now in need of replacement. Walter's research group has made contributions in
the areas of marine carbonate geochemistry, the geochemistry of natural waters,
experimental geochemistry, and sedimentary basin hydrogeochemistry. Given EAGL's
capabilities, the laboratory not only has served Walter's research group but
others at the UM and elsewhere on a recharge basis, particularly researchers in
aqueous chemistry, and marine biogeochemistry. It has been maintained by an
Instrumental Analyst (50% institutional salary support) over the years and has
accrued considerable experience in managing a productive research and
educational facility. The EAGL has also had a broad societal impact in terms of
working on practical problems (applied geochemistry, environmental problems,
hydrocarbon and groundwater pollution and resource issues, climate change and
human impacts on natural forested watersheds). Over the years, many graduate
students have trained in the lab and have used the facilities to produce a
variety of research studies, which have advanced the state of scientific
knowledge. Furthermore, the hands-on training they received gave them the
expertise and confidence to set up their own research laboratories at other
institutions. The requested instrumentation includes a JY Horiba Ultima 2C ICP-
OES, a Milestone Ethos Microwave Digestion Station, a Dionex DX 600 High
Performance Ion Chromatograph with conductivity and photodiode array detector, a
UIC Coulometrics Carbon Coulometer with additional acidification module, and a
Perkin Elmer Lambda 25 UVNIS spectrophotometer. The acquisition of this new
generation of equipment, with its quantum leap in analytical capability and ease
of use, will facilitate even greater scientific research contributions, while at
the same time having broader impacts on societal concerns, real-world
applications, student education and training, and on mentoring the next
generation of geoscientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;