* 0318725
* International Funding, Local Non-Governmental Organizations, and Electoral Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2002,12/31/2004
* David Brown, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 12/31/2004
* USD 39,895.00

The growth of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) has been explosive over the
last few decades. A conservative estimate of international NGOs (groups with
operations in more than one country) puts the number at 29,000. The growth of
local groups is even more pronounced. The World Watch institute estimates that
there are two million NGOs in the United States, 70% of which are less than 30
years old. In a short four-year period (1990-94), the percentage of European
Union relief aid channeled through NGOs grew from 47% to 67%. NGOs now disburse
more money than the World Bank. NGOs are involved in a quiet revolution: a
revolution that holds important implications for the development of civil
society and social capital. Perhaps their most important contribution lies in
the alternatives that they provide in terms of goods, services, and civic
engagement. Despite their growth and importance, we know very little about their
impact on domestic politics.&lt;br/&gt; Theories of NGOs, their international
connections, and their impact on politics can be categorized into three
perspectives: liberal, neo-liberal, and Marxist. Liberals argue that the flow of
international resources to local NGOs provides the means necessary for citizens
to overcome or bypass weak and ineffective political institutions that fail to
provide public goods and services. With external funding, previously excluded
segments of society can increase their political influence. Neo-liberals see
NGOs as efficient providers of goods and services. They argue that NGOs and
their foreign benefactors are politically neutral; they merely take on
responsibilities previously held by a state unable to provide the goods and
services efficiently. Marxists argue that resources from abroad corrupt local
NGOs. Once local NGOs come to depend more on resources from abroad than on
achieving political victory, they quickly lose sight of their original goals,
eventually demobilizing their membership.&lt;br/&gt; We propose the first
quantitatively oriented empirical study of NGOs, foreign funding, and their
impact on politics. Specifically, we estimate the impact of NGO access to
foreign funding on voting behavior. Our proposal requests funds to collect
financial data and electoral data, and to conduct archival research. We target a
natural experiment provided by two massive World Bank projects in two Brazilian
states: Rondonia and Mato Grosso. The two Brazilian states are remote and
sparsely populated. Consequently, the two World Bank projects represent the vast
majority of foreign resources, allowing us to trace accurately the distribution
of external funds. There is an additional dimension to the experiment: each
project disburses funds to local NGOs as well as to the two state governments.
Because resources in each project are allocated to government agencies and NGOs,
we can test whether the two methods of implementation affected electoral
outcomes differently. In addition to collecting electoral and financial data, we
conduct archival research to determine the degree to which each NGO is
politicized. Every NGO that receives money is required to submit a brief history
and statement of purpose. From that description we can obtain important
information on how closely the NGO is tied to politics. By interacting the
allocation of funds with the degree of politicization, we can distinguish among
several hypotheses derived from the theoretical literature. The proposed study
is designed not only to determine is an empirical connection exists among
foreign donors, NGOs, and politics, but also to explain why. &lt;br/&gt;