* 0318374
* Analysis of the effects of environmental treaties
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ronald Mitchell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 282,364.00

Why do some environmental treaties perform so much better than others? Countries
have negotiated hundreds of environmental agreements, some have resolved
problems, some have had limited or no influence, and some have achieved their
objectives simply due to fortuitous circumstances. This project responds to
recent calls for policy-relevant, decision-support research on global
environmental change and a "transition to sustainability" by identifying
features of environmental treaties that can make both existing and future
agreements more effective. It will analyze environmental quality and behaviors
targeted by a range of environmental agreements to: understand how much of the
variation in environmental outcomes is due to relevant agreements and how much
is due to other factors; identify which agreements have greater, and lesser,
effects; determine how much particular design features contribute to an
agreement's effects; and analyze how the benefits of particular design features
depend upon characteristics of the environmental problem, international context,
countries involved, and other factors.

The project will build a unique meta-dataset linking existing and new data on
scores of environmental agreements, the outcomes they target and indicators of
legal, economic, political, and social drivers of those outcomes. The project
will develop and test regression models designed to distinguish effects of
agreements from other explanatory factors, to allow meaningful comparison of the
effects of agreements that address quite different environmental problems, and
to evaluate how generalizable "successful" design features are to other
problems. As most prior research on environmental agreements has derived from
case studies, development and application of a database and quantitative methods
addressed to a large and diverse set of agreements opens up new possibilities
for assessing whether qualitative findings are case-specific or can be
generalized to other cases, controlling for the effects of non-agreement
factors, and providing greater confidence regarding how one agreement's effects
compare to those of others and to non-agreement factors. Scholars and
practitioners will be informed of the project database, coding and analysis
methods, and findings through scholarly and policy-oriented articles; a book;
and a website. The research will move scholarship forward by extending previous
case study work on regime effects by confirming, extending, or refuting existing
claims regarding whether, how much, and under what conditions environmental
agreements contribute to environmental protection. It will move the development
of better environmental agreements forward by identifying those design features
most likely to promote better performance as well as how non-agreement factors
may limit the influence of an agreement in certain contexts. In addition, making
the methods and dataset publicly available will help other scholars,
governments, treaty secretariats, and non-governmental organizations to
investigate questions beyond those addressed here.