* 0318902
* SBIR Phase I:     Real-Time Micro-Array Imaging for Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Val Golovlev, Sci-Tec, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,675.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to establish
the feasibility of a novel micro-array technology based on measurements of
kinetics of hybridization of biopolymer molecules. By measuring kinetics of
hybridization in real time, the perfectly and non-perfectly homologous DNA can
be distinguished with much higher accuracy than by using conventional micro-
arrays. An important innovative component of this technology is the labeling of
target DNA by colloidal gold particles that are of the order of hundreds of
nanometers in diameter. This labeling technique significantly increases the
detection sensitivity and can be implemented using a very inexpensive detection
system. Prior work has shown that the use of gold particles can increase the
speed of hybridization to allow complete analysis in minutes, whereas
conventional micro-array protocols require many hours. The proposed system is
advantageous for many micro-array applications, including screening of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), when high hybridization specificity is
required, and performing express micro-array analysis during time-critical
medical procedures such as surgery.

The commercial applications of this project include drug screening, nucleic acid
identification and sequencing, single base mutation screening, and gene
expression analysis. The increasing applications of micro-arrays in medical
research will create additional opportunities for introducing the proposed
technology into routine clinical practice.