* 0318364
* Collaborative Research: From Farmers to Merchants and Moneylenders: A Human Capital Interpretation of Jewish Economic History
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Maristella Botticini, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 255,482.00

This project will study an historical example in which social norms (in this
case religious prescriptions) have had long-term implications on investment in
children's education, occupational choice, migrations, and demographic patterns.
The focus will be on the economic history of the Jews and the aim will be to
explain why since the Middle Ages the Jews have been engaged primarily in urban,
skilled occupations such as crafts, trade, money lending and medicine, and why
the Jewish people were a minority in many cities and towns. To answer these
questions, the research will present an extensive summary of evidence of the
Jewish religion, population size, occupational distribution, economic
restrictions, income by occupation, religious conversions, and migrations from
the first to the twelfth century CE. The distinctive occupational selection of
the Jews occurred between the seventh and the ninth centuries in the Muslim
Empire and then it spread to other locations. The research will show that this
transition was the outcome of the widespread literacy among Jews prompted by an
educational reform in the first century CE, which made primary education
compulsory for male children. Based on the growing nexus between education and
Judaism in the first half of the millennium, the project will build a model in
which Jewish fathers choose the level of their children's education, their own
occupation, religion, and location. The model predicts that when urbanization
expands (as it did in the Muslim Empire), Jews move to new cities due to their
comparative advantage in urban, skilled occupations. Furthermore, before
urbanization a proportion of Jewish farmers are predicted to convert to other
religions. To test the theoretical results, the first part of the project will
rely on the historical evidence for the first millennium provided by historians.
The second part of the project will focus on the second millennium and the
observed occupational distribution of the Jews from the twelfth to the
seventeenth century. The following set of questions, among others, will be
answered: Why did a significant proportion of Jews become moneylenders in many
medieval and early-modern European cities? Was it because of the prohibitions
imposed by the Church on both Christians and Jews regarding the occupations they
could engage in? Was it because the Jews had an advantage because of extensive
networking among themselves? Or was it the outcome of their large investment in
human capital? The project will address these issues with a two-step
methodology. First, it will collect data from medieval and early-modern sources
to carefully reconstruct (i) the involvement of Jews and non-Jews in money
lending from about 1100 to about 1600 in Italian and selected European cities
and towns, and (ii) the detailed structure of Jewish money lending using micro
data from primary sources for medieval and early modern Italian cities for which
there are abundant data. The second step will expand Roy's model of occupational
choice and migration, include the restrictions on occupations related to the
questions above, and compare the predictions of the model with the historical
evidence.

This research project will contribute to three strands of literature. First, it
will offer a different interpretation of the economic history of the Jews in the
past two millennia by showing how economic models provide a different
perspective on historical facts. Second, the economic history of the Jews will
offer a laboratory for studying the impact of changes in social norms on
economic performance over the long run. Some economic patterns that one observes
nowadays (e.g., the selection of Jews into urban, skilled jobs) have been
heavily influenced by social norms, religious attitudes, and cultural values
that emerged centuries ago. This can help understand different paths of economic
development within and between countries, and across ethnic and religious
groups. Third, the project will show that the intergenerational transmission of
cultural and religious traits from parents to children (through human capital
investment) can be a powerful mechanism through which societies take divergent
economic trajectories.