* 0318146
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Composing relationships: Extemporaneous Nanti karintaa poetry in Peruvian Amazonia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Joel Sherzer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2004
* USD 11,992.00

Under the direction of Dr. Joel Sherzer, Ms. Christine Beier will conduct field
research for her doctoral dissertation on performances of the Nanti verbal art
form known as karintaa. Karintaa is extemporaneous chanted poetry performed by
Nantis in the communities of Montetoni and Marankejari in Peruvian Amazonia.
This project will describe karintaa performances within their social, cultural,
and historical contexts. It will examine the role that these performances play
in shaping relationships among individuals and in shaping Nanti society as an
enduring network of relationships. Using a discourse-centered approach, Beier
will investigate the features that distinguish karintaa from other Nanti forms
of speaking and that make karintaa part of a larger communicative system.
Beier's description and analysis of karintaa performances will be based on audio
and video recordings that she makes in Montetoni and Marankejari. She will
analyze these recordings in close collaboration with Nanti consultants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research makes three significant contributions to the
scientific understanding of human societies. First, it addresses general
questions regarding the relationship between language use and social
organization. Second, the project will contribute to linguists' and
anthropologists' understanding of the social, cultural, and verbal life of a
small indigenous group in Amazonia, one of the least known areas of the world.
Third, the project will result in new data from a previously unstudied language.
With the communities' permission, the original recordings as well as related
transcripts and analytical texts will be archived in several places (including
www.ailla.org) to ensure their international accessibility to interested
scholars, students, the general public, and future generations of
Nantis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;