* 0318806
* The North-American Lectures in Thermodynamics, Interfacial Science and Materials Design
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Juan De Pablo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2007
* USD 16,800.00

De Pablo, Juan J. U of Wisconsin - Madison

"The North American Lectures in Thermodynamics, Interfacial Science and
Materials Design"

A program of lectures will continue at universities and research institutions
whose goal has been that of disseminating recent advances in the area of
molecular thermodynamics and complex-fluid behavior, and that of fostering
collaborations and exchanges between the US and Mexico. The speakers represent a
broad spectrum of current research activities and new directions being pursued
at US institutions. While in Mexico, the speakers are hosted by scientists and
engineers from the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), the
Metropolitan University (UAM), the Polytechnic Institute (IPN), and the Mexican
Petroleum Institute (IMP). The net result of this project will continue to be an
increased level of interaction and collaboration between US scientists and
engineers, their Mexican counterparts, and Mexican students. Broader Impacts:

In spite of the close proximity between the US and Mexico, scientific exchanges
between these two countries has been very limited, particularly in the field of
chemical and materials engineering. The proposed lecture series is designed to
make Mexican schools of chemical engineering and related research institutes a
common destination for the North American chemical engineering "lecture
circuit". Large numbers of students in Mexico will be routinely exposed to
state-of-the-art chemical engineering developments and outstanding US lecturers.
Mexican researchers will have an opportunity to meet many of the scientists
whose work they read about and whose texts they lecture from. Industry
affiliated engineers will be exposed to advanced technology. This continued
exchange of information will undoubtedly result in close collaborations between
Mexico and the US, research partnerships with academic institutions, and
commercial partnerships with Mexican industries. It will also result in a
greater willingness of Mexican scientists to exchange knowledge and students
with their US counterparts. This program marks the beginning of what could
become a research and cultural partnership comparable to that adopted with great
success by European countries within the framework of the European Union.

ENG/CTS Interfacial, Transport and Thermodynamics Program and MPS/DMR Office of
Special Programs jointly support this project.