* 0318662
* SBIR Phase II:   An Innovative Normal Stress Sensor System for Complete Characterization of Polymer Shear Flow Properties
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Seong-Gi Baek, RheoSense, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,011,289.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address
several technical improvements needed for successful commercialization of a
novel MEMS sensor plate containing monolithic miniature capacitive pressure
sensors. As shown in Phase I, the sensor plate can be used to accurately measure
the first (N1) and second (N2) normal stress differences, which are important
nonlinear elastic flow properties of various classes of viscoelastic liquids. In
Phase II, sensor packaging and lead transfer to the sensors will be made
suitable for high volume, high quality manufacturing of sensor plates. One
version will be optimized for measurements at lower pressures and another
version optimized for measurements on molten commercial thermoplastics at higher
temperatures and pressures. The latter version of the sensor plate will be
smaller in diameter to make possible measurements on smaller samples at higher
shear rates, and will contain miniature temperature sensors that will enable
accurate compensation for changes in sensor calibration constant with
temperature. Improvements will be tested with a wide variety of commercial
polymer systems and other important classes of viscoelastic liquids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This novel sensor plate will meet the critical market need
for an inexpensive instrument for fully characterizing shear flow properties of
molten thermoplastics. The competing alternative technology, the force rebalance
transducer (FRT) is expensive and works best with large samples. It is
simpler/less expensive to adapt a sensor plate rather than a transducer to
existing rheometers. Hence the sensor plate has significant commercial potential
to satisfy pent-up demand for an inexpensive way to upgrade rheometers to allow
flow elasticity measurements. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;