* 0318080
* Constructing Interregional Commodity-Industry Accounts for U.S. States
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Randall Jackson, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2005
* USD 99,994.00

Various mechanisms link the fortunes of regional economies to one another. These
linkages can be political, social, and economic, and can involve not only flows
of information, but also flows of goods and services (commodities). Through the
exchange of information and commodities (interregional trade), economic impulses
are transmitted throughout the regions in an economic system. Hence, economic
growth in one region can stimulate other regional economies, and likewise,
downturns in the economy of one region can have negative impacts on other
interdependent regions. Understanding the nature of these interregional linkages
can be enhanced by providing a formal representation of information and
commodity flows among regions. This research will provide such a representation
in the form of interregional trades of commodities among US states, delineating
both industry and institutional origins and destinations. The project focuses on
the estimation of interstate exchanges of commodities, leaving the estimation of
interregional factor flows and interregional inter-institutional flows as
avenues for future research. Information from two sources is used in estimating
the trade flows. The first is a commercially available dataset that enumerates
intraregional commodity, factor and institutional flows, and the second is
publicly available transportation shipment data from the Commodity Flow Survey
(CFS) conducted by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. Because disclosure
rules and statistical reliability problems make it impossible to use the
unmodified CFS data, the project uses a three-phase method to generate an
interregional commodity flow accounting framework that is consistent with
published national data. First, spatial regularities within the CFS data are
estimated econometrically. Second, optimization techniques are applied to
estimate gross interregional flows by commodity. Third, the structure of these
relationships is used to map the intraregional accounts to a consistent
multiregional system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interregional database that
results from this project will provide a foundation for a wide variety of
analytical research advancing knowledge and understanding of the US state and
interstate economic system. Analyses that will flow from this database include
studies of economic structure and structural change, and the identification of
key industry sectors and critical interstate linkages by state. The database
will find use as the foundation of a range of extended models formulated
specifically to analyze the economic impacts of various policies, including
those that focus on trade, transportation infrastructure, and economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;