* 0318606
* Space Weather: Solar Wind/Magnetospheric Controls of Substorm Onset and Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Kan Liou, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 09/30/2006
* USD 192,000.00

The primary objectives of this project are to investigate triggering mechanisms
of substorm expansion phase onset and time scales of different substorm phases
by using the technique of auroral oval positional analysis. The questions that
will be addressed are: (1) Can reductions in convection trigger substorms (e.g.
northward turning of the IMF)? (2) Can magnetospheric compression (e.g. Storm
Sudden Commencements) trigger substorms? (3) What determines substorm times
scales? (4) Can growth phase parameters predict substorm characteristics? These
issues are of particular importance to the National Space Weather Program. The
method to be used involves a massive statistical study. A large number (~ tens
of millions) of global auroral images acquired from the ultraviolet imager (UVI)
aboard the Polar satellite during the ISTP mission will address these questions.
In addition to the images, solar wind plasma and magnetic field observations
from the Geotail, Wind, and IMP-8 spacecraft, energetic particle data from the
LANL series of geosynchronous satellites, magnetometer data from the GOES
geosynchronous satellites and from the ground are compiled and analyzed to
establish statistically meaningful results. This three-year effort includes
substorm event identification and selection, auroral feature extraction (polar
cap and oval location and auroral power), and correlation analysis. This project
will investigate the temporal variations of the polar cap size, the oval
boundary locations (both poleward and equatorward), and auroral power before and
after auroral onsets to determine conditions that lead to the expansion phase
onset. In addition, it will correlate interplanetary shocks with auroral onsets
and provide a time-scale analysis of the different phases of substorms. All data
products, including an onset list and substorm movies, as well as published
results (journal reprints), will be made available to the general community
through the web and CD-ROMs upon request.