* 0318291
* Prototype International Virtual Institute for the Development of a Materials World Network
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2008
* Robert Chang, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 12/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Continued progress in materials science and engineering has become increasingly
dependent upon global collaborative efforts that pool resources and reduce costs
through a Materials World Network operating in real and virtual space. This
project supports the design and development of a prototype International Virtual
Institute (IVI) as a test bed for the virtual services envisioned for a
Materials World Network. The project develops a cyber-infrastructure that will
enhance the use of physical infrastructures in real space. The proposed IVI
prototype includes, in the first phase, a Global Research Gallery and an
Evaluation Center. The Global Research Gallery will allow researchers and
students to: 1. View pre-publication results on current research; 2. Discuss
research findings without attending a conference; 3. Compare research results
from different labs at one location; find the latest research techniques and
identify tools for cutting edge measurements; 4. Develop potential collaborators
with complementary research strengths and resources; 5. View previously
inaccessible research activities from top-rated institutions; 6. Present their
research work at minimal cost; and 7. Create global topical networks. 8.
Schedule special GRG exhibits to meet their specific research and networking
needs. The Evaluation Center will be used to assess the usefulness of our cyber
infrastructure. User feedback will be collected to evaluate the following: 1.
Global use of the IVI as a resource for research and collaboration; 2.
Willingness of users to participate in the further development of the IVI
network; and 3. General level of support from academia, industry, government,
foundations, etc. More specifically, a multiple-focus approach will be adopted
to evaluate benefits to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
can potentially enrich the research and education environment of students,
teachers and their colleagues. In particular, the IVI prototype can deliver the
most impact in the following&lt;br/&gt;areas: 1. It can enhance the utilization
and the sharing of global infrastructures for research and&lt;br/&gt;education;
2. The IVI infrastructure is designed to facilitate the rapid and broad
dissemination of&lt;br/&gt;scientific and technological findings and
understanding; 3. Provides a unique opportunity to enhance&lt;br/&gt;teaching,
training and learning among students and teachers from different parts of the
world; 4. It is a&lt;br/&gt;uniquely useful platform for encouraging global
scientific and cultural exchanges among students; and&lt;br/&gt;5. The IVI is
designed to be a "level playing field" for all who wish to participate. The IVI
serves&lt;br/&gt;under-represented groups in this country, in other developed
countries, and in developing countries&lt;br/&gt;around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;