* 0318394
* Firm Finance and Enforcement Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Stefan Krasa, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 230,459.00

This project will study how enforcement institutions affect a firm's ability to
raise funds. Recent empirical studies have documented a link between legal
systems and the ability of firms to raise capital. Currently, there is no
integrated model that organizes these empirical observations and can quantify
the impact of proposed reforms. This research will develop a computable
contracting model, which includes the legal system as an essential element, and
will show how legal and other institutions affect a number of key variables that
relate to firm finance. Specifically, whether a firm raises funds via loans or
equity, the loan size or interest rate, the likelihood that a firm will default
on a loan, and whether a firm can obtain funds at all. We will focus on two
important aspects of most legal codes: 1) the amount of protection that the code
grants: for example, inherent in most bankruptcy codes is an important tradeoff.
If creditors are favored in the bankruptcy process relative to debtors, then
interest rates will be lower and it will be easier for existing firms to raise
finance. However, entrepreneurs will be more reluctant to start new ventures. 2)
The cost to enforce the rights that the code grants: This cost will affect the
types of contracts written and the incentive to "settle out of court" (i.e.,
avoid the formal legal system).

The goal of the project is to use the computable contracting model to determine
the overall impact of these aspects of the legal system on firm finance (i.e.,
access to credit, loan interest rates, bankruptcy rates, and the composition of
firm credit). The inability of firms to obtain adequate finance is a significant
problem for many firms, particularly those that are small, young and/or located
in emerging markets. The computable contracting model that we will develop will
be used to quantify the effects of alternative policy proposals for
institutional reform. For example, a recent trend in bankruptcy reform is to
institute legislation to lower bankruptcy by decreasing debtor protection. The
economic impact of such legislation is unclear because of the tradeoff noted
above. High levels of debtor protection in a bankruptcy code encourage default,
thereby raising bankruptcy costs and increasing the cost of finance for all
firms. However, better debtor protection may encourage entrepreneurs to start
small businesses, which are an engine of growth in most economies. This research
project will provide a model that will be used to quantify these tradeoffs in a
systematic way, allowing policy-makers to evaluate the effects of alternative
policy proposals on key economic variables. The ability to conduct these types
of policy comparisons is essential for an informed debate about legal and other
types of institutional reform.



