* 0318200
* Nonparametric Models and Methods for Social Sciences Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* D. Wayne Osgood, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2007
* USD 234,216.00

Social scientists often collect and analyze data that are longitudinal. Some
longitudinal studies have long durations, which result in large number of
observations per subject and give rise to what is called functional data. The
analysis of such data often is complicated for two reasons in addition to the
lack of independence. First, for many kinds of social science data, there are
weak theories about functional forms explaining the effects of factors and weak
measurement procedures (e.g., with attitudes) that produce ordinal or only
somewhat stronger (but typically not interval) scales. Thus, there is need for
flexible modeling and test procedures for non-normal and often heteroscedastic
data. Second, missing observations are common whenever subjects are followed for
long periods. Typically, "missingness" is not completely at random, causing
parametric-type remedies. In this project, the investigators propose a fully
nonparametric approach to some inference questions regarding such data. They
will consider inference procedures for a) multi-way heteroscedastic analysis of
variance designs when some (or all) of the factors have many levels but small
number of replications per cell, b) the effects of factors which adjust for the
presence of covariates, c) the covariate effect and its interaction with
categorical factors, and d) designs with missing data. Procedures that use
weighted averages of (mid-) ranks and that are known to maintain a high level of
efficiency for a wide variety of data types will also be developed for the above
problems. Facets of the project are closely connected to the classical problem
of lack-of-fit testing and some methods that will be developed also will be
relevant in this area. This research builds upon prior results by the
investigators, many of which were obtained using previous
grants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flexible modeling provided by the nonparametric
approach, coupled with the efficient test procedures afforded by (mid-) rank
test statistics, are the key thrusts of this project. To ascertain the effect of
several categorical factors and continuous covariates on a response of interest,
researchers typically use parametric or semiparametric event history modeling,
including linear models, generalized linear models, frailty models, marginal
proportional hazards models, and random coefficient models. These models depend
on assumptions that may or may not be satisfied for any given application. This
can have unpleasant practical consequences as documented in several case
studies. Moreover, missing observations require imputations that are done with
parametric assumptions. In fact, it is widely believed that nonparametric
procedures cannot be used when data are missing at random (as opposed to missing
completely at random). Programs for implementing the nonparametric procedures
will be developed and applied to a number of social sciences studies including
a) questions regarding routine activities and deviant behavior, b) examination
of the effects of various life circumstances on criminal offending, and c)
examination of incarcerated boys recently released from correctional
institutions. This award is jointly supported by the Division of Mathematical
Sciences and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences as
part of the Mathematical Sciences Priority Area.&lt;br/&gt;