* 0319509
* SBIR Phase I:  GOLDFINGER -- A Highly Integrated Technology for the Fabrication of Radio Frequency Micro Electro Mechanical Systems Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Jeffry Sniegowski, MEMX, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 98,934.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 Project will develop a highly
integrated Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) technology that will combine
SUMMiT V, the world's most advanced surface micromachining technology, with
innovative thick metal films to produce Radio Frequency (RF) devices of
unmatched performance, cost and reliability. Advanced polysilicon MEMS
technologies like the SUMMiT V technology have the mechanical sophistication to
achieve wide tuning range at low operating voltage, but the series resistance of
polysilicon precludes creation of devices with suitable quality factor, or Q.
The selective thick film metallization of SUMMiT V structures will be employed
to design RF MEMS devices with both very low series resistance and high quality
factors. This integrated technology, named GOLDFINGER, will be demonstrated in
the design and manufacture of a high performance tunable capacitor with low
actuation voltage (&lt;6 volts), wide tuning range (greater than 1.5:1), and
high quality factor (&gt;200). Tunable capacitors with such performance do not
exist today, and the successful realization of this device will enable
reductions in size, cost, and power consumption in the next generation of mobile
phone handsets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GOLDFINGER technology will enable the
building of tunable capacitors with unmatched performance. The tunable capacitor
market is estimated to be approximately $120M in size: 400M handsets annually,
with 2 tunable capacitors per handset at approximately $0.15 each. The
GOLDFINGER technology will also enable the development of other RF MEMS devices
as well. For example, the GOLDFINGER technology can be used to make next
generation inductors and resonators. The total RF MEMS market is predicted to
reach &gt;$1.0 billion by 2007, with RF MEMS being utilized in a wide range of
applications. Satellite communication, auto electronics, RFID tags, adjustable
antennas, LANs, base stations, radar systems, and other wireless products are
just some of the market segments that would benefit from high performance RF
MEMS devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;