* 0319301
* SBIR Phase I:      Enhanced Biomolecular Analysis Using Advanced Direct Detection Methods
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Charles Pennington, Luna Innovations, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,980.00

This Small Business Innovation Research project will investigate enhanced
measurements that can be made using a system that simultaneously reports mass
capture during a biomolecular interaction along with changes in the structure of
the capturing molecule. Current direct detection instruments are based on
optical techniques that respond to changes in refractive index. To date, this
response has been attributed strictly to mass capture as molecules are bound to
the sensor surface. Using an optical fiber based grating technique, this project
will show that conformational changes in derivatized proteins can create a
transduction signal upon binding. Separating out these two effects will provide
a more accurate picture of the molecular interaction, a better understanding of
immobilization chemistries and the effect on protein response, and the potential
for instruments with increased measurement sensitivity.

The main commercial application of this project will be in the area of drug
discovery research. Companies involved in drug discovery require an instrument
able to detect and characterize protein interactions. Current direct detection
biosensor instruments are limited to measuring bound mass. The proposed
development effort will enable the characterization of conformational changes
simultaneously with the measurement of bound mass and will be implemented in a
high-throughput format.

