* 0319523
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a Nuclear Microprobe System for Interdisciplinary Research and the Integration of Research and Undergraduate Education at Hope College
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Paul DeYoung, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2006
* USD 680,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Hope College under the direction of Dr. Graham
Peaslee for&lt;br/&gt;a particle accelerator and attached microprobe facility to
enhance the research efforts of&lt;br/&gt;faculty and undergraduate students.
This new instrumentation will be used in a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary research projects conducted in the areas of
environmental chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;biochemistry and biophysics, condensed matter
physics and materials science,&lt;br/&gt;electrochemistry, paleontology and
geochemistry. While the disciplines affected by this&lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art
instrumentation vary, the intellectual merits of these research projects
are&lt;br/&gt;consistent in that they each advance a field of basic scientific
research, and they each&lt;br/&gt;involve significant opportunities for
undergraduate training in doing so. Additionally,&lt;br/&gt;most of the research
projects proposed will strengthen interdisciplinary
connections&lt;br/&gt;between two or more research groups.&lt;br/&gt;Ion beam
analysis techniques that will be available with this instrumentation
include&lt;br/&gt;microPIXE, STIM and RBS, which allow characterization and
quantitative measurement&lt;br/&gt;of elements on the surface of materials.
Specific examples of the work to be pursued with&lt;br/&gt;this instrumentation
include direct measurement of anthropogenic metals in the
lake&lt;br/&gt;sediment and quantitative assessment of metals in protein gel
assays. Other projects will&lt;br/&gt;simply use the analytical tools provided
by this instrumentation to further the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of materials
developed on campus or to solve problems that cannot be&lt;br/&gt;answered by
other methods. Examples of this include characterization of
amorphous&lt;br/&gt;nitrite films for optical and electronic devices and
phthalocyanine films for use in&lt;br/&gt;electrochemical sensors, or studying
the chemical surroundings of dinosaur bones&lt;br/&gt;between the time of their
death and their discovery as fossils.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to these valuable
research contributions that become possible with this&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation,
the broader impact of this proposal includes the training
of&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students in some of the state-of-the-art analytical
methods employed in&lt;br/&gt;physics, chemistry, biology, geology and
environmental science. What is novel about this&lt;br/&gt;particular
instrumentation is that it will form a common tool that multidisciplinary
teams&lt;br/&gt;of undergraduates (and their research mentors) will use together
to solve complex&lt;br/&gt;research problems. In addition, it is anticipated
that companies will be able to obtain&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated materials analysis
from this facility occasionally, which will help local&lt;br/&gt;industries stay
competitive.&lt;br/&gt;