* 0319972
* SBIR Phase I:     Development of an Optical Sensor for Instantaneous Detection of Bioaerosols
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Rafael Perez-Reisler, Caribbean Thermal Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will study the
feasibility of an instrument capable of detecting biological agents
instantaneously by measuring droplet sizes and the intrinsic fluorescence of
biological material. The instrument will provide instantaneous measurements
indoors and outdoors of the biological aerosols present in the environment with
the use of long-range fluorescence excitation, which produces a multiphoton
optical signal. It has been demonstrated in laboratory settings that a
multiphoton florescence emission along with particle size could be a clear
fingerprint for airborne biological material. A long range laser in the order of
800 nm will detect the micron size aerosol as it pass the sampling volume
providing instantaneous measurements of intrinsic fluorescence and particle
size. The particle size of the aerosol will be detected by measuring the
intensity of eth elastic scattering of the laser. A compact micro-control system
will drive all system components. Software will be developed to drive the micro-
controller and quantify all the fluorescence measurements. The system will be
configured so that it is compact, easy to use and
reliable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first generation of the product will target
the stand-alone semi-portable system market. This Phase I project will provide
design specifications for the indoor-outdoor air quality conditions, and
biological terrorist attacks alarm system applications.