* 0319265
* SBIR Phase I:    Large Aperture, Periodically Poled, Hydrothermal Potassium Titanyl Phosphate for Highly Efficient Frequency Conversion of High-Power Solid-State and Fiber Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Tony Roberts, ADVR, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,543.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
investigate the feasibility of fabricating large-aperture, periodic
ferroelectric domain gratings for quasi-phase matched laser frequency
conversion. The key innovation in this effort is the use of low temperature
hydrothermally grown potassium titanyl phosphate (LTH-KTP) as the nonlinear
optical substrate material. Using LTH-KTP will enable a simplified poling
process, resulting in increased fabrication yields, lower component costs as
well as allow the fabrication of high-quality, large aperture (&gt;2mm)
periodically poled wafers. The ability to periodically pole thick wafers of
hydrothermally grown KTP, combined with its high resistance to optical damage
(&gt;500MW/cm2) will enable highly efficient, wavelength conversion of high-
power laser sources for use in Lidar-based remote sensing applications including
the increasingly important Homeland Security area of standoff detection of
chemical and biological agents. The anticipated results of the Phase I effort
include a demonstration of periodic poling in LTH-KTP using the micro-electrode
technology and a preliminary assessment of the effect different poling
configurations have on the quality of the domain grating. In the Phase II
effort, the poling technology will be refined and grating structures suitable
commercial applications will be fabricated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
periodically pole thick wafers of hydrothermally grown KTP, combined with its
high resistance to optical damage will enable highly efficient, nonlinear
optical frequency conversion of high-power ytterbium fiber and diode pumped
solid state Nd: YAG lasers sources. Laser sources with increased pulse energies,
wavelength flexibility, and excellent beam quality, will find use in both
civilian and military applications. Specific applications include laser-based
material processing (cutting, welding and marking), remote sensing for standoff
detection of chemical and biological agents, environmental monitoring, forest
management as well as Lidar-based missile identification, tracking, and
targeting.&lt;br/&gt;