* 0319938
* MRI/RUI: Aquisition of Controlled Environment Chambers for Enhanced Research in the Plant Biology Program at Hope College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2006
* Thomas Bultman, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 09/30/2006
* USD 154,058.00

A grant has been awarded to Hope College under the direction of Dr. Thomas
Bultman for the acquisition of four controlled environment plant growth
chambers, which, along with recent faculty hires, will considerably strengthen
and extend the research and teaching program in the plant sciences at Hope
College. Ongoing and predicted global climatic changes make plant ecology a
particularly critical subfield of biology and therefore one to which
undergraduates need exposure. The chambers will allow replicated, multi-
factorial experiments of sufficient sample size for statistical validity.
Chambers will be computer networked to allow integrated control from local or
remote sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The controlled environment chambers will be
used to foster faculty-student collaborative research on impacts of global
climatic change on plant-fungus and plant-fungus-insect interactions and on tree
seedlings from neotropical cloud forests. Dr. Bultman and students will test if
enhanced CO2 and drought interact with other environmental variables to
influence an endophytic fungus/grass mutualism. Utilizing the controlled
environment chambers, experiments will be conducted to the evaluate shoot and
root mass response to variation in endophyte infection, CO2 level, defoliation,
drought and fungal genotype. Dr. Swarthout and students will determine the
response of endophytically-infected grass to elevated CO2 and temperature
through enhanced levels of carboxylating enzymes. They will explore this
response under a range of conditions in which nutrients (nitrogen and
phosphorus) and water availability become limiting. Members of Dr. Bultman's
laboratory will also test the insect response to variation in endophyte
infection, CO2 level, plant damage, drought and fungal genotype using the
controlled environment growth chambers. In like manner, they will also determine
the response by natural enemies of herbivores to variation of endophyte
infection, CO2 level, and fungal genotype. Dr. Murray and students will seek to
uncover physiological explanations for alterations in elevational distributions
of tree seedlings within the cloud forests at Monteverde, Costa Rica.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of the award is that
undergraduate students in both research and classroom settings will gain
important training in assessing primary and interaction effects using
appropriate statistical procedures. Ability to precisely control light duration,
light intensity, temperature, humidity and CO2 will greatly expand faculty and
student research opportunties at Hope College. These opportunities are critical
in the development of students as scientists and help to ensure students pursue
careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;