* 0319203
* Acquisition of a Multi-Sensor Core-Logger in Support of the Multi-User LRC Core Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Douglas Schnurrenberger, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2005
* USD 179,258.00

0319203&lt;br/&gt;Ito&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial support
for the acquisition of a multi-sensor core logger (MSCL) for automated analysis
of basic physical properties of lacustrine cores. A state-of-the-art MSCL system
will be purchased from Geotek, Ltd. and will augment an existing Geotek MCSL
already housed and operated at the Limnological Research Center (LRC) at the
University of Minnesota. The current MSCL at the LRC has been in operation for
the last ten years but is limited to logging whole-core sections for p-wave
velocity, gamma-ray density and magnetic susceptibility. The new MSCL will allow
for the logging of split cores and will include sensors for color imaging,
electrical resistivity and higher resolution acquisition of magnetic
susceptibility. The MSCL will support national and international
interdisciplinary paleolimnological research of importance to understanding
earth's climate record. The MSCL will be used as part of a program of initial
core description of lake cores from multiple global lake drilling projects that
are part of the International Continental Scientific Drilling Program. Lake
sediments from lakes Titicaca, Malawi and Baikal will eventually be archived at
the University of Minnesota and initial core descriptions carried out by
investigators using LRC equipment including the MSCL.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;