* 0319828
* SBIR Phase I:     Diode-Pumped, High-Power, Cr:LiSAF-Based Ultrafast Laser and THz Source
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Evgueni Slobodtchikov, Q-PEAK, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to conduct key
experiments directed toward the development of an innovative, ultrafast-pulse
laser source. While Ti: sapphire-based femtosecond sources are widely deployed
in scientific laboratories throughout the world, they have a level of complexity
and cost that is a barrier to wider use of femtosecond systems. Based on a
directly diode-pumped Cr:LiSAF laser and following a multi-pass slab design that
has proven successful with similar materials, the source to be developed in this
project will be less complex, smaller and less expensive than present ultrafast
laser systems. One application that will be emphasized in the project is
terahertz generation, which in turn has a variety of significant uses. In the
Phase I program, Cr:LiSAF lasers will be built and characterize, with two
possible diode-pumping geometries. In addition, a Q-switched laser based on one
of the Cr:LiSAF designs will be built and characterized to provide data on the
potential performance of a regenerative amplifier based on the proposed
technology. Finally a preliminary design will be conducted of a high-power,
diode-pumped, Cr:LiSAF-based THz-radiation system. If the overall effort is
successful, the outcome will be ultrafast- and terahertz-generation products
suited for scientific and industrial customers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
initial market for the ultrafast laser would be the scientific research
community, but it is anticipated that industrial applications such as process-
control spectroscopy, ultra-precise micro-machining, biological imaging and
high-speed electronics circuit testing, would also accept this technology. The
development of the associated THz source would provide the option of supplying
devices to address the emerging applications of THz systems. These applications
include, but are not limited to, communications, atmospheric sensing, collision
avoidance, medical imaging, non-destructive inspection and security scanning.
&lt;br/&gt;