* 0319759
* SBIR Phase I:     Beamforming Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) for Nondestructive Evaluation (NDE) and Medical Ultrasound
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Vincent Lupien, ACOUSTIC IDEAS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an advanced
ultrasonic beamforming Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) chip. The
beamformer ASIC will enable three-dimensional imaging to be employed in intra-
cardiac catheter imaging, surgical guidance of instruments, and tumor ablation.
The level of integration, frequency of operation, and scalability proposed in
this project have never been attempted. The purpose of the Phase I effort is
determine the feasibility of this ASIC. To accomplish this task: (1) a finite
element substrate noise model will be developed and used to evaluate the effect
of noise on signal integrity; (2) the signal path will be modeled using a
MATLAB-based architectural simulator embodying the exact numerical and sampling
rate representations of the ASIC; and (3) a partial circuit design of the chip
will be obtained in preparation for later stages of development in Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diagnostic ultrasound is used to non-invasively and
non-destructively investigate both living and inanimate objects, spanning
applications from diagnostic obstetrics to defect detection in aerospace
structures. The fundamental function shared by all imaging ultrasound machines
is beamforming. The beamforming ASIC proposed in this Phase I SBIR effort will
be developed with the explicit purpose of exceeding the technical requirements
of most applications in both medical and non-destructive evaluation. The
significant performance advantages featured by the ASIC will make it an
attractive choice to instrument makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;