* 0319749
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Thermal Gravimetric Analyzer - FTIR Instrumentation for Undergraduate Research Projects
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Norman Duffy, Wheeling Jesuit University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 08/31/2006
* USD 102,998.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Wheeling Jesuit University will acquire an integrated
thermal gravimetric analyzer - Fourier transform infrared (TGA/FTIR) instrument.
This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas including a) the
thermal decomposition of metal inorganic complexes to form active sulfides for
photovoltaic applications; b) the deactivation and regeneration of VOC oxidation
catalysts; and c) the concentration and sequestration of carbon dioxide. The
TGA/FTIR will also be used in the instrumental analysis and inorganic laboratory
courses. This instrument will also enhance the educational and research training
of students at a neighboring female preparatory high school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating the TGA with FTIR spectroscopy results in a
powerful analytical tool for characterizing thermal decomposition processes and
the adsorption of gases on solids. The instrument provides accurate weight loss
or weight gain data of solids while simultaneously measuring the concentrations
of the product gases to provide kinetic data needed for process evaluation.
These studies will help to identify advanced materials for energy generation and
will expand our scientific knowledge for developing processes for pollution
abatement. &lt;br/&gt;