* 0319243
* Exploring the Links Between Probability Judgments and Comparative Judgments [and the Biases that Influence Them]
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Paul Windschitl, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2008
* USD 203,197.00

Often people must make judgments that require them to consider how a target
entity (e.g., a person, object, event) compares to a specific referent or set of
referents. One such judgment is a probability judgment. When asked "How likely
is Michigan to win the Big Ten Basketball Tournament?" a respondent must
consider not only the strength of the Michigan team, but also the strengths of
other teams in the tournament. Another such judgment is an explicit comparative
judgment. When asked "How good is Michigan compared to the other teams in the
Big Ten?" a respondent must again consider not only the strength of the Michigan
team, but also the strengths of other teams in the Big Ten. Understanding these
two types of judgment, which can be collectively called referent-dependent
judgments, is critical because they underlie decisions and behaviors within wide
variety of life's domains. For example, a doctor's confidence that a patient has
Disease A rather than Disease B or C can influence treatment decisions; an
employer's judgment of how Manager X's productivity compares to other managers
in the company might be the basis for a merit raise; and a consumer's judgment
of how safe Minivan Y is relative to other minivans under consideration might
influence the amount of money the consumer will spend on that minivan.
&lt;br/&gt;Despite the structural overlap between probability and comparative
judgments, these two forms of judgment have not been systematically compared or
simultaneously tested within the same general paradigm. The proposed research
will investigate the key commonalities and differences among these two forms of
referent-dependent judgments. The proposal also outlines a framework for
understanding how three major types of biases (egocentrism, focalism, and
multiple-referent biases) have the potential to influence both probability and
comparative judgments. Many of the proposed experiments will test for possible
differences in how the biases might influence the two forms of judgment.
Overall, these studies would facilitate the development of a theoretical
framework that provides a broader and more synthetic understanding of the major
processes that mediate both biased and unbiased referent-dependent judgments.
&lt;br/&gt;