* 0319273
* Group Travel: XXII International Congress of Entomology, Brisbane, Australia, August 2004
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Susan Weller, Entomological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/2004
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract DEB-0319273&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to
the Entomological Society of America (ESA) to provide funds for 21 junior
research scientists, students or postdoctoral researchers to attend the
International Congress of Entomology in Brisbane, Australia. The Congress is one
of the largest international meetings for entomologists from a broad range of
disciplines with 19 subject areas that range from the classification and
evolution of insects, evolution of behavior, functional genomics, and both
biological and chemical insect control. Funds for travel, accommodation and
registration will be distributed through a competitive process to be
administered by ESA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications for the grants will be
solicited through Society email notices, the ESA Website and Newsletter, and
related societies and list serves. Competition will be open to all applicants
who are U.S. citizens, U.S. residents, or foreign citizens working or studying
at U.S. institutions; membership in ESA is not a
requirement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this grant is to promote young
scientists, whose careers will benefit the most from the international exposure.
Students and postdoctoral fellows will be given the highest consideration for
awards, and awards will be available for all scientific sections within ESA. The
Congress will be a great opportunity for maximizing awardees exposure to
international researchers and a variety of new research methods and programs. In
this time of limited funds at all levels of scientific support, it is especially
critical that the ESA seek support to ensure that the next generation of U.S.
scientists participates actively in the international entomological
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;