* 0319061
* Essays on the Holdup Problem and on the Value of Legal Advice
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Yeon-Koo Che, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 85,542.00

This project will investigate the implication of the holdup problem in a dynamic
environment. The holdup problem exists when an economic agent makes specific
investments, such as workers' acquiring firm-specific skills, or business
partners adapting their product lines and processes to the needs of their
partners. Parties making such investments are often at the risk of expropriation
by their partners since these investments are worth little without their
partners. Protecting the investors from the risk of holdup has been a prominent
rationale for various organization and contractual arrangements, including
vertical integration, reorganization of asset ownership. Most of these theories
rest on a very static assumption about the investments, which is often
unrealistic. The current project reexamines the holdup problem with a model that
permits a more realistic investment dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
so far reveals that, in many plausible circumstances, the holdup problem need
not entail inefficiencies, thus calling into question the reliance on the holdup
problem as a rationale for contracts and organizations. In other cases,
inefficiencies would result from the holdup problem, but organizational
responses necessary to alleviate inefficiencies differ markedly from those
prescribed by the existing theories. The project will thus investigate
organizational/contractual treatment of inefficiencies, and will in the process
explore implications on such long-standing issues as the role of asset ownership
in the performance of firms, the effect of exclusivity agreements and other
trade contracts in protecting specific investments, and the optimal legal rule
for protecting entitlements and compensating their breach (i.e., the issue of
the liability rule vs. the property rule). &lt;br/&gt;