* 0319414
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Photonic-Encoders/Electronic-Decoders for Optical Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Antonio Mendez, MENDEZ R&D ASSOCIATES
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,989.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the design and
performance analysis of a novel photonic/electronic hybrid concept for optical
code division multiple access (CDMA). The small business has developed families
of matrices and hardware designs whereby these can be implemented as
wavelength/time (W/T) matrix codes for high performance optical CDMA networks.
Optical CDMA is usually based on photonic encoding and decoding. There are three
functions which may be better executed by an integrated electronic
decoder/receiver that complements a photonic encoder: (1) electronic rather than
photonic correlation to optimize the signal-to-noise-ratio; (2) programmable
compensation for fiber impairments; and (3) signal processing for multi-user
interference suppression. This project will design a system concept based on
photonic encoding and electronic decoding; carry out design analyses and network
simulations; and generate design specifications and R&amp;D recommendations for
Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technology applicable to local-area-network
(LANs), and metro-area-networks (MANs) and access networks has been developed.
Optical CDMA has traditionally been developed for local area networks to support
multiple concurrent, asynchronous, bursty users; since the late 1990s it has
been considered as a viable contender for the emerging applications of
metropolitan and access networks. The proposer has developed a technology
applicable to either application. This permits supporting a large number of
subscribers with relatively simple transmitters and receivers. The proposer is
targeting metropolitan, access, and extended private networks. Another potential
application is steganography for Homeland
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;