* 0319103
* Modification of the ABC Program and the Evolution of Floral Novelty
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Elena Kramer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 07/31/2007
* USD 345,029.00

Kramer&lt;br/&gt;0319103&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how new
morphological characters evolve has become a major focus of the rapidly growing
field of comparative developmental genetics. In flowering plants, it has been
proposed that radical changes in floral morphology may have been mediated by
simple shifts in the expression domains of homeotic floral organ identity genes.
This hypothesis has not been carefully tested, however, and still leaves
unexplained the question of how the underlying program may have been modified in
cases where a simple "sliding boundary" model is insufficient to explain
morphology. These issues can be addressed through studies of the lower eudicot
family Ranunculaceae, which contains a great diversity of floral morphology.
Although preliminary data suggest that the ABC program in this family has been
reshaped by gene duplications, further characterization of ABC gene homologs is
necessary to clarify these findings and test their broader applicability. To
these ends, the objectives of the project are: 1) to analyze the expression
patterns of AP3, PI, AG, and AP1 homologs in Aquilegia vulgaris using in situ
hybridization; 2) to characterize homeotic mutants of A. vulgaris using SEM,
gene expression studies, candidate gene sequencing and analysis of genetic
segregation; 3) to determine the protein dimerization and DNA binding
capabilities of AP3 and PI homologs from Aquilegia vulgaris; and 4) to use
antibody localization to determine the protein distribution of AP3, PI, AG and
AP1 gene products in Aquilegia vulgaris, Xanthorhiza simplicissima, Clematis
integrifolia, Clematis alpina and Ranunculus ficaria. In addition to
investigating the evolution of floral morphology, these studies will address
issues such as the conservation of organ identity gene function outside the core
eudicots and the role of gene duplication in the evolution of novel
developmental programs. In terms of broader impact, this project will provide
training for undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;