* 0319038
* Analytical-Experimental Approach to Verified Cohesive Zone Fracture Models in Engineering Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Sunil Saigal, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2005
* USD 102,161.00

Proposal: CMS-9820912&lt;br/&gt;PI: S. Saigal&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Analytical-Experimental Approach to
Verified Cohesive Zone&lt;br/&gt;Fracture Models in Engineering
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: The chipping of coatings is studied
using the cohesive &lt;br/&gt;zonebased cohesive finite elements formulation. An
integrated &lt;br/&gt;analytical/experimental/numerical approach is followed.
The cohesive &lt;br/&gt;zone models are postulated to include irreversibility,
rate-dependence, &lt;br/&gt;and the effect of environmental factors. These
postulations are both &lt;br/&gt;guided by and validated by a set of experiments
designed to highlight &lt;br/&gt;various phenomenon occurring in the fracture of
materials systems. The &lt;br/&gt;developments are applied to the industrial
application of chipping of &lt;br/&gt;paint systems. For this application,
multiple, interacting cracks &lt;br/&gt;propagating along unknown trajectories
need to be accounted for. The &lt;br/&gt;cohesive finite elements approach
provides a natural vehicle for such &lt;br/&gt;cracks. Additional applications
of cohesive elements include layered &lt;br/&gt;constructions found in numerous
engineering applications such as &lt;br/&gt;composites, laminated sheets, coated
metal, and microelectronic &lt;br/&gt;devices. The proposed research is carried
out in close cooperation with &lt;br/&gt;the DuPont Company. The experiments for
validation as well as for the &lt;br/&gt;industrial application are carried out
at DuPont. The cohesive models &lt;br/&gt;are developed under the guidance of
DuPont researchers to ensure that &lt;br/&gt;these elements have full industry
validity. The project serves as a &lt;br/&gt;unique training mechanism for
graduate students, introducing them to &lt;br/&gt;university-industry
interactions as well as to the effectiveness of &lt;br/&gt;combined
analytical/numerical/experimental approaches in solving &lt;br/&gt;real-world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;