* 0319448
* STTR Phase I:  Rapid, Nondestructive Residual Stress Characterization of Semiconductor Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Jon Lesniak, Stress Photonics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 95,393.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
produce an infrared photo-elastic stress analysis system utilizing cutting edge
technology analogous to visible light photo-elasticity and applied for the first
time to optically opaque, yet infrared transparent, materials. The device will
allow nondestructive, full-field stress characterization of silicon, compound
semi-conductors, photonic materials, thin films, interfaces, and buried layers
at a speed applicable to on-line inspection. Currently, residual stresses are
not routinely measured because there are no efficient commercially available
techniques. The result of Phase I will be an industrially driven design criteria
for an instrument that can measure these residual stresses in a manner that is
rapid, affordable, easy to master, and easy to justify. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
prototype stress imager will find applications in nearly every portion of the
micro-electronics industry including; wafer manufacture, device manufacture,
microelectronics packaging, and MEMS devices. The proposed instrument will be
relatively inexpensive, affordable enough for small universities, fabs, and
engineering mechanics laboratories. Finally, commercial applications outside the
electronics industry have been identified, including; inspecting thermal barrier
coatings, measuring sintering stresses in ceramics as well as curing stresses in
polymers and polymer composites. &lt;br/&gt;