* 0319076
* BE/GEN-EN:  A Genomic Approach to Physiological Tolerance, Adaptation and Dispersal
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Leo Buss, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

BE/GEN-EN: A Genomic Approach to Physiological Tolerance, Adaptation and
Dispersal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leo W. Buss&lt;br/&gt;Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world's oceans are undergoing pronounced
environmental changes and, with climate alteration, are expected to continue to
do so. If organisms are to survive these challenges they must alter their
physiological tolerances to environmental factors or disperse to locations
within their existing tolerances. At present, our knowledge of the genetic
foundations of tolerance, adaptation or dispersal is scant, scattered, and
idiosyncratic. However, if an appropriate system is developed, genomic
technologies have the capacity to rapidly and near-exhaustively characterize all
genes involved in the response to an experimental environmental challenge. At
present, genomic technologies can be considered mature for only a handful of
organisms and none of these are experimentally tractable marine organisms. This
award has the dual objectives of generating biological resources necessary to
establish Trichoplax adhaerens as a model system for marine environmental
genomics, and to perform experiments intended to demonstrate the utility of this
system in identifying environmentally responsive genes. &lt;br/&gt;In the first
instance, the award will support the maintenance of a standard laboratory line
of Trichoplax, the production of a normalized full-length cDNA library, and the
end-sequencing of some 8,000 clones from this library. These clones will permit
the production of a first generation gene expression microarray comprised of up
to 5,000 unique genes. The intermediate range goal is to use microarrays in
experiments to identify those genes which respond when the environmental
conditions deteriorate to a point at which the animals are induced to disperse.
Three distinct forms of environmental deterioration will be assessed: exposure
to salinity maxima, to thermal maxima, and to critical population densities.
Genes which are up-regulated, down-regulated, and those for which expression
remains unaltered will be identified in Latin Square statistical design. Of
particular interest will be genes whose expression is altered in a parallel
fashion in all treatments, as numbered amongst these genes will be those which
transduce environmental signals to elicit dispersal. While intriguing in their
own right, these specific studies are expected to have the broadest impact as a
proof-of-concept for the viability of marine environmental genomics. From this
proof-of concept, the long-range goal will be to develop a tractable model
system with which any interested scientist can study how external stimuli in the
marine environment are transduced and integrated to ect changes in gene
expression. &lt;br/&gt;