* 0319542
* SBIR Phase I:  Ordered Arrays of Surfactant-Coated Magnetic Nanoparticles for RF and Spintronic Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Michelle Corte-Real, Materials Modification Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
ordered arrays of surfactant-coated magnetic nanoparticles for application in
Radio Frequency (RF) and spintronic devices. The advent of tools to fabricate
2-D arrays of nanoparticles has led to concerted efforts in the development of
different methods to produce size and shape-controlled magnetic nanostructures.
The incorporation of these nanostructures in functional devices however,
requires a thorough understanding of the relationship between nanostructural
parameters and electromagnetic performance. The lack of control over crucial
parameters like particle size and separation drastically compromises
reproducibility. The nascent class of ordered nanostructured materials
circumvents this problem by offering control over nanoscale morphological
parameters. The potential application in RF and spintronic devices has recently
been identified. Monodisperse coated single domain magnetic nanoparticles will
be synthesized, with precise control over size and coating thickness. Subsequent
fabrication of ordered closepacked monolayer films will be via the Langmuir-
Blodgett technique. A study of the spindependent tunneling and RF absorption and
tuning characteristics will help understand the role of particle size in RFand
spintronic device performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arrays of surfactant-coated
nanoparticles can be developed into spintronic devices for high-resolution
magnetic sensing, vital to the high-density recording industry. When deposited
on ferroelectric substrates, these arrays will provide dual tuning (magnetic and
electrical) in devices like micro-patch antennas, phase-shifters, resonators
etc.