* 0319062
* Molecular Modeling of Environmentally Benign Solute-Solvent Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Clare McCabe, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2004
* USD 109,606.00

McCabe, Clare M Colorado School of Mines

"Molecular Modeling of Environmentally Benign Solute-Solvent Systems" As current
solvents have become banned or discouraged from use, solvent replacement - i.e.,
replacing a hazardous and/or carcinogenic solvent in reaction, separation, and
dissolution/cleaning operations with an environmentally acceptable one - is one
of the key methods for turning an existing process into an environmentally
benign one. In the pursuit of environmentally benign processes, the application
of neoteric solvents, including supercritical carbon dioxide and ionic liquids,
show enormous potential for industrial application and it is these fluids that
we focus our proposed research on.

The future focus on the design of environmentally benign processes - whether
achieved by solvent replacement or by the development of fundamentally new
environmentally benign chemical processes - parallels a crucial emerging need
for an accurate comprehensive methodology for calculating the thermodynamic
properties (especially phase equilibria) of mixtures containing novel solvents
at operating conditions relevant to the application of these solvents. For the
wide range of conditions and systems expected to be encountered in
environmentally benign processes, the method for predicting thermodynamic
properties (including phase equilibria) should be robust, rapid and versatile.
The PI proposes to address this need by undertaking a sustained research program
whose goal is to apply molecular theory and simulation to the development,
modification and deployment of a predictive molecular-based methodology based on
the molecular-level statistical associating fluid theory (SAFT) integrated with
other molecular modeling techniques. The PI believes that the resulting
methodology will be the modeling platform of choice for the design of
environmentally benign processes. A combination of theoretical developments to
enhance the predictive capabilities of SAFT in key areas relevant to EB systems
- ab initio methods to facilitate potential model development and testing, and
computer simulations to provide both a rigorous test of the theory and aid in
potential model development - will enable a true predictive platform to be
realized. In pursuit of this goal two broad application areas relevant to EB
processes will be the long-term focus of the PI's research activities. The first
area is the accurate modeling of polar polymer-solvent, and co-polymer-solvent
systems through the incorporation of the underlying molecular interactions in
these systems into the theoretical approach. Secondly the PI will concentrate
efforts on developing much need models and molecular theory for describing the
thermodynamic properties of ionic liquids and their mixtures. In this proposal,
the PI will focus on the first of these two areas.

The proposed research is the first step towards achieving the PI's long-term
goals. The lessons learned from this project will facilitate similar advances in
other application areas. Strong ties with industry and experimental groups will
be maintained throughout the project which will provide students with the
opportunity to experience both the theoretical and experimental sides of
research, a means to validate our methods and models, and provide guidance
towards key problems faced by industry in adopting environmentally benign
alternatives to existing, and new processes.

The results of this research will be incorporated into an active-learning-based
molecular modeling course, under development by the PI. The course will be
suitable for both graduates and undergraduate students, which will ensure that
students at CSM will be exposed to and participate in the frontiers of molecular
modeling and the molecular thermodynamics of EB processes. Undergraduate
participation in the project will be strongly encouraged through research
projects and women and minorities actively recruited through the PI's
participation in the Science Related Degrees project at CSM, which offers
mentored research projects for undergraduate students in these underrepresented
groups.

