* 0319837
* MRI:  Acquisition of SQUID Magnetometer for Ferromagnetic Semiconductor and Oxide Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Shiv Khanna, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2004
* USD 159,418.00

We request funds to acquire a Quantum Design Superconducting Quantum
Interference Device&lt;br/&gt;(SQUID) magnetometer to measure the magnetic
properties of Mn and Cr-doped Group III-&lt;br/&gt;nitride films grown on both
doped and undoped AlGaN/GaN heterostructures and single&lt;br/&gt;crystalline
Mn-based perovskites. Our laboratories are equipped with all the growth,
fabrication,&lt;br/&gt;testing for electrical and structural capabilities, but
this critical piece of equipment is missing. The&lt;br/&gt;equipment will be
installed in the state of the art Virginia Microelectronic Center
research&lt;br/&gt;laboratories at VCU. Spurred by room temperature
ferromagnetism in GaN:Mn and potential&lt;br/&gt;applications combining spin and
charge transport for devices under the umbrella of spintronics,&lt;br/&gt;we
will investigate the fundamental issues in nanoscale semiconducting
ferromagnets, such as&lt;br/&gt;thermal stability of magnetism, Curie
temperature, magnetic viscosity, coercivity, and inter-dot&lt;br/&gt;magnetic
interactions in GaN quantum dots interfaced with GaMnN/GaCrN films, as well
as&lt;br/&gt;GaMnN or GaCrN dots interfaced with GaN films. Additionally, we
will also investigate&lt;br/&gt;magnetism in single crystalline oxides, which
are produced in our laboratory using MBE systems&lt;br/&gt;and a sputtering
system. Specifically, the temperature dependence of magnetization in both
field-&lt;br/&gt;cooled and zero-field-cooled conditions, magnetization
hysteresis and magnetic relaxation related&lt;br/&gt;behavior will be measured.
These are critical to understand the magnetic behavior of
these&lt;br/&gt;ferromagnetic semiconductors and magnetic
perovskites.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, magnetic anisotropy and easy axis
reorientations related to hole density or epitaxial&lt;br/&gt;growth lattice-
matching strains will be investigated. The behavior of thin film systems
containing&lt;br/&gt;a few layers of diluted magnetic materials is complicated
by the fact that the absolute magnitude&lt;br/&gt;of the magnetic moment is very
small, especially at higher temperatures. In order to measure&lt;br/&gt;these
effects with high precision and obtain the relevant information for fabricating
high-quality&lt;br/&gt;samples, we need a SQUID magnetometer equipped with
sample space oven and sample rotator.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposal is to provide basic and technological understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;physics of behavior of magnetic spins on spin-based devices from
the precise measurement of&lt;br/&gt;magnetization properties on dilute magnetic
semiconductors and magnetic oxides fabricated using&lt;br/&gt;the state-of-the-
art techniques. The broader impacts of this proposal are to provide
necessary&lt;br/&gt;information and feedback on the fabrication of spinotronic
devices, search for new magnetic&lt;br/&gt;materials for better spin-injection,
and understanding of spin degrees of freedom in this new class&lt;br/&gt;of
ferromagnetic semiconductors.