* 0319021
* MRI/RUI-Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Multiple Users at UNCG
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Esther Leise, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 204,927.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of North Carolina Greensboro (UNCG)
under the direction of Dr. Esther Leise for the purchase of a confocal
microscope as the focal point of a multi-user facility to be housed in and
managed by the UNCG Department of Biology. Confocal microscopy is an enhanced
form of fluorescence light microscopy that depends upon laser illumination and
computerized image formation to eliminate out-of-focus and scattered light,
thereby providing the user with unprecedented clarity of detail and information
extraction capabilities that are impossible to replicate by traditional
fluorescence microscopy. This instrument will be the first confocal microscope
at UNCG and in the greater Greensboro metropolitan area and will allow
researchers at UNCG to use confocal microscopy on a daily basis and to routinely
train students in the use of this state-of-the-art microscopical method.

The major users of this confocal microscope facility include Dr. Leise and 6
additional principal investigators from the Departments of Biology and
Nutrition. All of the major users have active research programs that require
confocal microscopy to maximize their data collection efficiency and to obtain
data that is currently impossible to extract with existing university microscopy
facilities. The research programs of all of the major users also involve
undergraduate and graduate student research assistants, so students from each
laboratory will be instructed in the use of the confocal microscope and will
have ample opportunity to obtain hands-on experience in obtaining and analyzing
confocal data. The research projects of the major users range from the molecular
to the organismal, but all incorporate investigations into basic biological
questions. Researchers will use confocal microscopy together with a broad range
of model systems and organisms to study the changing patterns of gene expression
and protein localization that occur during organismal development, to analyze
the dynamics of subcellular protein trafficking and distribution in cultured
cells, and to learn more about life cycles and geographic distributions of toxic
microorganisms. Incorporation of confocal microscopy into Cell Biology
Laboratory and Genetics Laboratory courses will expose some 250 undergraduates,
including significant numbers of women and minority students, per year to the
usefulness of this advanced microscopical instrument.

The confocal microscope facility will improve ongoing research programs at UNCG
and will enhance the teaching mission of that institution as well. The confocal
facility will also affect the broader missions of campus life science
departments by promoting interdisciplinary collaborations between students and
faculty in at least 2 departments. The confocal microscope facility will also
link activities at UNCG to local technologically-oriented businesses in the
Greensboro area. The improved quality of campus research and educational
experiences for UNCG students will promote the new Piedmont Triad biotechnology
initiative as well as make UNCG students more competitive for careers in the
fields of biotechnology and in the life and biomedical sciences.