* 0320956
* Acquisition of Research Instrumentation for Web-based Visualization of Spatio-Temporal Data
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Naphtali Rishe, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Rita V. Rodriguez
* 07/31/2008
* USD 440,000.00

This project, enhancing database, data delivery, and data visualization in
collaboration with the University of Illinois-Chicago, targets the development
of technology to address problems in the areas of spatial, temporal, moving
objects, and data visualization. Results from the research will be used to
enhance TerraFly, an interactive Web-enabled system at http://TerraFly.fiu.edu
designed to aid in the visualization of spatial and remote sensed imagery. This
research testbed at FIU creates simulated moving object data in real-time and
generates overlays of moving objects in real time for display by the TerraFly
client. TerraFly, the subject of a cooperative Research and Development
Agreement between FIU and USGS, presently takes more than 13 terabytes of aerial
photography covering US and makes it available to its users. This mass data,
combined with point and polygonal data (made available for TerraFly research by
Navigational Technologies) and moving data mined from Internet sources, combined
with additional simulated moving object data created by the infrastructure, is
expected to allow performance of realistic tests of spatial indexing techniques.
Research activities include: Storage and Visualization of Spatial Data Storage
and Visualization of Moving Object Data Spatio-Temporal Data Indexing TerraFly
includes land, urban, and coastal imagery data collected by satellites, aerial
photography and other remote sensing means. The first activity involves
enhancements allowing storage of additional metadata, queries, and data
processing routines and algorithms, and also to allow on-the-fly incorporation
of data stored at remote sites. The second includes handling data update
intervals, query languages (linguistic issues), indexing, and
uncertainty/imprecision. The third activity performs research toward a new data
structure for spatial searching with S-trees (multidimensional search trees
optimized for extremely fast updates and queries). The proposed S-Tree is a
hybrid data structure that uses a combination of a hash table and a quadtree (a
multidimensional binary search tree that divides the space into regions at the
points being inserted in the tree). Results of the research will be made
available to disaster managers and thus benefit society. Moreover,
underrepresented students will be offered hand-on experience for research
efforts, thus enabling more potential PhD students in the CS/CE pipeline.