* 0320875
* Acquisition of a High Performance Parallel Computing Cluster for the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Mathematics and Computer Science at Clark University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Harvey Gould, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 190,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Clark University under the direction of
Dr. David Hibbett&lt;br/&gt;(PI) with four co-Principal Investigators (co-PIs),
titled "Acquisition of a High&lt;br/&gt;Performance Parallel Computing Cluster
for the Departments of Biology, Chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;Physics, and Mathematics
and Computer Science of Clark University". The proposed&lt;br/&gt;project
involves the development of a shared computational faculty for the
natural&lt;br/&gt;science programs of Clark University. The instrumentation
includes a Beowulf-type clusters, with 32 interconnected "nodes" (individual
computers) and associated storage devices, hardware and software. The system
will be developed over two years, with one cluster purchased in each of the
first two years of the funding period. The proposed system was designed on the
basis of an analysis of current and required computing capacity available to the
PI and co-PIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and co-PIs all have active research
programs (including graduate and undergraduate students) that require a high
performance parallel computing cluster. The proposed instrumentation will be
used in diverse research projects, including: 1) Evolutionary studies in fungi
based on DNA sequences (Hibbett, Biology Dept.); 2) Studies of liquid-solid
phase changes (co-PI H. Gould, Physics Dept.); 3) Algorithmic analyses of
geometric relationships between objects (co-PI L. Han, Mathematics and Computer
Science Dept.); and 4) Protein modeling and molecular dynamics (co-PIs R.
Bruschweiler and S. Huo, Chemistry Dept.). These research projects are relevant
to robotics, conservation of biodiversity, medicine, and other applied
disciplines. In addition to research, the PI and co-PIs all participate in the
Concentration in Computational Science, which provides a research-oriented
background in computational applications for Clark University undergraduates
majoring in diverse scientific disciplines. The PI and Co-PIs of this proposal
will use the proposed instrumentation in a number of undergraduate courses that
satisfy the Concentration in Computational Science, including Computer
Simulation Laboratory, Molecular Evolution and Systematics, Quantum Chemistry,
Biomolecular NMR, and others. Finally, the proposed cluster will be used in
annual workshops on parallel computing and its applications that will be offered
for area high school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a shared
computational facility represents a significant interdepartmental initiative in
the sciences at Clark. By pooling resources, the proposed project will develop
critical resources for research that would be otherwise inaccessible to the
individual Departments. In addition to enabling research, the proposed parallel
computing cluster will become the cornerstone of the Concentration in
Computational Science, which promotes interdisciplinary training for
undergraduates in the sciences. The proposed instrumentation will also play a
central role in summer workshops in parallel computing technology for local high
school teachers. These workshops represent part of Clark University's ongoing
community outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;