* 0320920
* MRI/RUI: Multi-electrode Physiology and Fluorecence Microscopy Instrumentation to Support Research and Research Training at an Historically-Black, Undergraduate Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Leonard Davis, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 127,655.00

A grant has been awarded to Delaware State University under the direction of Dr.
Melissa A. Harrington to establish a combined electrophysiology and fluorescence
imaging facility. This equipment will be used measure electrical signals and
calcium dynamics in invertebrate nervous systems, muscle cells and cell lines
expressing ion channels and transporters. The instrumentation includes a 64
electrode planar multi-electrode array for recording electrical activity
combined with a fluorescence microscope to permit simultaneous functional
imaging of calcium or voltage dynamics. The instrumentation will support
research and research training in the areas of cell biology and neurophysiology
at an historically-black, undergraduate institution.

Two neurophysiology projects will focus on a land snail as a model system for
studying sensory processing and learning. These projects will use the
microelectrode array to study the timing and spatial pattern of neural activity
that develops in the snails brain in response to sensory stimulation and
learning. Experiments will be carried out on the isolated brain and neural
connections to the sensing region of the tentacles. The multi-electrode array
and fluorescence imaging system will also be used with cultured cells over-
expressing the human multi drug resistance gene in order to examine the
regulation the cellular currents proposed to be linked to the expression of
multi drug resistance. The multi drug resistance gene is often up-regulated in
cancer cells, and this instrumentation will allow students to study
relationships between an overexpressed transmembrane protein and ion cellular
currents. A fourth project involves investigating programmed cell death and
regeneration in primary cultures of muscle cells. Muscle cells are excitable
cells that lend themselves easily to study with either Ca2+ imaging or multi-
electrode physiology. This project will investigate the development of, and
recovery from a partial cell death induced through UV illumination of a single
nucleus in multinucleate myotubes.

This proposal will further the development of a novel and useful model system
for studying: 1) the neurobiology of sensory processing and learning; 2) a novel
approach to studying the function of the human multi-drug resistance gene; and
3) in vitro studies of muscle cell degeneration and recovery. Moreover, since
Delaware State University is a historically black, undergraduate institution
with a 76% African-American enrollment, the proposed equipment will broaden
opportunities for minority undergraduate and master's students to participate in
state-of-the-art research.