* 0320256
* The Pakbeh Regional Economy Program, Phase II, 2003-2004
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Bruce Dahlin, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 07/31/2006
* USD 258,966.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Bruce H.
Dahlin will conduct three summer field seasons of archaeological research in the
Chunchucmil region of NW Yucatan, Mexico to complete Phase II of The Pakbeh
Regional Economy Program (PREP). Since 1993, PREP has been investigating the
Early Classic lowland Maya site of Chunchucmil and its surrounding region in NW
Yucatan, Mexico. While the urban status of other Classic Maya cities is
arguable, Chunchucmil is a true city with a conservatively estimated population
within its central 14km2 of between 29,700 and 46,650, and it has the highest
population densities of any Maya site. Chunchucmil nevertheless occupies one of
the most depauperate agricultural landscapes in the entire Maya lowlands,
suggesting that it exceeded agricultural carrying capacity, thus necessitating
the importation of food and other basic goods. In fact, the city is unique in
having features like streets and avenues that would have facilitated trade. It
also lacks the usual trappings of a 'regal/ritual center' that characterize
other Maya sites, i.e., monumental civic/ceremonial architecture, congregational
spaces, and sculpture and hieroglyphics in demonstrably public spaces. The
hypothesis that makes the most sense of these and other departures from the
typical Classic Maya urban pattern is that Chunchucmil was founded on trade. It
had access to a vigorous maritime trade route, control of the second largest
salt works in Mesoamerica, a port facility, and a rich diversity of
environmental resource zones. We are testing an empirically derived composite
model of the region's economic organization using a variety of data gathering
techniques at all scales, from regional and urban mapping to excavation of
households. Traditional artifactual analyses (stylistic, compositional and
modal) will help construction of a detailed ceramic sequence and ceramic and
lithic exchange networks. However, since the vast majority of materials used in
subtropical areas are highly perishable and unlikely to leave archaeological
remains, we are using Chunchucmil as an experimental laboratory for developing
new prospecting, data gathering and analytical techniques. The most successful
so far is identification using chemical biomarkers in soils of the first
positively known ancient Maya marketplace. This technique may distinguish
production from ordinary domestic activities and differential consumption
activities within households. Functions of ceramic and stone artifacts will be
reconstructed based in part on microscopic and chemical residues. Spatial
distributions of artifacts and natural and man-made landscape features are being
analyzed using a GIS database. This research will contribute to the substantive
interpretation of Maya economic and political systems and how those systems
acted as a filter or broker for cultural ideas coming from, and contributing to,
the larger pan-Mesoamerican world. The research will also contribute
methodologically by applying new geochemical techniques to archaeological
prospecting, data gathering and interpretive practices. Finally, the project
will continue to train students from throughout North America (Mexico, U.S.) and
Europe (France, Germany, Spain) and it will continue to provide employment and
training opportunities to local villagers in this economically depressed region
of Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;