* 0320308
* STTR Phase I:     Controlled Energy Storage and Release in an Intelligent Prosthetic Foot
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Steven Collins, Intelligent Prosthetic Systems
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop an
intelligent prosthetic foot that reduces the energy consumption of walking in
amputees. Commercial prostheses use passive mechanisms to provide articulation,
cushioning against heel impact, and elastic energy return; yet the energetic
cost of amputee walking is high. Currently the most sophisticated prostheses are
intelligent knees, which improve gait by actively controlling braking of the
knee. Based on recent laboratory results, Intelligent Prosthetics proposes that
controlled energy storage and release could significantly improve the efficiency
of a prosthetic foot. Such a foot would store elastic energy after the foot
strikes the ground, as in current products. Instead of returning energy
spontaneously, however, active control would capture that energy with a latch
mechanism and release it later in the gait cycle, coinciding with the push-off
phase of able-bodied walking. The mechanism will be microprocessor-controlled
and will require battery power mainly to actuate a latch. Phase I of this
project will develop a prototype prosthesis, and experimentally test the
conceptual feasibility of intelligently controlled energy release. The project
intends to develop this concept into a commercial prosthesis with greater energy
return and comfort than conventional designs, in a compact and lightweight
package.

The technology of controlled energy release is intended primarily for the
prosthetic foot market. However, the scientific findings could also apply to
orthoses or rehabilitation technology for other disabled individuals, such as
stroke and cerebral palsy patients. Similar technology could be applied to
energy harvesting from locomotion, such as to power wearable electronic devices
or more long-term applications such as powered exoskeletons for amplifying human
performance.