* 0320866
* Aquisition of a Dual-Beam Focused Ion Beam System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Chia-Ling Chien, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 550,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a dual-beam focused ion beam (FIB)
processing system for nanoscience research in advanced materials and in the
biosciences at Johns Hopkins University. A FIB system uses a finely focused beam
of high-energy ions to selectively remove material from a target with nanometer
precision, functioning as a "nano-scale milling machine." A FIB can also perform
nanodeposition of materials with feature sizes down to 30 nanometers by local
stimulation of gaseous precursors. FIB devices have been used in the
semiconductor industry for approximately a decade for post-fabrication repairs,
modification, and quality control analysis of integrated circuits. However,
these systems also have great utility for basic research, particularly for the
fabrication of nanostructures and devices that cannot be made by conventional
microlithographic techniques. New research directions that acquisition of the
FIB system will enable span a wide range and include (i) the study of new
materials and devices for "spintronics," a potential new class of microcircuitry
that employs spin currents as well as conventional electrical currents to carry
and store information; (ii) the development of new stencil mask methods of
nanostructure fabrication; (iii) studies of electronic transport properties of
macromolecules; (iv) fabrication of high performance cantilevers for atomic
force and magnetic force microscopy, with particular potential for applications
in the biosciences; (v) fundamental studies of the mechanisms of cell adhesion
and growth on nanoengineered surfaces, with relevance for tissue engineering;
(vi) fundamental studies of the dynamics of materials' surfaces; and (vii) site-
specific sample preparation for high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
studies of nanostructured devices, geological materials, and biomineralization.
In addition to the primary ion beam, the dual beam instrument will have an
electron beam for high-resolution scanning electron microscopy of samples in the
FIB chamber. This will allow non-destructive imaging and analysis of sensitive
nanoscale features produced by the FIB. The system will also be equipped for
nanodeposition, automated TEM sample preparation, and in-situ electrical
measurements for fabrication analysis and measurements of the properties of
nanoscale devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new FIB instrument will greatly
enhance the research training of several postdoctoral fellows and twenty
graduate students involved in the research. As the instrument will be made
available to the broader Johns Hopkins research community, its impact on
research training is expected to grow with time. The instrument will be
integrated into undergraduate courses, and into the extensive Education Outreach
Programs focusing on materials research that are already in place at Johns
Hopkins for high school students, high school teachers, and undergraduates. All
of these programs have had considerable success in reaching traditionally
underrepresented groups, and the increased opportunity to use state-of-the art
instrumentation that this FIB system will provide will further these programs'
goals of developing a more diverse and talented scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;