* 0320074
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing Crop Plants with Wide-Spectrum Disease Resistance
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Karen Century, Mendel Biotechnology Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop genetically engineered, broad-spectrum disease resistance in plants.
Farmers spend a significant amount of money on fungicides every year to combat
plant pathogens, yet enormous yield losses due to disease still occur. In
addition, toxic chemicals as well as pathogen-produced toxins present human
health and environmental concerns. Mendel Biotechnology has identified an
Arabidopsis transcription factor, TDR1, that causes resistance to three
pathogens when overexpressed in transgenic plants. TDR1 and three closely
related genes will be tested in combination with several tissue specific or
inducible promoters to identify combinations that confer a high degree of
resistance without negative side effects. Expression patterns correlated with
TDR1-based resistance will be detected using microarrray experiments to
determine how this method will complement other strategies for genetically
encoded resistance. Also, TDR1 orthologs will be identified in crop species to
demonstrate conserved pathways and the likelihood of cross-species utility of
this technology. Results from the proposed experiments will establish the
feasibility of using a TDR1-based technology to produce disease resistance in
crop plants.

The commercial application of this project will be in the area of agriculture.
The project aims to confer broad spectrum disease resistance in economically
valuable crop plants such as maize, soybean, and sugar beets.