* 0320786
* Acquisition of Instruments Supporting the Center for Fundamental and Applied Molecular Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Stefan Lutz, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 03/31/2007
* USD 420,000.00

Abstract for NSF-MRI#0320786&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to
Emory University under the direction of Dr. Justin Gallivan to support
acquisition of instruments within the Center for Fundamental and Applied
Molecular Evolution. Evolution is the central organizing principle of biology,
and is responsible for the intricate complexity of living systems. By combining
advances in chemistry, molecular biology, genetics, computation and robotics, it
is now possible not only to understand molecular evolution, but also to
recapitulate evolutionary processes in the laboratory to solve problems in
chemistry, biotechnology, and materials science. The Center for Fundamental and
Applied Molecular Evolution (FAME), a joint initiative between Emory and Georgia
Tech, was established to seize new opportunities to develop an understanding of
the fundamental principles of molecular evolution, and to apply these principles
towards the production of new molecules and materials. Researchers within the
FAME Center address problems in both fundamental and applied aspects of
molecular evolution, such as determining how enzymes evolve to recognize new
substrates, altering enzyme substrate specificity, increasing enzyme stability,
and evolving enzymes to synthesize new molecules and materials. Solutions to
these problems have many practical benefits to society, ranging from
understanding the mechanisms of antibiotic resistance to developing new
environmentally friendly syntheses of pharmaceuticals using directed molecular
evolution. The instrumentation funded by the NSF, including a gene sequencer,
high-throughput liquid handling system, colony picker, and plate-reading
spectrophotometer, will support two critical elements in the discovery process-
the ability to rapidly distinguish evolutionary winners from losers in Darwinian
selection, and the ability to understand the molecular basis of the outcome
through gene sequencing. The instrumentation will provide researchers within the
Center the ability to observe, understand, and direct evolutionary processes in
the laboratory in timeframes measured in hours, rather than billions of years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of these instruments will have an immediate
and lasting impact on the research and training environment at both Emory and
Georgia Tech. The instrument center will serve as a fertile breeding ground to
complement the existing intellectual infrastructure. Additionally, these shared
instruments will directly support the research efforts of the principal
investigators, senior personnel, and their research groups-of these researchers,
half are women and several are under-represented minorities. The instruments
fill a critical infrastructural need, and will ultimately support the research
and training of nearly 100 researchers in the area of molecular evolution over
the next three years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to serving the Emory and
Georgia Tech communities, the NSF supported instrumentation will be available to
molecular evolution researchers throughout the region. Furthermore, the Center
will serve as an important resource in educating the community at large about
molecular evolution. Finally, the instruments will aid the quest to understand
the basic molecular evolutionary principles that underlie life on earth, and to
harness them to solve problems in chemistry, biotechnology, and materials
science. &lt;br/&gt;