* 0320037
* SBIR Phase I:     Direct Measurement of Wafer Temperature in White/UV LED Manufacture
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Jeffrey Bodycomb, Bellwether Instruments, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 98,536.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop an improved method for measuring temperature during manufacture of
visible and ultra-violet light emitting diodes (LED's). Unfortunately, LED
substrates such as sapphire do not allow one to use currently available
instruments because at wavelengths where the substrate is opaque process gases
absorb radiation affecting temperature measurements. In this project it is
planned to develop a method to correct for process gas absorption of radiation
for use with substrates such as sapphire and silicon carbide. This will allow
improved real time in-situ temperature measurement, giving improved
manufacturing yields, better data for development work, and lower costs for
these materials. The instrument will be initially developed for use with gallium
nitride (GaN) processes used for LED manufacture. Improved process temperature
measurement will lead to faster development through a better understanding of
the process and higher manufacturing yields due to improved temperature control.

Commercially, the project could enhance manufacturing productivity and improve
national competitiveness in wide bandgap materials manufacturing by providing
better process control data. The reduced development and manufacturing costs
will improve US competitiveness in this critical technology area. Also, reduced
costs of LED components will speed widespread adoption of LED lighting lowering
US energy costs and bringing economic and environmental benefits.

