* 0320991
* MRI: Development of a High Performance Computational Cluster at an HBCU for the Support of Research and Research Training in Computer Science, Engineering, and Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Al-Sameen Khan, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 278,000.00

The grant supports a high performance computational cluster to enhance the
research, training, and educational activities at Delaware State University
(DSU), one of the nation's Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU).
The sixty-four node linux-based Xeon cluster will be capable of supporting
research in the sciences at DSU and will enhance and foster collaborations with
researchers at other universities as well as in industry. A diverse
interdisciplinary group of faculty and students in the sciences utilizes the
high performance computing platform for the following research activities: (1)
Systematic studies of the challenging problems of defect properties and alloying
in technologically-relevant materials using first-principles calculations; (2)
Parallel data-mining algorithms, developed for use on distributed-memory
parallel computers, for mining of massive data sets in biotechnology, remote
sensing and home security, precision agriculture, and environmental sciences;
(3) Novel neural network based classification tools employed to classify and
determine function-structure from MRI brain images of Alzheimer's disease
patients; (4) Numerical calculations in atomic physics to study the ionization
of atoms or ions by electron impact. (5) Investigation of the optical and
electronic transport properties of novel epitaxial ternary and quaternary III-V
antimonide materials and SiGeCSn group IV bulk alloy layers, heterostructures,
quantum-confined structures, and devices.

The computational cluster is used in the research training and research-related
education of upper-level undergraduates by engaging them in small research
projects during the academic year and summer months and by the integration of
parallel computing into the undergraduate science curriculum. Acquisition of
this state-of-the-art equipment dramatically strengthens and increases the
research productivity, while supporting the research training of undergraduate
and graduate students and enhancing collaborations within academia and industry.
The cluster will be utilized as a recruiting tool to attract and hire additional
faculty researchers in the sciences. In addition, DSU graduates broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities and women in the scientific
community.

