* 0320322
* SBIR PHASE I:  A Spin-Processing Module for High Speed Ozone-Water Based Resist and Residue Removal
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* David Boyers, Phifer Smith Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is directed to the
development of a single-wafer spin processing module for high-speed ozone-water-
based resist and residue removal in semiconductor device manufacturing. A new
ozone-water process which is unique in promising practical throughputs in
single-wafer processing configurations has been developed. Experimental and
analytical work has shown there is an opportunity to significantly increase the
etch rate and etch uniformity of this process with improvements in the design of
the spin processing module. Four goals are established for this Phase I: (1)
Measure the radial dependence of the etch rate as a function of key process
parameters using a standard commercial spin processing module; (2) Develop a
computational fluid dynamic model of the module; (3) Validate the model by
comparing the measured etch rate to that predicted by the model; and, (4) Use
the model to make a preliminary evaluation of promising new spin processor
designs.

Single-substrate wet processing has applications in wafer processing, magnetic
disc manufacturing, optical disc manufacturing, and flat panel display
manufacturing. The market for wafer wet processing equipment alone is projected
to reach 3.1 billion dollars by 2005. The single-wafer wet processing segment is
growing and is expected to be between 300 million to 450 million dollars by
2005.