* 0320867
* MRI:     Acquisition of dSPACE Real-Time Development System and Electromechanical Apparatuses for Research in Smart Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Marc Karam, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2005
* USD 72,349.00

In the department of Electrical Engineering at Tuskegee University, the PI and
three students&lt;br/&gt;(two graduates and one undergraduate) are conducting
research in the area of Smart Control&lt;br/&gt;Systems. The following two
projects are underway: robust optimal control using a
recurrent&lt;br/&gt;dynamic neural network, and compensation of global feedback
linearization control of nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;systems using neural networks.
However, these research activities are confined to
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;investigations and applications to computer simulated
system models using Matlab/Simulink&lt;br/&gt;software from the MathWorks Inc.
No physical plants and corresponding real-time&lt;br/&gt;implementation software
are currently available to test the smart control algorithms and
refine&lt;br/&gt;them.&lt;br/&gt;The requested instrumentation to be acquired
includes the ACE1103PX4CLP prototyping&lt;br/&gt;system from dSPACE Inc., which
contains powerful hardware and comprehensive software tools&lt;br/&gt;for
development of real-time control systems. In order to apply the dSPACE products
to actual&lt;br/&gt;plants, we are in addition requesting the acquisition of the
following electromechanical&lt;br/&gt;apparatuses from ECP, a leading
manufacturer of mechanisms for research in control: the&lt;br/&gt;Rectilinear
Mass/Spring/Damper (ECP Model 210), the Industrial Plant Emulator (ECP
Model&lt;br/&gt;220), the Inverted Pendulum (ECP Model 505), the Magnetic
Levitator (ECP Model 730), and&lt;br/&gt;the Control Moment Gyroscope (ECP Model
750).&lt;br/&gt;The acquired instrumentation will contribute to greatly
advancing the above-listed research&lt;br/&gt;projects by providing the
possibility of implementing the current Matlab/Simulink codes
and&lt;br/&gt;models of the neural controllers on dSPACE hardware, and testing
them in real-time as applied&lt;br/&gt;to actual electromechanical apparatuses,
as well as checking the robustness of the neural&lt;br/&gt;controllers in the
presence of noise and disturbances. The feedback obtained from the
actual&lt;br/&gt;implementation of the various neural algorithms will contribute
to significantly evaluating,&lt;br/&gt;refining, and improving the smart
controllers design.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal resides in
the fact that, if funded, the smart control&lt;br/&gt;research at Tuskegee
University would be greatly enhanced, which in turn would affect
the&lt;br/&gt;global research community in the area of artificial intelligence
and control, since several journal&lt;br/&gt;and conference publications have
resulted thus far from this research, and more would result&lt;br/&gt;with
higher quality if the instrumentation is acquired.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
the requested instrumentation include introduction of a new
graduate&lt;br/&gt;course in Advanced Control Design at Tuskegee University,
which is an HBCU committed to the&lt;br/&gt;high quality education of African-
American students. Moreover, the acquired equipment will&lt;br/&gt;boost the
research level and researchers motivation and learning experience and contribute
to&lt;br/&gt;attracting new graduate students to Tuskegee University that are
interested in the area of smart&lt;br/&gt;control systems. The development of
this area that is expected to occur due to the
requested&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation will have the additional impact of
attracting research funding from industry and&lt;br/&gt;government agencies.
Furthermore, the experience that students will have with
dSPACE&lt;br/&gt;products will be very beneficial for their future career, since
these products are used in major&lt;br/&gt;industries worldwide. Finally the
acquired equipment will encourage the multidisciplinary trend&lt;br/&gt;in the
College of Architecture, Engineering, and Physical Sciences at Tuskegee
University by&lt;br/&gt;being made equally available to the faculty and students
of the Aerospace, Chemical, Electrical,&lt;br/&gt;and Mechanical Engineering
departments, which all offer courses in control systems.