* 0320869
* RUI: MRI Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with Energy Dispersive X-Ray and C-Mode Scanning Acoustic Microscope for a Centralized Laboratory for Imaging and Metrology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Alan Raisanen, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2005
* USD 406,395.00

This major research instrumentation (MRI) grant is submitted within the
framework of&lt;br/&gt;the Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program.
The mission of this RUI&lt;br/&gt;submission is the establishment of a
Centralized Laboratory of Imaging and&lt;br/&gt;Metrology (CLIM) at the
Rochester Institute of Technology. The instrumentation&lt;br/&gt;requested
includes a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with energy dispersive
X-ray&lt;br/&gt;(EDX) capability and a C-Mode Scanning Acoustic Microscope that
would greatly&lt;br/&gt;enhance RIT's ability to conduct competitive
undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: CLIM will build upon RIT's
existing strengths in Semiconductor and&lt;br/&gt;Microsystems fabrication and
packaging to bridge the applied research gap between basic&lt;br/&gt;research
and product commercialization. The impact of the proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation will be in the establishment of a strong
research base for investigators&lt;br/&gt;and undergraduates. A major component
of the investigators vision involves&lt;br/&gt;establishing the undergraduate
research infrastructure required to (i) publish in refereed&lt;br/&gt;journals
by undergraduates, (ii) enhance RIT's credibility to funding agencies to
secure&lt;br/&gt;funding for undergraduate research, and (iii) provide a
superior environment for&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate education.&lt;br/&gt;Various
examples of research activity enabled by this equipment listed in the
Project&lt;br/&gt;Description section of this proposal include: photonic
lightwave integrated circuits&lt;br/&gt;fabrication, wafer bonding, microfluidic
package analysis, packaging yield analysis, and&lt;br/&gt;Silicon on Insulator
substrate characterization. These diverse efforts share a common&lt;br/&gt;need
to characterize (i) material properties, (ii) process development, and (iii)
failure&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms. Nondestructive structural, and chemical analysis
and nanometer-scale&lt;br/&gt;imaging capability is fundamental to the success
of the proposed research initiatives. The&lt;br/&gt;scanning electron
microscope, energy dispersive X-ray, and a C-Mode Scanning
Acoustic&lt;br/&gt;Microscope enable imaging, chemical analysis, and structural
analysis, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In the first year of this
program alone, it is estimated that through&lt;br/&gt;projects, classroom
instruction, and research, 150 students will benefit from
this&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation. This equipment will be introduced immediately,
as a centerpiece to&lt;br/&gt;several classes, which include the following: EMCR
201 (Introduction to Microelectronic&lt;br/&gt;Engineering), EMCR 221
(Introduction to Microlithography), EMCR 350 (IC&lt;br/&gt;Technology), EMCR 564
(Microlithography Systems), EMCR 643 (Thin Film&lt;br/&gt;Processing), EMCR 650
(IC Processing Laboratory), EMCR 680/690 (Senior Seminar&lt;br/&gt;Research),
ITFF 455 (Introduction to Surface Mount Electronics Packaging), ITFF
456&lt;br/&gt;(Advanced Concepts in Electronics Packaging), and ITFF 457
(Electronics Packaging&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory).&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted by three faculty from RIT (S. L. Rommel-
Microelectronic&lt;br/&gt;Engineering, A.D. Raisanen-Semiconductor Microsystems
Fabrication Laboratory, and&lt;br/&gt;S.M. Ramkumar- Manufacturing Mechanical
Engineering Technology and Packaging&lt;br/&gt;Science) in the area of
materials, process and failure characterization of
microsystems&lt;br/&gt;development and packaging. This project will foster
collaboration between device and&lt;br/&gt;packaging researchers at RIT to
realize next-generation, high-performance microsystems.