* 0320531
* SBIR Phase II:    Ultra-Sensitive Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) Technology:   A Photon Counting Camera
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Mark Meisner, Titan Optics & Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 10/31/2005
* USD 496,174.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will result in an
innovative, technologically advanced, imaging system--with the potential of
capturing and counting individual photons. The imaging system will be a compact
avalanche-gain, charge-coupled device digital camera. The technology generated
from this research effort will profoundly benefit many detection and
discrimination applications. The innovation will offer high-photoresponse from
the deep ultraviolet to the near infrared in very Low-Light-Level, as well as
photopic light conditions. In addition, the camera system will have solid-state
reliability without typical intensifier imaging tube limitations, such as, image
burn-in and blooming. In short, the innovation will have significant cost
savings over current conventional multi-spectrum imaging systems and will offer
enhanced imaging performance. A possible research, military, law enforcement, or
homeland security application for the camera will be black-on-black detection--
that is, when faint objects are difficult to discriminate from the background.
This far-reaching technology will also be beneficial for many non-military
applications: such as, Low-Light-Level physical, deep space and forensic
sciences, as well as, photopic (daylight) medical and life sciences. In summary,
the imaging system will have the most impact where real-time and lowest possible
noise is required.