* 0320906
* Acquisition of an Aberration Corrected Analytical Electron Microscope for Nanocharacterization of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Charles Lyman, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 590,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of an aberration corrected Analytical
Electron Microscope (AEM) for the characterization of materials at the nanometer
scale at Lehigh University. The ability to locate and simultaneously identify
the nature of the atoms in crystalline materials is one goal of researchers
involved in the characterization of materials. This goal is now achievable in
the Analytical Electron Microscope (AEM) because of the recent successful
commercial development of spherical aberration (Cs) correctors. A Cs-corrector
permits the refinement of the electron probe dimensions to the atomic level
while increasing the amount of current in the probe, thus increasing the quality
of all the signals generated and detected in the Cs corrected AEM. Calculations
and recent experiments confirm that the Cs corrector will improve all present
performance metrics by 2-10 times, thus creating a truly unique instrument. The
Lehigh instrument will complement other national and international projects
employing Cs-corrected instruments that emphasize high-resolution imaging and
in-situ experiments rather than analytical techniques. The research performed on
the new instrument will offer new insights into the nature of nanometer-level
interfacial segregation that controls the brittle failure of materials, the
enhancement of mechanical properties in ceramics, the behavior of
microelectronic devices and the creation of passive oxide layers on steels. The
elucidation of the chemistry of sub-nanometer catalyst particles used for
nitrous oxide reduction, oxidation of carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide, and
environmental remediation of groundwater will be enhanced. Even beam sensitive
polymers have proven amenable to X-ray mapping in the AEM, and the Cs-corrector
will permit quantitative measurements of the microstructure and nano-scale
chemistry of ion containing polymers.

Lehigh's electron microscope laboratory and the AEM in particular already act as
a center for researchers from a wide range of industries and universities.
Lehigh also serves as a center for microscopy education and training, for
thousands of researchers, technicians and engineers from industrial and
governmental research labs, through its annual Microscopy School. The Cs-
corrected AEM will be the only Cs-corrected instrument available for such broad-
based instruction and training and will be integrated into ongoing courses on
AEM and Characterization of Nanostructures. The research enabled by the Cs-
corrected instrument will be infused into the learning experience of graduate
and senior undergraduate students at Lehigh via a new course, 'Materials for
Nanotechnology.' This course is also available to students and researchers at
other universities, via an interactive, multi-institutional learning initiative
accessible via real-time video/audio/internet connections to graduate students
in similarly equipped classrooms at the University of Pennsylvania, Carnegie-
Mellon University, Drexel University, the University of Pittsburgh and Penn
State University. Other schools have expressed interest in participating in this
program via Internet2 video-conferencing, including several universities strong
in under-represented groups such as Florida A&M, Howard, Prairie View A&M,
Savannah State and Southern University.