* 0320092
* SBIR Phase I:     Combining Time Compressed Synthetic Pulses and Frequency Scalable Antennae to Optimize UWB Sensor Dynamic Range
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Bernt Askildsen, REALTRONICS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
capitalize on evolving concepts for sensor optimization that will facilitate the
detection of human targets through caves, hillsides, buildings, foliage, fog,
and other opaque materials. This technology will have broad application in
homeland security, airport security, hostile police action, high school and
other hostage events, and for search and rescue. The phase I effort will include
a feasibility study of simulated and real data to determine if novel pulse and
antennae geometries will simultaneously enhance the dynamic range and resolution
of evolving ultra-wideband sensing. The hypothesis of this proposal suggests
that these improvements will facilitate unattended remote sensing of human and
other targets through a wider range of materials without sacrificing extended
range, resolution, and clutter suppression. This effort will include field
measurements to assess the initial potential of select pulse shapes, antenna
geometries, and loading schemes to detect humans through a variety of low-loss
and high-loss opaque materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two primary
applications for this technology, situational awareness and subsurface
investigation. The former, which is the most attractive for early market entry,
comprises homeland security, police/fire/search and rescue, and military actions
where the location of human subjects and the detection of possible weapons on
the opposite side of walls, vegetation, snow, fire, fog, darkness, smoke, or
other opaque media is sought. The latter includes geophysical exploration, ore
body investigation, utility detection and location, road-bed and bridge
subsurface scans for cracks and voids, and unattended ground sensing from a
fixed point to assess subsurface changes that can be used to predict earth or
structural failure.&lt;br/&gt;