* 0320029
* SBIR Phase I: A Semiconductor Device for Direct and Efficient Conversion of Radioisotope Energy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Larry Gadeken, BetaBatt, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 03/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will establish the
feasibility of constructing a semiconductor device that directly and efficiently
converts the energy released from radioactive decay directly into electric
current. The semiconductor material will be utilized in a unique manner that
will result in an innovative electrical technology. Prior efforts using
semiconductor materials to accomplish direct radioisotope energy conversion have
concentrated on planar geometries as in, for example, solar and photovoltaic
cells. The goal of this research is to distribute the radioisotope throughout
the specified active volume of a semiconductor in such a manner as to remain
nearly proximate to the energy conversion mechanism. The key to achieving high
efficiency is to situate the maximum number of radioactive nuclei so that a
minimal amount of decay energy is lost before conversion to electric current
occurs. Commercially, this research will lead to the development of a practical
nuclear battery. It is anticipated that this direct energy conversion device
would be able to replace chemical batteries in a number of applications.
Especially attractive is that candidate radioisotope power sources have half-
lives measured in decades so that electric current can be delivered continuously
in remote or inaccessible locations. Potentially, acceptance and success in the
industrial marketplace will lead to a number of consumer applications.

