* 0320833
* Acquisition of a Bruker Daltonics OmniFLEXTM Bench-Top MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer for Interdisciplinary Research in an Undergraduate College Setting
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Gary Harris, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2006
* USD 165,555.00

A grant has been awarded to Wellesley College under the direction of Dr. Harris
to acquire a bench-top MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer for interdisciplinary
research in an undergraduate setting. A mass spectrometer is an instrument that
can very accurately determine the mass of atoms and molecules and has for many
years been a key instrument for research conducted primarily in Chemistry
Departments. The development of recent techniques that allow for the ionization
and volatilization (the matrix assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI)
technique ) of large biomolecules (i.e. proteins) has spurred the development of
a new generation of mass spectrometers that are becoming essential components
for research in biology and biochemistry. It was therefore the goal of this
proposal to acquire this state of the art instrumentation in an effort to allow
undergraduate students who are interested in the chemistry of life to engage in
collaborative interdisciplinary research efforts with faculty in both
departments. The proposed acquisition of the MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer will
therefore have a significant impact on a broad base of faculty and undergraduate
research students in the Chemistry and Biology Departments at Wellesley College,
as well as specific courses in our curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
mission at Wellesley College is the undergraduate education of women and this
commitment has taken on a special meaning in the sciences where women have
traditionally been underrepresented. In the Biological Sciences and Chemistry
Departments, the permanent full-time faculty of 24 members maintains high
standards for both teaching and research. Many of the faculty have extramural
funding, which supports productive research programs that also are focused on
training undergraduate students. Therefore, the mass spectrometer will not only
have an impact on research training, but will also enhance the research
environment for a high proportion of our faculty. Several of the proposed
projects will use the MALDI-TOF to identify unknown proteins derived from
polyacrylamide gels utilizing peptide mass fingerprinting. The biologists plan
to use prokaryotic (cyanobacterial) and eukaryotic (Arabidopsis and
Saccharomyces) model systems to identify proteomic changes in response to
oxidative and pH stress and unique protein-protein interactions. An organic
chemist, will use mass spectrometry as a part of a research project to
understand the forces involved in stabilizing the conformations of model
b-sheets. Another faculty member in the chemistry department, will use mass
spectrometry to acquire structural information relevant to the regulation of
enzyme activity. There are also plans to integrate the mass spectrometer into
undergraduate lab settings at both intermediate and advanced levels.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The scientific merit of the projects that will be undertaken using
the new mass spectrometer, and their focus on the teaching and research training
of female undergraduates, speaks directly to the intellectual merit this
undertaking The funding of this project represents a critical investment in our
next generation of students. &lt;br/&gt;