* 0320816
* Impact of Polarization-Mode Dispersion on Fiber Nonlinearities
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Govind Agrawal, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 08/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;0320816&lt;br/&gt;Agrawal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though the
polarization-mode dispersion (PMD) phenomenon has been studied extensively in
recent years, most of the research on PMD has been carried out within the linear
approximation in which all fiber nonlinearities are neglected. Although this
approach has provided considerable physical insight, it cannot be used for real
lightwave systems in which nonlinear effects such as self- and cross-phase
modulation (SPM and XPM) are not generally negligible. For the same reason, it
cannot be used in the soliton regime where the nonlinear effects are used for
sustaining solitons. What is needed is a comprehensive research program that
studies the impact of PMD on various nonlinear effects such as SPM, XPM, four-
wave mixing (FWM), and stimulated Raman scattering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of the proposed research is to develop a new theoretical framework
that is capable of including the impact of PMD on several important nonlinear
effects occurring inside optical fibers. More specifically, we plan to study the
impact of PMD on SPM, XPM, FWM, and stimulated Raman scattering. The PMD problem
is generally quite complicated because of its stochastic nature. Most of the
research so far on PMD has ignored fiber nonlinearities because it considers the
state of polarization of each frequency component of the pulse separately. This
approach cannot be used for real lightwave systems in which the nonlinear
effects are not generally negligible. To remedy this situation, the PI proposes
a research program in which the PMD effects will be incorporated by solving the
underlying nonlinear Schrodinger equation with the moment method. This technique
will allow us to find the stochastic but ordinary differential equations for
several important pulse parameters such as the position, width, chirp, and
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A somewhat different approach is needed for
handling the PMD effects on FWM and stimulated Raman scattering. These two
nonlinear effects are increasingly being used for making parametric and Raman
amplifiers. Fiber lengths used for making such amplifiers are long enough that
PMD effects cannot be ignored. The PI has already begun to focus on the Raman-
amplification problem and has developed a simple model that allows the PI to
find the average and standard deviation of the PMD-induced fluctuations in the
amplified signal. He plans to extend this technique to the case of parametric
amplification. Although most of the proposed research is of theoretical nature,
the PI intends to verify the theoretical predictions in collaboration with other
experimental groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;