* 0320887
* MRI: Acquisition of a Research Infrastructure for Collaborative Scientific and Engineering Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Jonathan Stanton, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/2006
* USD 186,300.00

This project, acquiring four heterogeneous computing clusters connected by high-
speed networks, aims at serving as the cornerstone for a Bioinformatics program.
Major activities include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Promoting research in
bioinformatics, facilitating exchange among scientists,&lt;br/&gt; Training in
cluster administration leading to a certificate, and&lt;br/&gt; Supporting
undergraduate senior design projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure
services the following research areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Network Algorithms
and Distributed Systems, &lt;br/&gt; Large Scale Flow Simulations, &lt;br/&gt;
Bio-informatics, and&lt;br/&gt; Distributed Data Storage for Biological
Data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first implements and evaluates network protocols
and distributed systems to understand system behavior in simulation. The second
uses equipment for scalable Cartesian grid methods and for determining
biological flaws. The third, involving computational protein modeling, proposes
algorithmic improvements to enhance the backbone of the selection in the
protocol. Computational biology (phylogenetics and molecular dynamics of
biomolecules) will also benefit from the cluster. The last deals with the
genomics core facility. The project addresses managing, processing,
interpreting, and efficient availability of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
computing clusters, called Lion, Rhino, Sparrow, and Gazelle, are used for
production, development, and training. The project emphasizes recruitment and
retention of students within a strong educational component. Four new courses
will be developed and a training program will award a cluster computing
certificate upon completion.&lt;br/&gt;