* 0320449
* SBIR Phase II:   Genomic Mapping of DNA by Means of GeneEngine(TM)  Technology
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Rudolf Gilmanshin, U.S. GENOMICS INC
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 999,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to build a
technology for long-range, high-resolution DNA mapping based on the proprietary
GeneEngine(TM) platform. This technology will be a unique tool for genomics
because of the combination of features: single- molecule sensitivity, ability to
analyze very long DNA molecules, high throughput, and potential for automation.
The basic feasibility of this technology was shown in Phase I. The Phase II
project is aimed at creating efficient procedures for sample preparation and
measurement, as well as for developing analysis algorithms and combining them
into an automated software package. These procedures and software will be united
to form a toolkit for DNA mapping.

The commercial application of this project will be in the area of Genomics. The
product resulting from this project will comprise of instruments and consumables
(e.g. reagents) for mapping of whole microbial genomes based on long-range,
single-molecule DNA mapping. The ability to scan microbial genomic DNA for
genetic information at a fraction of the cost and time of that needed currently
will be valuable in a number of commercial applications in life science research
and the healthcare industry, including the elucidation of complex genetic
pathways, identification of target genes for development of novel anti-infective
drugs, correlation of genomic information with unique functions and with drug
response, as well as for DNA-based molecular diagnostics and prognostics. The
principal market for these applications would be the bio-pharmaceutical
companies and academic research laboratories, with additional longer-term
markets expected in the area of clinical diagnostics.