* 0320510
* SBIR Phase I:     High-Throughput Functional Proteomics by Automated Chromophore-Assisted Laser Inactivation (CALI)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Manfred Koller, Cyntellect, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel
approach to functional proteomics utilizing a prototype high-throughput platform
for laser-enabled analysis and processing (LEAP) of cells. Since most genes
function through action of a protein, many academic and commercial research
efforts are now shifting from genomics to proteomics to determine the level and
function of various proteins in cells. Chromophore-assisted laser inactivation
(CALI) uses labeled probes and light irradiation to elucidate specific protein
functions. CALI provides direct and immediate protein inactivation and can be
targeted within a cell compartment. However, implementation of CALI to date has
been low-throughput, and intracellular proteins are difficult to target since
the labeled probe must first be introduced into living cells (e.g., by
microinjection). To overcome current limitations of CALI, high-throughput viable
cell loading and laser irradiation of cells are required. Through SBIR and other
funding, the company has been developing LEAP for high-throughput cell imaging
and laser-irradiation to achieve cell purification and optoinjection. It is
hypothesized that LEAP can be modified to implement CALI in a high-throughput
manner, and further provide optoinjection to enable intracellular CALI. Phase I
studies will evaluate different chromophores and probes against various protein
targets and define conditions for optoinjection, thereby demonstrating
feasibility of high-throughput CALI on LEAP.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of instrumentation
relevant to drug discovery and development. Successful completion of the project
will lead to commercialization of the novel LEAP instrument platform for high-
throughput cell imaging and laser-based manipulations. Applications of this
platform will include high-throughput high-content cell-based assays, cell
purification, cell transfection (optoinjection), and CALI. Within each
application, LEAP will have significant advantages over existing techniques. The
market for equipment for cell analysis/processing, screening, and proteomics are
forecasted to grow by the billions. The opportunity for LEAP is therefore
significant, as is the potential to carry out experimentation that has
previously not been possible.