* 0320498
* SBIR Phase I:     Quantitative Detection of Bacterial Pathogens in Seeds by Use of a Novel Enrichment  Technique Coupled with Automated Real-Time PCR
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Parm Randhawa, California Seed and Plant Lab., Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research project is to develop an innovation
called Amplidisks that would assist in the detection of bacterial plant
pathogens in seeds. Healthy seeds are very important to agriculture in the
United States and throughout the world. Just a few infected seeds (0.01%) in a
seed lot can result in a disease epidemic and significant crop loss. Since the
frequency of infected seeds in a seed lot is generally very low, highly
sensitive seed testing methods are needed. Currently available assays use small
aliquots (0.01-0.1%) of a liquid seed extract, and can lead to false negative
results. This assay would enable sampling of several hundred times larger
aliquots of seed extract by using a novel enrichment technique, where the number
of target organisms are increased in an Ampli-disk and detected and confirmed by
real-time PCR. The objective of the Phase I work is to show the feasibility of
this technique for detection of Clavibacter michiganensis pv michiganensis in
tomato seeds. The follow on Phase II project will validate the procedure and
develop commercial kits containing Ampli-disks and dry beads with all PCR
ingredients. The commercial application of this project will be in the area of
agriculture. The development and marketing of test kits based on the the
proposed technique is expected to result in the elimination of diseased seed
lots and food materials. Healthier seeds would likely lead to increased crop
yields and to improved food safety for the consumer.

