* 0320895
* MRI: Acquisition of an Itanium Cluster for Grid Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Kyran Mish, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 340,000.00

EIA-0320895&lt;br/&gt;Henry J. Neeman; Kelvin K. Droegemeier; Kyran D. Mish;
Dimitrios V. Papavassiliou; Patrick L. Skubic&lt;br/&gt;University of
Oklahoma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of an Itanium Cluster for Grid
Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal from an EPCoR state, seeking
funding for an Itanium based grid, aims at integrating the facility and the
research in various computational fields into TeraGrid and contemplated Cyber-
infrastructure. On-going projects in meteorology, high-energy physics,
earthquake, chemical and aerospace engineering, will use the resource for
design, development, and debugging Grid-enabled software. These
include:&lt;br/&gt; Modeling Environment for Atmospheric Discovery
(MEAD)&lt;br/&gt; Linked Environments for Atmospheric Discovery
(LEAD)&lt;br/&gt; Development of Data Grid Tools&lt;br/&gt; Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Computational Server&lt;br/&gt;
Development of a Grid-based Problem Solving Environment for Multiscale,
Multiphase Flow through Porous Media in Hydrocarbon Reservoir Simulation,
and&lt;br/&gt; Grid-based Design Environment for Preliminary Aircraft Design and
Optimization.&lt;br/&gt;The MEAD collaboration develops and adapts cyber-
infrastructure to enable simulation, data mining/ machine learning, and
visualization of hurricanes and storms using TeraGrid. The LEAD project develops
Grid-enabled resources for real time (RT) weather forecasting and related
research. The High Energy Physics Data Grid Tools project develops tools for
dynamic workspaces for scientific analysis communities creating dynamic
workspaces for their projects and complementary collaboratory tools for RT
interactive sharing of workspaces. The NEESgrid project links earthquake
researchers across the nation with leading-edge computing resources, allowing
geographically distributed collaboration. The HiMUST project develops a problem
solving environment for multiscale, multiphase, multiphysics flow of porous
media. The Grid-PRADO project provides Grid-enabled aircraft design through
massively parallel searching of design parameter spaces for design
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;The project involves participation of two minority
institutions, Langston and Howard Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;