* 0320177
* MRI:     Acquisition of a Slow-Scan CCD Camera for a JEOL 2010F TEM
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Zhifeng Ren, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2004
* USD 155,972.00

&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to acquire a slow-scan charge-coupled device (CCD)
camera to be attached to a newly-&lt;br/&gt;installed JEOL Model 2010F field
emission gun (FEG) transmission electron microscope (TEM) at&lt;br/&gt;Boston
College, for recording digital images directly from a TEM to a computer, thus
basically replacing&lt;br/&gt;the photographic film recording media in a
traditional TEM.&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Physics at Boston College recently
acquired the JEOL-2010F FEG TEM and finished&lt;br/&gt;its installation in 2002.
This advanced TEM is currently playing a key role in education and
research&lt;br/&gt;training on the nanoscale at Boston College, and for
fundamental and applied studies on several materials&lt;br/&gt;and systems. It
is thus an indispensable tool for research in the materials-related science
programs at BC,&lt;br/&gt;and is utilized by faculty and students in four
academic departments: Physics, Chemistry, Biology and&lt;br/&gt;Geology &amp;
Geophysics. We have a number of research projects going on in the above-
mentioned&lt;br/&gt;departments, and the successful fulfillment of these
projects depends strongly on the characterization&lt;br/&gt;work that will be
carried out in the new TEM.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, we were unable to acquire
from the beginning a very important attachment to this TEM,&lt;br/&gt;the
requested CCD camera. Traditional photographic films are presently used as the
recording media,&lt;br/&gt;which is a costly, extremely low efficiency and
frankly unsuitable solution for such an advanced&lt;br/&gt;instrument. The
difference between a CCD camera and film recording is analogous to that between
digital&lt;br/&gt;and film-based cameras. With film, TEM images are first
exposed, and then the films are developed and&lt;br/&gt;fixed in a dark room.
After that, the films are either printed in the dark room or scanned to a
computer for&lt;br/&gt;further processing and analysis. The above tedious work
that can cost several hours or even a few days&lt;br/&gt;can instead be
accomplished in a few minutes or within an hour by using the CCD camera
system.&lt;br/&gt;The requested slow-scan CCD camera represents a major
innovation in electron microscopy because of its&lt;br/&gt;exceptional imaging
characteristics and the benefits associated with immediate image visualization
and&lt;br/&gt;computer processing and analysis. The advantages of a CCD camera
are numerous, and include avoiding&lt;br/&gt;delays and chemical waste involved
in film processing; providing a higher dynamic range and
improved&lt;br/&gt;linearity which produce better data quality; and recording
data in a form immediately suited to&lt;br/&gt;processing, analysis and
archiving. CCD cameras have developed to the point where they can be
used&lt;br/&gt;instead of film in a number of applications, providing rapid
feedback on specimen and image quality.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the detection
quantum efficiency of a CCD camera is superior to that of
photographic&lt;br/&gt;emulsions and is therefore well-suited to acquiring data
from radiation-sensitive materials, such as&lt;br/&gt;biological samples,
organic materials etc., which has proven to be extremely difficult or impossible
by the&lt;br/&gt;normal photographic film method. Direct image acquisition by a
CCD camera can reduce the&lt;br/&gt;characterization time greatly while saving
tremendous labor and resources. It can not only greatly&lt;br/&gt;advance our
research in a significantly short turnaround time, but also open new windows for
quantitative&lt;br/&gt;electron microscopy and imaging of radiation-sensitive
materials. It will quite positively impact our&lt;br/&gt;educational program,
with a graduate-level course being taught every 2 years, open to students from
all&lt;br/&gt;the science departments. Each semester, about 6 undergraduate
students, 5 graduate students and 4&lt;br/&gt;postdocs are trained to use the
TEM. The requested CCD camera will facilitate our teaching in such a
way&lt;br/&gt;that the students can view their results immediately in a
computer, and the feedback information&lt;br/&gt;immediately guide them to
optimize their operation procedure.&lt;br/&gt;The research topics for which the
TEM is playing an essential role include: novel electronic materials
and&lt;br/&gt;phenomena involving carbon nanotubes and arrays; unconventional
superconductivity in molecular&lt;br/&gt;organic conductors and heavy Fermion
materials; new approaches to unanswered questions about the&lt;br/&gt;cuprate
superconductors; membrane interactions in nerve myelin and molecular
organization of&lt;br/&gt;polypeptides; studies of metallic nanoparticles and
nanoporous sol-gel glasses; and studies of the role of&lt;br/&gt;colloids in the
hydrosphere. Support for the research activities that employ the TEM comes from
NSF&lt;br/&gt;(DMR, CHE, IBN and ECS), ARO, NIH (NCI), DARPA, DoE, NASA, EPA,
Sloan and Dreyfus&lt;br/&gt;Foundations and the ACS Petroleum Research Fund. We
describe herein several of these projects&lt;br/&gt;emanating from the multiple
PI's programs.