* 0321848
* Liquid Crystal Order in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2010
* Leo Radzihovsky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2010
* USD 500,000.00

Liquid-crystals, defined as states of condensed matter intermediate in their
properties between fully disordered isotropic liquids and fully ordered crystals
are ubiquitous in nature. The principal investigator (PI) will study a variety
of realizations of liquid crystal phases and transitions between them in novel
contexts, with a unifying thread being importance of thermal and/or quantum
fluctuations and static heterogeneities that lead to universal phase
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One class of such problems that will be studied,
building on the PI's earlier work on smectic-A and discotics, is effects of
quenched disorder on various types of liquid crystal orders, such as
cholesteric, smectic-C, antiferroelectric and others, as realized by liquid
crystals confined inside a random matrix of a rigid aerogel and/or a flexible
aerosil. A dynamic theory of these systems will also be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another focus will be the study of polymer-
liquid crystal composite materials that hold considerable technological promise
by combining mechanical properties of plastics and rubber with electro-optic
properties of conventional fragile liquid crystals. Such materials, as for
example realized by liquid-crystal elastomers and gels, also pose many
fundamental theoretical questions, not unrelated to the aforementioned problem
of liquid crystals in a random matrix, e.g., aerogel, with the randomly
crosslinked polymer matrix playing the role of quenched
disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently discovered microscopically achiral bent-
core (banana-shaped) liquid crystals are exciting because they exhibit a
spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry and an accompanying spontaneous
ferroelectricity. The PI will work to map out their rich phase diagram, explore
phases, and elucidate the nature of this chiral symmetry breaking both in the
orientationally ordered liquid and spatially ordered smectic
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a number of recently discovered "hard"
condensed matter systems that also appear to exhibit liquid crystal order. A
previously studied example is a spontaneous vortex solid in putative
ferromagnetic superconductors at zero field, that therefore have a symmetry of a
columnar liquid crystal phase. Another example that will be studied is the
putative "smectic vortex glass" state realizable in type-II superconductors with
vortices running perpendicular to a random array of parallel columnar defects.
The PI will explore thermal fluctuations, pinning and dissipation (I-V) of such
systems with the goal of explaining recent puzzling experiments in such
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Possible electronic liquid crystal states in the
quantum Hall regime of partially filled high Landau levels is another exciting
direction of research. The PI will elucidate the phenomenology of quantum Hall
nematic, aiming to develop and bridge its description from two complementary
points of view: from the ordered side as a quantum-melted smectic and from the
disordered side as an orientationally-ordered Fermi-liquid of composite
fermions. A description of a quantum Hall smectic from the point of view of a
translationally-ordered composite Fermi-liquid will also be studied and related
to the previously developed Hartree-Fock smectic state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research affects fundamental issues to applied technology. The PI is active in
educational activities including K-12 and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;Liquid-crystals, defined as states of condensed matter intermediate
in their properties between fully disordered isotropic liquids and fully ordered
crystals are ubiquitous in nature. The principal investigator (PI) will study a
variety of realizations of liquid crystal phases and transitions between them in
novel contexts, with a unifying thread being importance of thermal and/or
quantum fluctuations and static heterogeneities that lead to universal phase
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research affects fundamental issues to
applied technology. The PI is active in educational activities including K-12
and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;