* 0321651
* SBIR Phase II:  Meshless Petrov-Galerkin Geo-Environ Technology For Wide Scale Field Uses
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Sumant Gupta, CFEST INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2010
* USD 1,223,038.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II proposes to develop a
Meshless Petrov-Galerkin Geo-Environ Technology For Wide Scale Field Uses.
Groundwater supplies are increasingly threatened by organic, inorganic, and
radioactive contaminants that are introduced to the environment by improper
disposal or accidental releases. Estimates of remediation costs at U.S.
government sites alone totals into the billions of dollars. Computational
mechanics and aerospace advances in meshless Petrov-Galerkin provide easy means
for stable accurate simulations of large groundwater reservoirs without grid
generation. The proposed software package Meshless Groundwater Model-Petrov
Galerkin (MGM-PG) will be designed for advanced hydrologists as well as for
groundwater basin managers, purveyors, and field hydrologists. Current software
advancements will be interfaced for easy conceptual model development for
various applications.

MGM-PG potential market includes: (i) groundwater reservoir quantity and quality
management; (ii) cleanup of contaminated sites; (iii) storage of wet year
surplus surface water underground and its uses for extended draught periods (ASR
projects); (iv) safe disposal of treated effluents by rapid infiltration and
extraction projects (RIX projects); (v) conjunctive uses of surface and
subsurface water; (vi) landfill sites; and (vii) cleanup of large contaminated
Federal Facilities. Proposed technology has applicability to thousands of EPA
National Priority List for expedited clean up of contaminated sites and also for
groundwater management projects that are implemented at a cost of billions of
dollars by federal agencies, State, counties, petroleum facilities, and chemical
industries. Worldwide only 4-5 geo-environ codes have been developed for wide
variety of societal needs. MGM-PG will be a new technological advancement and
will promote training of new graduate students in meshless advances rather than
old methods.