* 0321466
* Phenotypic and genetic analysis of the thigmomorphogenetic developmental response in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Massimo Pigliucci, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* William E. Winner
* 09/30/2004
* USD 149,901.00

Collaborative research: Phenotypic and Genetic Analyses of Thigmomorphogenetic
Developmental Response in Arabidopsis

By Massimo Pigliucci1,2, Randy Small1, and Janet Braam3 1University of
Tennessee, Knoxville 2SUNY-Stony Brook 3Rice University

The relative importance of nature (genetics) and nurture (environment) has
always been at the center of much curiosity and discussion among scientists,
philosophers, and people in general. In the last two decades or so, the
scientific study of nature-nurture or, as it is technically known, genotype-
environment interactions, has become a prominent field of inquiry. Scientists
are seeking a better understanding of how exactly organisms perceive and react
to changing environmental conditions and to new stresses imposed upon them. In
particular, scientists want to know what genes are involved in these complex
responses, and how they evolve through time in different organisms. This
research project aims at studying a particular kind of response to stress in
plants: thigmomorphogenesis, or the reaction to mechanical contact. Plants
experience all sorts of mechanical stimulation, from those exerted by wind and
snow, to the contact elicited by neighboring plants (which indicates the density
of other plants, and hence the degree of competition for common resources such
as water and light), to that induced by insects poised to attack the plant,
using it as food. Touch response, then, is a common reaction to changing
environmental conditions, and plants have evolved ways of dealing appropriately
with the challenges imposed by wind, snow, insects, etc. These responses include
an alteration of the flowering schedule (to minimize competition with other
plants), a thickening of the plant stems (to better withstand insect attacks or
pressure from wind or snow), and an alteration in the production of branches
(again to minimize the effects of competition). Much remains to be uncovered,
however, on exactly what genes make all of this possible, and how such genes
work within the broader context of plant development and life cycles. The
investigators will conduct several experiments to elucidate the genetic basis of
touch response in a common weed, the mouse-ear cress (a member of the mustard
family), which has been extensively used for genetic and ecological research
over the past decades. Different genetic strains of this plant will be exposed
to varying environmental conditions (increasingly strong wind), and their
response will be measured for a series of crucial characteristics representative
of the morphology and life history of this plant. At the same time,
characteristics will be measured of a series of genes already suspected to
affect the ability of these plants to respond to mechanical stimulation, in
order to test hypotheses about how many of these genes may be active, and how
exactly variation at the genetic level of analysis corresponds to the observable
variation exhibited by the whole plant when grown under ecologically realistic
settings. Results from this project will help ecologists, evolutionary
biologists, and molecular biologists better understand the complex relationship
between genes, environments, and the way living organisms look and behave. This
is a general goal being pursued by many laboratories throughout the world, and
this research will allow the scientific community to make progress in this area
because of the ease with which the particular plant and environmental change
selected here lend themselves to precise quantitative analyses of genes and
their effects. It is also important to note that response to mechanical
stimulation has been implicated as one way to conveniently alter certain plant
characteristics (e.g., stem thickness) to be able to better withstand attacks
from insects. This has obvious practical applications for plants of commercial
interest to humans.