* 0321297
* Acquisition of Transmission Electron Microscope for Interdisciplinary Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Manoranjan Misra, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 800,000.00

This project from an EPSCoR state, involving interdisciplinary research in
nanotechnology, nanodevices, materials science, chemistry, biomedical
engineering, and related fields, aims at acquiring a high resolution
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM). The project investigates the properties
of nanostructural materials and devices in an experimental setting. TEM will be
used, among other research, to obtain images of membrane surface features with
atomic resolution permitting the characterization of physical and chemical
properties of a membrane surface in order to develop more efficient water
treatment membranes and will also be used to study corrosion behavior for the
study of long-terms behavior of steels under stress. The infrastructure will
support projects such as: Nanostructural Materials and Devices, Colloidal
Membrane Fouling, Materials Interface and Nanomaterials Research, Long-Term
Stability Rock and Steel Sets - Corrosion Aspects, Hydrogen and Nitrogen
Interactions of Zr2Fe Hydrides, Imaging and Solidification Interfaces, Total
Synthesis of Benzenoid Nanostructures, Sensitized Microstructures During Aging
in Alloy 22 for Nuclear Waste Package Containers, Micro / Nano Polymer Gels,
Grain Growth Study of Metal Oxide Nanomaterials for Catalysts Applications, and
Nanostructures Ti3SiC2/SiC composites obtained by Field-Assisted Combustion
Synthesis. Educational activities with graduate and undergraduate students,
including three courses utilizing the microscope for training and teaching, are
planned. Moreover, research collaboration with the private sector is envisioned.