* 0321301
* Acquisition of an Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* John Thompson, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2006
* USD 137,334.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Colorado under the direction of
Dr. Thompson to support the purchase of an ion trap mass spectrometer for use by
students and faculty in the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences. This
acquisition will significantly enhance the infrastructure of the existing mass
spectrometry resources for departmental research and education programs in
biological chemistry and biotechnology. The new instrument will greatly enhance
ongoing research projects supported by the National Science Foundation and the
National Institutes of Health, increase productivity, and enhance faculty
competitiveness for new research grants. In addition, graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars will have the opportunity to acquire a working knowledge
of modern mass spectrometry which will enhance their preparedness for careers in
research and teaching.

The grant will greatly facilitate ongoing structural studies of proteins and
nucleic acids. Recent advances in instrument technology have extended the
capabilities of mass spectrometers for the analyses of complex biological
molecules. The research projects to benefit directly from this acquisition
include studies of protein and DNA damage resulting from oxidation and from
interactions with small, reactive molecules produced in cells under stress. Such
events alter normal biochemical processes often leading to cell death or
transformation into tumor cells. Other studies will probe relationships between
the chemical/biological processing of proteins and DNA and the oxidative
degradation of these molecules for the purpose of developing new pharmaceutical
technologies. The instrument will greatly enhance educational programs by
providing students with the opportunity for hands-on usage of mass spectrometry
in their research projects.

Improvements in the scientific infrastructure of academic institutions is
essential in order to maintain pace with rapid achievements in instrument
development. Such developments are revolutionizing scientific research,
especially in the biological sciences. The opportunity to acquire a state-of-
the-art mass spectrometer will enable departmental personnel to probe important
scientific questions of greater complexity than was possible in the past.
Without such infrastructure support it would be impossible to maintain cutting-
edge research capabilities. Enhancements in departmental resources will aid in
the recruitment a broad range of students on both local and national levels and
assist the faculty in providing them with appropriate training for successful
scientific careers in academia, industry, and government.