* 0321795
* Dissertation Improvement: The Biological Evidence from the San Pau Chu Site and its Implication for Austronesian Migrations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Anne Stone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 08/31/2005
* USD 5,984.00

Modern Pacific region populations are diverse culturally, linguistically, and
biologically. Many attribute this to more than one migration occurring during
the colonization of Oceania. According to archaeological research and linguistic
reconstructions, the colonization of Oceania began at about 3500 years ago. This
wave of movements is associated with Lapita Cultural Archaeological Complex
(distinct decorated ceramic assemblages, lithic, shell, and bone implements with
a horticultural-fishing economy in an island environment), and the people are
thought to have spoken languages of the Austronesian language group. Evidence
also has been used to suggest that Austronesian peoples originated from
Taiwan/Island Southeast Asia (e.g., the Express Train to Polynesian, Triple-I,
Slow Boat, and Eden in the East models) or further east in the Bismarck
Archipelagos of Melanesia (i.e. the Indigenous Melanesian Origins model).
Comparisons of skeletal morphology and genetic research offer insights into
population relationships and movements; however, the ancestral homeland of
Austronesian-speaking populations is still unknown. To address existing
alternative models with respect to the Austronesian expansion and to test the
agreement between different lines of evidence, this project will examine
molecular data (ancient DNA) and dental morphology of human skeletons from the
prehistoric archaeological site (2500-3000 before present), San-Pao-Chu (SPC),
in Southwest Taiwan. To determine the biological relationships between this
population sample and modern populations, molecular research will include
segments of maternally inherited mitochondrial DNA. These results will then be
compared with morphological data drawn from metric (i.e. tooth crown width) and
nonmetric (e.g., tooth root numbers) dental traits. This is the first study to
look at mtDNA of ancient Taiwanese and one of the few studies using ancient DNA
to study Austronesian migrations. The results of this research can also offer
evidence of biological relationships for the indigenous Taiwanese, specifically
the Ping-Pu tribe, to ethnic groups in mainland Asia and populations of Island
Southeast Asia, and will provide a body of knowledge to evaluate the existing
models concerning the Austronesian ancestral homeland. Biological and spatial
analyses of the SPC human skeletal remains can also offer information to
evaluate prehistoric societies, especially Taiwanese Austronesian speakers. This
project also provides training for a graduate student and fosters collaboration
between American and Taiwanese scientists.