* 0321635
* STTR Phase II:   Automation of the Crosscut Operation in a Wood Processing Mill
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Alexander Mullin, Barr-Mullin Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is to design and
develop a fully automated system for crosscutting planks of lumber into parts
with specific length and surface characteristic requirements. This system
consists of a scanning device with four heads to scan the four surfaces of each
incoming plank, a mathematical programming model and a software system to
determine an optimal cutting pattern for each plank, and all necessary
mechanisms to interface with (and to coordinate the operation of) various
components of the manufacturing line. These components include the transport
devices such as conveyor belts, the positioning devices, the saw mechanism, and
the subsequent cut-piece sorter. Installation of an automated system would
result in both higher speed and higher yields. The project will also extend the
scope of this mathematical model, in combination with the models for the gang-
rip saw operation, to create a combined system for ripping and crosscutting.

The software system developed under this research grant will have an impact on
the efficiency of the crosscut operation, by increasing both its speed and its
yield. This in turn could lead to substantial reductions in the manufacturing
cost as well as to significant savings in the overall consumption of wood, which
is a scarce national resource. This project supports the educational development
of one graduate student at NC State University.

