* 0321438
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Impact of Community Organizing on Political Engagement
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Lonna Rae Atkeson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project examines how voters learn
about the candidates and issues in presidential nomination campaigns.
Presidential nomination campaigns are difficult environments for voters, except
for the in party when a sitting president is seeking reelection. This is true
because it nearly always begins as a low information race and the contextual
environment that faces citizens is a difficult one because of the intraparty
nature of the contest and the multiple numbers of candidates competing. However,
because the race is sequential and lasts over a period of months, voters have a
tremendous opportunity to learn about the candidates through the events and
activities of candidates, reports by the media, and the decisions of primary
voters and caucus goers. While technically each state campaign is a state
contest for the sole purpose of delegate selection, the state campaigns have
been nationalized making state events opportunities for candidates to earn
national and local media coverage, create a voter support base across states and
raise needed campaign funds. As candidates become more known through their
activities, media reports and election outcomes individual level attitudes and
preferences change. While information may vary across states, based upon the
level of campaign action in the state, and between interested and uninterested
individuals, information does accrue and does impact both preferences and
attitudes about the candidates. Information, therefore, about winners and losers
and more substantive information about candidates' traits and policies, helps
future voters determine the viability and electability of candidates, weeding
out candidates who are the weakest alternatives. In this research the Ph. D.
student focuses on how potential nomination voters respond to the campaign as it
unfolds, considering the contextual environment that voters find themselves in
(hard fought or low key sate contests) and the attributes of individuals,
especially their level of political sophistication, that makes potential voters
more or less likely to receive and accept new political information. The key
questions center around how information matters to voters and when and which
voters acquire and react to information. Information comes from the intensity of
the campaign at the state and national level. For this dissertation the student
focuses on three key dependent variables: knowledge about the candidates,
candidate choice or candidate preference and political engagement. To address
questions related to voter learning the research design consists of a rolling
panel and cross-sectional survey design that captures attitude development as it
changes in response to the context of the campaign. In addition, the research
program collects a vast amount of contextual data on candidate behavior, media
coverage and macro campaign conditions. The design and data collection allows
the student to connect the activities of candidates, the media and macro
campaign conditions with individuals and interact that information with
individual level measures of political sophistication. By examining the
contextual environment she will be able to assess what, when and which voters
learn about the candidates and how that knowledge assists them in making more
informed decisions. The project has the potential for broader impact because it
will assist in graduate and undergraduate training and provide a resource for
future studies of presidential nomination campaigns, the importance of voter
context and the value of contextual data in understanding individual level
attitudes and behavior.

