* 0321578
* Map-Based Dissection of Sorghum Drought Tolerance Gene Networks
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* John Mullet, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sara E. Patterson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,964,299.00

Cereals provide seventy percent of the world's calories and water is the most
limiting natural resource for grain production worldwide. Sorghum, a grass with
its origin in Africa, is the fifth most important cereal worldwide. Sorghum has
evolved characteristics that permit grain production in hot dry environments
(i.e., thick leaf wax, deep root system) and that facilitate continued growth
when water availability is limited. Sorghum is also similar in gene sequence to
other important cereals such as rice, corn, and wheat and has a relatively small
genome (only twice the size of rice and 20-fold smaller than wheat). Some
sorghum genotypes show distinct drought-tolerance. Of particular interest are
plants that continue to grow when experiencing water limitation, thus showing a
'stay-green' phenotype. A genomics approach will allow scientists to understand
the network of genes that form the basis to stay green traits. To accomplish
this, genomic resources will be further developed in Sorghum. The TAMU-ARS
sorghum genetic and physical map, already established, will be further developed
and will be aligned to the rice genome sequence. Sorghum chromosomes will be
characterized and a virus-induced gene silencing system (VIGS/RNAi) will be
established. Breeders are developing the genetic populations that permit precise
chromosomal localization of drought tolerance genes, which is essential for
candidate gene identification. All these genetic tools will be used to fine map,
isolate, and characterize this network of genes that control expression of the
sorghum stay-green trait that is central to grain production in water limited
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information will be made publicly available
through scientific and popular publications, presentations at meetings, and
through collaboration with the groups developing Gramene, a national relational
database for grasses (http://www.gramene.org) and on a local project web site
(http://SorghumGenome.tamu.edu). The complete sequence of several sorghum BACs,
BAC sequence and other sequence data will be submitted to GenBank and DNA
sequence data will be provided to the curators of Gramene. The information and
technology generated will help public and private cereal breeders to improve US
crop drought tolerance and productivity and will facilitate the transfer of the
'stay green' trait to other cereal species that lack sorghum's tolerance to
drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;