* 0321218
* RUI-Development of a Cluster System to Support Computational Science Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Mirley Balasubramanya, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This project, developing a scalable and incrementally upgradeable Beowulf
cluster system with high-speed connectivity, supports computational
experimentation at a RUI institution. The project builds on work led by a group
of students who independently created a Beowulf cluster of discarded systems.
Creating core facilities for an expanding emphasis on computational science
research, this custom cluster system will service problems related to coastal
regions. Flexibility (especially in file configuration, scheduling, and
processing model) constitutes the primary software and hardware development
focus. The National Spill Control School, the Center for Coastal Studies, the
Blucher Institute of Geomatics, the Center for Water Supply Studies, and the
Center for Bioacoustics are research institutes associated with the university's
College of Science and Technology; this work provides support to the local
scientists engaged in computational experimentation. The experience of the
student developers, combined with the PIs expertise in parallel processing and
computational science, will service various research areas; some involve
combinatorial optimization problems. Several examples follow.&lt;br/&gt;
Resource scheduling in parallel environment using genetic algorithms&lt;br/&gt;
Molecular dynamics computer simulation research&lt;br/&gt; Influence of
dimensionality on phase transitions, &lt;br/&gt; Effect of adsorption in
confining and curved geometries &lt;br/&gt; Simulating the dynamics of inert gas
atoms and alkanes using a Beowulf cluster&lt;br/&gt;Most of the development time
will be spent on customized system software and on application support software
designed to provide maximum flexibility. The developers will also create process
migration control, customized schedulers, loaders, fault and performance
monitors, signal handlers, and self-test utilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project, originated by the Computer Science Club, not only enhances research
programs in the area, but also involves research training in an undergraduate
institution. The cluster project is expected to attract more
students.&lt;br/&gt;