* 0321647
* SBIR Phase II:   Delta-Sigma All-Digital Magnetometer
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* James Deak, NVE CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2005
* USD 499,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
and prototype a single-chip &lt;br/&gt;magnetometer based on an innovative
approach to digital magnetic sensors. The traditional approach combines a
physical sensor having an analog output with an electronic analog-to-digital
converter. In this sensor, the analog-to-digital conversion occurs in the
physical mechanism of the sensor itself. With this approach only inexpensive
digital electronic circuits are needed to complete the sensor system, resulting
in a robust design that can easily be manufactured. The unique properties of
sub-micron sized magneto-resistive sensor elements are used. The small size of
these elements allows only two magnetic states, i.e. the magnetic state
represents a binary digit that is a function of the external magnetic fields.
Using concepts borrowed from over-sampling delta-sigma analog-to-digital
converters, it is possible to measure the analog magnitude of a magnetic field
by repeatedly interrogating the magnetic state of the bit. Using the principles
of delta-sigma converters, including noise shaping feedback and high over-
sampling ratios, high resolution and an inherently linear response can be
achieved. &lt;br/&gt; This single-chip digital magnetometer would be a
revolutionary advance in sensor technology since it is based on standard wafer-
level integrated circuit processing techniques. It will thus be much smaller and
cheaper to fabricate than existing equivalent magnetic sensor systems. The
highly integrated nature of this product, low power consumption and the digital
output will make it extremely attractive for remote and/or bussed sensor
applications. Applications include digital compasses, geomagnetic surveying
equipment, vehicle sensors for traffic control, intrusion detection,
currency/document validation and portable biomedical assay devices. &lt;br/&gt;