* 0321461
* Collaborative: The Role of Gene Duplication in the Evolution of Chordate Developmental Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Chris Amemiya, Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2006
* USD 315,000.00

0321461&lt;br/&gt;Amemiya&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interconnection between
development and evolution (Devo-Evo) was recognized in the mid-1800's by Darwin
and Haeckel, though it has not been until very recently that the mechanistic
basis for this crucial link has been readily addressable to experimental
biology. In this collaborative project a question concerning the developmental
evolution of the vertebrate bauplan is addressed: what are the developmental and
evolutionary consequences of gen(om)e duplication during vertebrate phylogeny?
It has been known for a long time that the evolution of the vertebrates was
associated with a major expansion of genome size, either by gene or genome
duplications. The present project focuses on the Hox gene clusters, a complex of
genes that encode transcription factors known to be involved in a wide range of
biological activities, including the development of the body axis, fins and
limbs and many other organs. Vertebrates have the peculiar tendency to duplicate
and retain Hox clusters, while no such tendency is apparent in invertebrates. It
is not known why vertebrates have this tendency and whether these duplication
events had an influence on the evolution of the vertebrate body plan. The goals
of this project are to understand the extent and history of Hox cluster
duplications among the vertebrates (specifically focusing on the teleosts), and
to determine whether such duplications have facilitated evolutionary change both
functionally and morphologically. We will use the ray finned fish radiation, in
which the most recent Hox cluster duplication has been documented, as our
experimental focus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental approach involves:
(1) tracing the patterns of molecular evolution of the Hox clusters and their
genes, with the aim to determine whether the teleost Hox cluster duplication was
coincident with the teleost radiation; (2) using Bacterial Artificial Chromosome
technology and computational genomics methods in order to detect changes in the
organization of clusters as well as identify changes in the pattern of non-
coding sequence conservation; (3) employing BAC-reporter transgenesis as a
comparative tool to draw inferences with respect to the effects of gene
duplication on expression patterns; and (4) employing statistical tests to both
coding and non-coding regions of Hox clusters to draw inferences with regard to
the evolutionary forces (selection/drift) acting on duplicated genes and
clusters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation represents a part of an
ongoing collaboration between three investigators of diverse backgrounds: Frank
Ruddle (Yale University) has expertise in mammalian developmental biology, mouse
transgenesis and homeobox genes; Gunter Wagner (Yale University) has an
extensive background in quantitative-mathematical approaches to evolution and
developmental evolution; and Chris Amemiya (formerly Boston University and now
at Virginia Mason Research Center) has expertise in vertebrate zoology,
genetics, and genomics. Each investigator is focussing on different aspects of
the project but with the same overall goals in mind. This consortial approach
has proven effective in the past and considerable progress has been made since
the previous funding cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact of this
proposal is measured in two ways: (1) by employing a highly interdisciplinary
and novel approach for evaluating a complex problem in biology; and (2) by
providing a wealth of research and educational resources. These training
opportunities, including new summer traineeships for teachers and undergraduates
of underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;