* 0321286
* Acquisition of a High Accuracy/Resolution Landscape and Structure Characterization System (HARLS-CS) for Anthropology, Archaeology, Architecture, Biology and Geosciences
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Steven Burian, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 349,452.00

Investigations of a wide range of natural and human processes require data from
varying scales - from global to site or plot. In the past, acquisition of data
at the site/plot/field/structure level of investigation involved manual
measurements, traditional survey, or other time consuming approaches. The High
Accuracy/Resolution Landscape and Structure Characterization System (HARLS-CS)
is an integrated suite of instruments designed to rapidly and accurately
characterize the topographic and spectral properties of the surfaces of
relatively small areas (e.g. 100s of square meters to 10s of hectares) and
structures (such as building facades) at very high resolution (25 mm - 0.5 m).
The system will provide coordinated three dimensional, multispectral and metric
photographic-based measurements necessary for a wide range of mensuration,
classification, and quantitative characterization analyses. The intellectual
merit of the system derives from dramatic expansion of existing research
activities in a number of disciplines and multidisciplinary areas. It will serve
as a shared resource in the fields of anthropology, archeology, architecture,
biology, biological and agricultural engineering, community planning/policy,
entomology, geography, geology, photogrammetric mapping and terrain
characterization, and water resource management. It will be managed by an
experienced group of researchers growing their already substantial collaborative
research capabilities. This approach will expand multi-disciplinary cross-
pollination and exposure of faculty and students. The system will integrate
seamlessly and expand a well-developed set of existing research programs and
institutional structures that will insure its effective use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system has broad impact for both education and
socioeconomic capacity building. The HARLS-CS will play a significant role in
expanding research training. It will provide both undergraduate and graduate
students access to previously inaccessible high resolution data for their thesis
research and will be used in "real world" applications in both advanced
undergraduate and graduate classes. These offerings will help students develop
valuable methodological expertise. By taking advantage of the existing,
extensive hardware, software and course infrastructure already in place, the
HARLS-CS will expand the integration of education and research. The equipment
and data acquired by the instruments will play a key role in solutions to a
variety of socially important problems. For example, measurements from the
system will be used for visualizations of alternative development scenarios for
communities around the state, providing a publicly accessible way to understand
alternative future strategies. Data from the system will allow creation of
detailed 3D urban maps to be used in support of aerosol dispersion analyses
relating to both pollution studies and homeland security planning. The detailed
data provided by the system will support reptile micro-habitat analyses. This is
only a partial list.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from the systems will be used in
the ongoing EAST Project where various high-technology approaches are integrated
into high school curricula in 152 schools in the state, particularly in
underserved rural areas. Particular efforts will be placed in the recruitment of
underrepresented groups into the student population exposed to these new
opportunities. Regular "short course" offerings will be also used to insure that
there is a substantial population of technically trained users. &lt;br/&gt;