* 0321328
* MRI:     Acquisition of Equipment to Support Collaborative, Multi-Disciplinary Research and Development of  Reliable Software
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Steven Roach, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/2005
* USD 163,793.00

This project from an MSI, developing reliable software in a collaborative
setting, requests infrastructure to:&lt;br/&gt;Create reliable and maintainable
software that connects and disseminates geoscience data sets to the Earth
Science community through the GEON grid.&lt;br/&gt;Develop, apply, and
disseminate techniques aimed at improving the integrity and reliability of
software and data, and&lt;br/&gt;Educate and train software engineers,
particularly those from underrepresented populations who are able to join the
workforce and contribute to multidisciplinary projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves a network, containing two servers and a set of workstations.
The first server contains the testbed data necessary for the development and
verification of software to transfer and process geospatial data from disparate
sources. The second server provides the computing throughput necessary to
process large data sets and serves as the backbone of the experimental node on
the GEON grid. The equipment supports development of the Geospatial Network
(GeoNet) and a toolset for data validation, analysis, and visualization. The lab
will also house an experimental node on the GEON Grid.&lt;br/&gt;SMART Board
Interactive Whiteboards with multicolor and touch-sensitive drawing tools are
also requested. These boards interface easily with software available to
collaborators and facilitate distance collaborations. The project targets the
instrumentation of the Collaborative Affinity Research Laboratory (CARL),
providing a collaborative environment that is configurable, and that supports
local, remote, synchronous, and asynchronous collaborations. The university will
continue using the infrastructure to enhance diversity utilizing their Affinity
Research model. Thus, students will benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;