* 0321333
* Acquisition of a Network of Workstations for Research in Parallel and Distributed Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Gilbert Young, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/2005
* USD 159,658.00

This project from a RUI institution, servicing the area of parallel and
distributed computing, aims providing a network of workstations for research.
Research projects underway include:&lt;br/&gt; Paradigm-Oriented Distributed
Computing Using Mobile Agents,&lt;br/&gt; Mobile Agent Management,
and&lt;br/&gt; Distributed Secure Information Management System.&lt;br/&gt;The
first exploits the benefits of a mobile agents infrastructure and develops an
environment for paradigm-oriented distributed computing. The second focuses on
the use of mobile agents and their impact on networks performance. The last
allows multiple servers to share the key to an encrypted file, and separates the
access authentication and verification from the information
storage.&lt;br/&gt;The equipment is expected to provide a solid computing
infrastructure for research projects having computation-intensive applications
(specifically, biology, physics, and mobile computing). Investigations to be
conducted follow:&lt;br/&gt; Wavelet Based Image Reconstruction
Algorithms,&lt;br/&gt; A Computational Screening Approach to Engineering
Thermostable Proteins through Mutation of Protein Surface Residues,&lt;br/&gt;
Development and Application of a Biased Brownian Dynamics Algorithm,
and&lt;br/&gt; Parallel Mobile Action Generators.&lt;br/&gt;The first
investigates the use of various wavelets in the new wavelet-based
multiresolution EM algorithm for medical reconstruction; the second develops and
applies Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) continuum electrostatics methods to a variety of
biochemical systems; the third uses PB electrostatics in conjunction with biased
Brownian dynamics simulation methods to calculate biomolecular encounter rates;
and the fourth aims at improving the performance of a mobile action generator
developed for the mobility management in wireless communication
networks.&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure will provide a state-of-the-art hands-on
instructional laboratory for training and education of students to be part of
the high-tech workforce.&lt;br/&gt;