* 0321918
* Biocomplexity:  Carbonshed Studies of Carbon Sequestration in Complex Terrain
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Russell Monson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,999,830.00

0321918&lt;br/&gt;Monson&lt;br/&gt;Recent estimates that regionalize the US
carbon sink suggest that a significant fraction is in&lt;br/&gt;the Western US,
in ecosystems that occur in hilly to mountainous regions. We have
used&lt;br/&gt;satellite data and ecosystem models to show that Western US
montane regions contribute&lt;br/&gt;disproportionately to the US carbon sink;
we estimated that 25 to 50% of the total continental US&lt;br/&gt;carbon sink,
and up to 75% of Western US carbon sink occurs in mountainous terrain.
Our&lt;br/&gt;ability to validate these predictions with measurements, or to
build on them with improved&lt;br/&gt;mechanistic models, is limited. Although
the scaling of biogeochemical processes was&lt;br/&gt;pioneered in mountain
watersheds, recent research has focused more on the "tower
footprint"&lt;br/&gt;paradigm than the watershed approach; unfortunately, our
current capabilities with tower-based&lt;br/&gt;measurements are not adequate to
develop accurate mass balance predictions in complex&lt;br/&gt;topography, and
this has diminished efforts to understand biogeochemical fluxes in
the&lt;br/&gt;mountains. In this proposal, we develop a "carbonshed" approach
for the study of the&lt;br/&gt;ecosystem carbon balance of montane landscapes.
We define a carbonshed within the same&lt;br/&gt;context as a watershed - a
mountainous tract in which the slopes and valleys cause
complex&lt;br/&gt;topographic patterns, which directly influence the drainage
and accumulation of CO2, as well as&lt;br/&gt;patterns in the redistribution of
energy and water, which indirectly influence the exchange of
CO2&lt;br/&gt;across the landscape. We make the case that the carbonshed scale
is crucial for linking local,&lt;br/&gt;ecosystem-level CO2 fluxes to regional,
landscape-level CO2 fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, we present a plan to
measure carbonshed CO2 fluxes in the Front Range of&lt;br/&gt;the Rocky
Mountains in Colorado. Recognizing that direct measurement of carbon
budgets&lt;br/&gt;using atmospheric techniques will be impossible in complex
landscapes, we focus on modeldata&lt;br/&gt;integration, using measurements to
calibrate and constrain models, and models to&lt;br/&gt;interpolate
observations. Recognizing also that carbon and water exchange are closely
coupled,&lt;br/&gt;especially in this semi-arid Western environment, we focus on
linking carbon and water&lt;br/&gt;measurements. We will challenge process
models with measurements at multiple time and&lt;br/&gt;space scales, utilizing
seasonal to interannual flux measurements, carbonshed scale
campaigns&lt;br/&gt;to scale up (10's of km), and regional (1000's of km)
airborne measurements. Large fires in&lt;br/&gt;2002 will allow us to make
airborne measurements of carbon dynamics in recently burned&lt;br/&gt;systems, a
unique test of the upscaling of fluxes in disturbance-based models. The
project's&lt;br/&gt;modeling will use a coupled ecosystem-atmosphere model,
allowing simulated fluxes to be&lt;br/&gt;translated into concentration patterns
for comparison to surface and airborne observations.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
addresses the intellectual merit criteria by 1) identifying a new phenomenon
in&lt;br/&gt;carbon science: the tendency for carbon sinks to develop in high-
relief ecosystems, as a result of&lt;br/&gt;the interaction of climate with land
use patterns, 2) proposing innovative and cross-disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;methods
to measure this phenomenon, and 3) assembling a team including
biophysicists,&lt;br/&gt;meteorologists, ecologists and educators to study this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The studies will provide training
opportunities for two graduate students and two,&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral
students. The funded activities will serve as the catalyst to develop a new
course&lt;br/&gt;on human-environment coupling that will include an analysis of
the combined roles of land use&lt;br/&gt;history, water resources, fire
suppression and biophysical controls over carbon in the mountains.&lt;br/&gt;The
research will support a significant K-12 and teacher training program
coordinated by the&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado CIRES Office of Education
and Outreach. The proposed research will&lt;br/&gt;contribute to scientific
infrastructure by adding a greatly enhanced carbon cycle
instrumental&lt;br/&gt;capability to the NSF Facilities at NCAR ATD, which are
available to the general scientific&lt;br/&gt;community. Additionally, a greatly
improved 4-dimensional model for analyzing regional carbon&lt;br/&gt;sink
activity will be made available to the general scientific and public policy
communities for use&lt;br/&gt;in analyzing US carbon sinks and their relevance
to global carbon cycle issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;