* 0321259
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Radiation Hard Optical Electronics Design and Testing
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Jingbo Ye, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Richard  N. Boyd
* 07/31/2004
* USD 239,732.00

This proposal requests funds for instrumentation to be used for the development
and construction of high speed, radiation resistant opto-electronics components
for use in transmitting and receiving digital data. The equipment will be
located at the Southern Methodist University (SMU) and at The Ohio State
University (OSU) and will be used for the design and construction of readout
electronics for the ATLAS experiment's liquid argon calorimeter and pixel
detector. . ATLAS is one of two large-scale detectors being constructed for the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. When
the LHC turns on in 2007, it will be the premier particle physics facility in
the world. The intellectual merit of this proposal is the advancement of our
understanding of the laws of nature. The Higgs boson is the one essential
ingredient in the standard model of particle physics that has yet to be
discovered. The ATLAS experiment is designed both to discover the Higgs boson
and to study its properties in detail. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While these fast,
radiation resistant digital data links are being developed for ATLAS, fast data
transfer via optical fibers has many applications. In high-energy physics
experiments, it substantially reduces the volume of cables thereby freeing up
valuable space as well as removing electrical ground loops. The wide bandwidth
of opto-electronics is well suited for multiplexing input channels and allows
for the introduction of error checking and error recovery transmission
protocols. These features are especially important in the presence of radiation.
Over the past several years, both the SMU and OSU groups have developed
expertise in the design and fabrication of opto-electronics components. The SMU
group has designed and constructed fast optical data links for the liquid argon
calorimeter. The OSU group is the lead institution in the design and testing of
the optical electronics for the pixel detector optical link and has developed
radiation hard versions of the Digital Opto-Receiver Integrated Circuit and the
Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers driver circuit. The equipment requested
will allow the groups to broaden their expertise in opto-electronics as well as
to strengthen their present and future contributions to the ATLAS experiment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the broader impacts of this proposal are enhancing
the infrastructure of the SMU and OSU groups; exciting and attracting a new
generation of scientists; developing techniques and electronics that have
applications beyond HEP; disseminating the information learned in this project
to the scientific and business community, and providing an example to society of
a collaborative effort that crosses geographic and cultural boundaries.
&lt;br/&gt;