* 0321839
* Workshop:  Fundamental Research Needs in Photonic Materials Synthesis and Processing at the Interface; Rochester, NY; April 28-30, 2003
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Shaw Chen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/29/2004
* USD 51,828.00

Shaw H. Chen&lt;br/&gt;University of Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Workshop on
Fundamental Research Needs In Photonic Materials Synthesis and Processing at the
Interface, to be held in Rochester, NY on April 28 - 30,
2003."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Workshop on Fundamental Research Needs in Photonic
Materials Synthesis and Processing at the Interface is to be held at the
University of Rochester, 28-30 April 2003. Three materials classes will be
featured: polymers, molecular materials, and nano-materials. Leading experts
from Europe, Japan, and the United States will gather to provide an overview of
selected fields of specialization. Fertile ground for future research and
development will be identified by three break-out sessions following the invited
talks. Approximately, 21 participants will be
invited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A wide spectrum of high-technology
industries, such as communication, sensing, information display and storage, and
health care, will benefit from long-term fundamental research in photonic
materials synthesis and processing. Also, interdisciplinary collaborative
research would be emphasized. This will be the first workshop on photonic
materials from the chemical engineering perspective with an aim to cultivating
collaborative research opportunities with allied fields such as chemistry,
physics, materials science, and electrical engineering and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;