* 0321948
* Modeling, Variability and Predictability of North American Hydrologic Extremes
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Kelly Redmond, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/2008
* USD 46,264.00

This research is intended to produce tools to assess potential regional effects
of global anthropogenic climate change on the structure of North American daily
hydrology in different seasons. The PI will apply climate prediction methodology
to forecast the probabilities of hydrological weather extremes. A new
comprehensive statistical framework will be developed for the description of
daily precipitation and streamflow data. Using this framework, the PI will
examine variability and predictability of daily hydrological extremes. He will
apply statistical methods designed for data with heavy-tailed distributions
(distributions with relatively large numbers of extreme events that can't be
accounted for by exponentially decaying tails of traditional Probability Density
Functions (PDFs). He will then examine the influence of climate forcing in space
and time on the shape of seasonal distributions of daily hydrology. The
parameters describing the PDF's shape will become predictands from which
statistical information, e.g., frequencies of extreme events, can be derived.
The PI will work with scientists at UCSD, SIO and the University of Nevada,
Reno.

This research has broader impacts of research results applied to the important
societal issue of extreme hydrologic events in the context of a changing
climate.