* 0321878
* Anterior Determination in Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Hazel Sive, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Continuing Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 390,000.00

0321878 Sive

This proposal focuses on the mechanism by which an organ is positioned during
embryonic development. The extreme front ("anterior") of embryos of the frog
Xenopus will be studied, with focus on two organs, the cement gland and the
stomodeum. The cement gland is a simple mucus-secreting cell layer that "glues"
the newly hatched embryo to a solid support. It derives from the outer layer of
the embryonic ectoderm. The stomodeum derives from the inner layer of the
ectoderm and forms part of the primitive mouth. Experimental data has been
incorporated into a "Venn diagram model" which suggests that overlap of three
domains of gene activity positions the cement gland/stomodeal region. These are
an anterodorsal (AD) domain, a ventrolateral domain (VL) and an outer (EO) or
inner ectodermal (EI) domain. It is proposed that AD + VL + EO = cement gland,
and that AD + VL+ EI = stomodeum. The goals of this proposal are firstly, to
further test the Venn diagram model by connecting the decision to make a cement
gland ("determination") with the final form and function of the organ
("differentiation"). The activity of four genes (c-jun and three Ets family
members) that may regulate expression of the cement gland marker, Xag1 will be
tested in gain and loss of function assays. Possible parallel pathways of cement
gland determination will be analyzed by examining the gob4 promoter. Secondly,
stomodeum and cement gland formation will be compared. Genes in the AD and VL
domains, that control cement gland formation, will be tested for their role in
stomodeum formation.

The proposal has the intellectual merit of asking how the mouth region is
positioned. This important region of the embryo is poorly understood. Both the
cement gland and primitive mouth are relatively simple organs, which present
unusual opportunities to study the complete time course of organ formation.
Multiple familial deformities of mouth development are known, and this proposal
has the broad impact of helping to clarify genetic causes of these birth
defects. In addition, the P.I. is committed to education at all levels, and the
proposal has further broad impact in the following ways. Several, individuals
working on this project will receive training in scientific method, which will
promote their future careers. A new edition of a laboratory manual describing
the care and use of Xenopus will be prepared during this project, and will
impact members of the community in their use of the Xenopus model.

