* 0321183
* MRI/RUI Development of a Large Ring Laser Interferometer for Earth Science Measurements
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Robert Dunn, Hendrix College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2009
* USD 256,602.00

0321183&lt;br/&gt;Dunn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) Program grant supports the development of a large ring laser
interferometer for earth science measurements at Hendrix College to complement
other large ring lasers located around the globe. A global network of ring
lasers has the potential to provide for very sensitive (10-8) geodetic
measurements including fluctuations in the earth's rotation rate or length of
day measurements, polar wobble, solid earth tides and the rotational component
of seismic waves. The development project supports sensor development in an
academic setting and will serve to impart students with knowledge of optical
gyroscopes and the natural phenomena that affect these sensitive instruments.
The project will also foster collaborations between Hendrix College faculty and
students and a local aerospace engineering firm (BEI Sensor and Systems) that is
interested in assisting with development of the ring laser for its potential
commercial applications. BEI will offer an internship program for Hendrix
students to gain experience working with aerospace engineers. The PI has also
developed collaborations with University of Arkansas and regional seismologists
interested in applications of ring laser data as a complement to existing
geodetic and seismic networks proximal to the New Madrid fault system in the
central U.S.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;