* 0321889
* Workshop on Collaborative Research through an Integrated Tsunami Scenario Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Harry Yeh, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2008
* USD 181,615.00

This action is to support a series of three workshops to initiate, develop,
coordinate, and sustain the community effort for scenario simulations for
tsunami hazard mitigation. The simulations involve many elements, including
tsunami generation, hydrodynamics, warning transmission, evacuation, human
behavior, and social and environmental impacts. The goal of the scenario
simulation exercise is to give researchers in all aspects of tsunami science and
hazards planning an experience similar to that obtained in a real field
investigation. In running the simulations and evaluating the results, critical
problems will be identified for improvement in each specialized area. The
simulation exercise will provide a valuable common background from which to
forge and maintain coherence in the broadly distributed multi-disciplinary
tsunami community.

The idea of tsunami scenario simulations was discussed by the tsunami community
at an NSF workshop held in 2002 in Seattle. The participants strongly
recommended that an integrated tsunami scenario simulation be developed. The aim
of these three workshops is to implement this recommendation through a broadly
distributed multi-disciplinary multi-community effort.

Three workshops are planned, one each year for the next three years. The first
workshop will be designed to initiate the simulation effort, the second workshop
will act as a catalyst to expand those activities, and the third will focus on
the applications and the use of the developed system. The first workshop is
planned for June 2003 at Oregon State University. A working group will be formed
to organize and coordinate these workshops. Because of the multi-disciplinary
multi-community nature of the scenario simulations, the working group will
consist of experts from a wide variety of disciplines. Prior to each workshop,
the working group will act as a steering committee. After each workshop, the
working group will analyze the workshop outcomes and issue a workshop report for
further discussion with the community. Such post- workshop discussions will take
place on the Internet utilizing a web-based discussion tool. The working group
will also proactively seek participants in the simulation exercise from broader
research communities, which will be kept informed via a public-access web page,
and on which the workshop results will be posted.

The three workshops will provide a coherent integrated community collaborative
arena through a common task of tsunami scenario simulations, and will induce
synergistic advancement in a wide variety of the simulation models. The ultimate
goal of these workshops is to achieve a widely accessible platform for
simulation of virtual tsunamis through a community effort. When fully
implemented, the tsunami scenario simulations will be useful for hazards
planning in coastal communities, and for the coordination and development of
scientific research. In addition, the integrated, highly visual character of the
simulations will be of great value for K-12 education on tsunami hazards, and
for general public education in this area.