* 0321106
* Acquistion of The Nanomechanical Test System for Undergraduate Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Willie Rockward, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 08/31/2005
* USD 93,088.00

0321106

Abstract

The Hysitron TriboScope Nanomechanical test instrument is a quantitative depth-
sensing nanoindentation and nanoscratch system which is interfaced with a
scanning probe microscope (SPM) to provide in-situ imaging. The acquisition of
the TriboScope Nanomechanical Test System will enable us to address some of the
open issues in the field of nanoscale structural components. Two of the open
problems include (a) the inconsistent production and fabrication techniques
which lead to varied results for the same nanosystem, (b) the procurement of
reliable and fundamental data banks of durability and material properties, and
c) the computational modeling of nanostructured materials which utilize
realistic material properties. The types of experiments that will be performed
on this test system will allow for us to directly address issues (b) and (c).
The tests that will be performed include Modulus, hardness, fracture toughness
measurements, and the generation of force vs. displacement curves.
Nanostructures represent a new field of science that can extend the size,
efficiency and design of well-known materials. As this field has progressed,
more elaborate structures have been generated that require a better
understanding and more consistent methodology for obtaining reliable material
properties. With the nation's most successful Dual-Degree Engineering program
for African-American males, Morehouse College is well positioned to have a
significant impact on the production of engineers of African American lineage by
increasing the number and the retention of students in the engineering and
applied physics programs. This equipment will not only serve undergraduates at
Morehouse College, but will also serve neighboring undergraduate liberal arts
colleges in the AUC. Colleges in the consortium directly impacted by the
procurement of this equipment include Clark Atlanta University, Morris Brown
College, and Spelman College, a private liberal arts Historically Black College
for African-American females. Students from these colleges are not only allowed
to cross-register and take classes at the neighboring schools, but may also
complete research projects. Therefore, the research opportunities at Morehouse
will also have a direct impact on the students at Clark Atlanta, Morris Brown
and Spelman College.