* 0321377
* Acquisition of Equipment for Distributed Immersive Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Alexander Sawchuk, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This project, developing the technology for Distributed Immersive Performance
(DIP), deals with live, interactive musical performances in which participants
in different physical locations are interconnected by very high fidelity
multichannel audio and video links. DIP, a specialized realization of broader
immersive technology, creates the complete aural and visual ambience that places
a group in a virtual space to experience events occurring at a remote site or
communicate naturally regardless of location. The assembled DIP experimental
system will have three sites in different locations on the USC campus. The sites
will have different types of equipment to test the effects of video and audio
fidelity on the ease of use and functionality of different applications. Two
will have high-definition (HD) video or digital video (DV) quality images
projected onto wide screen wall displays completely integrated with an immersive
audio reproduction system for a seamless, fully 3-dimensional aural environment
with the correct spatial sound localization for participants. The system will be
capable of storage and playback of the many streams of synchronized audio and
video data (immersidata) and will utilize novel protocols for the low-latency,
seamless, synchronized real-time delivery of immersidata over local-area and
wide-area networks such as Internet. Partners in the project include New World
Symphony (NWS) of Miami Beach, University of Maryland, and Georgia Tech. The
latter two contribute the Internet2 infrastructure as server sites. The enabled
research addresses the following challenges:&lt;br/&gt; Low latency continuous
media (CM) stream transmission, synchronization and data loss
management&lt;br/&gt; Low latency, real-time video and multichannel immersive
audio acquisition and rendering&lt;br/&gt; Real-time continuous media stream
recording, storage, playback&lt;br/&gt; Human factor studies: psychophysical,
perceptual, artistic, performance evaluation&lt;br/&gt; Robust integration of
all these technical areas into seamless presentation to
participants&lt;br/&gt;Students participate in the assembly, integration,
testing, and research applications using the DIP system via thesis research,
directed research projects, and classroom work. Offering an opportunity for
students to receive a broad cross-disciplinary education in media systems
engineering, undergraduate engineering majors from USC and CSULA are invited to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;