* 0321385
* MRI/RUI - Aquisition of robotics equipment for an Intelligent Systems Laboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Ramesh Varahamurti, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2007
* USD 346,188.00

This project, acquiring robotics equipment for an Intelligent Systems Laboratory
(ISL), aims at facilitating the development of cross-disciplinary courses and
providing exciting research possibilities. Furnishing opportunities of joint
collaborations with other disciplines, ISL enables students and faculty to
investigate, design, and implement control algorithms using non-traditional
techniques derived from various subdisciplines of Artificial Intelligence, such
as fuzzy logic, neural networks, genetic algorithms, hybrid approaches. ISL
fosters research and development of solitary cooperating autonomous or
teleoperative mobile robots for a variety of tasks such as gathering data from
potentially hazardous environments and facilitating search and rescue missions.
Areas identified for research, motivated by terrorist attacks, include: Design
and deployment of intelligent agents for bio-surveillance and threat detection,
and Design and implementation of large-scale hybrid systems tools for soft
computing, complexity analysis, and intelligent applications. Robotics kits will
be acquired, facilitating research, research training, and integrated
research/education activities at various academic levels. New interdisciplinary
courses will be developed and cross-listed in Machine Intelligence, Intelligent
Systems, Design and Applications, Intelligent Control, and Autonomous Robots.
Moreover, participants will be recruited for Girls SRC, a Summer Robotics Camp
for junior high school.