* 0321344
* Acquisition of a High Capacity Genotyping Facility for Diverse Biological Applications
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 581,812.00

A grant has been awarded to Northern Arizona University under the direction of
Dr. Paul Keim to purchase core instrumentation for a high-capacity, high-
resolution DNA genotyping and sequencing facility. The power of genetic and
genomic analysis has been well demonstrated in the human and a few selected
model genomes, but many other diverse biological species and problems would
benefit equally if such technology were readily available. Researchers at
Northern Arizona University are involved in diverse genetic and genomic problems
that require a state-of-the-art, high capacity facility for DNA analyses. These
instruments will be capable of moderate scale DNA sequencing (e.g. a small
bacterial genome or single locus across many samples), but more importantly they
will provide high capacity genotype analysis through PCR fragment sizing (i.e.,
DNA fingerprinting). An automated fluorescent detecting DNA sequencer will be
used to size PCR fragments associated with microsatellite loci, detect SNPs,
perform AFLP, and DNA sequencing. Moderate scale DNA sequencing capacity is
valuable for molecular systematics by targeted gene sequencing, or small
genome/plasmid sequence determination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current grant
will result in the establishment of a multi-user facility for ENvironmental
Genomics and GENetics (EnGGEN). EnGGEN will be a university and regional
resource center to provide molecular genetic analyses and training for a diverse
user base from regional academic, government and private institutions. Users
already committed to the facility are studying plant evolution, ecological
community genetics, conservation genetics, microbial diversity, and molecular
epidemiology. EnGGEN will provide a complementary facility to the Merriam Powell
Center for Environmental Research (MPCER) and the Merriam-Powell Research
Station whose missions are to support and foster collaborations among
environmental scientists, land-managers, and educators from public and private
sectors. Their diverse membership will provide immediate use of our proposed
environmental genetics facility and promote its use by a broad research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To promote the use of this facility throughout
the University and regional research community (e.g., Forest Service, National
Park Service, TNC, USGS), we have developed a plan of seminars, coursework,
hands-on laboratory use, and fellowship opportunities. This will help recruit
scientists that would not normally use genetics or genomic analyses in their
studies due to a lack of familiarity and/or facilities. We will also support
University curricular activities by sponsoring workshops, laboratory courses and
seminars for graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students. NAU has a culturally
rich student population with major representation of 42 Native American tribes
and Hispanics. We will mentor these students through in-place programs including
an NSF sponsored University Mentoring in Environmental Biology (UMEB) grant and
a NAU grants program that targets undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;