* 0321350
* MRI:  Development of Next-Generation Network Research Testbeds
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Jay Lepreau, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2009
* USD 800,000.00

This project, establishing the framework for a federated set of local and highly
configurable "internet emulators," known as Emulabs, (each heterogeneous, under
local control, offering a unique set of hardware) with expanded software and
innovative algorithms, extends previous research, building a new type of
experimental environment for research in distributed systems and networks. Many
institutions presently use this time- and space-shared facility for research.
Individual site users will now have priority for local hardware, as well as
control over local administrative, security, and resource allocation policies.
This autonomy is expected to encourage "organic growth," while intelligent
allocation, scheduling, and swapping systems will provide abstraction.
Researchers and students can be unconcerned with local complexities, instead of
seeing one large collection of a wide variety of hardware, including standard
PCs, network processors, wireless nodes, and more. The links between Emulabs
should be a useful resource for experiments wishing to operate on the "real"
Internet, while controlled-bandwidth links should shield experiments that do
not. Support for wireless, mobile nodes should open new avenues for
experimentation. Many challenges are involved in achieving this
mission:&lt;br/&gt; Creating software to manage the extension&lt;br/&gt;
Application of novel algorithms and techniques&lt;br/&gt; Augmenting existing
database with failure resistant peer-to-peer sharing of network information
between Emulabs&lt;br/&gt; Scheduling on a non-static, wide-area system (NP-
complete problem)&lt;br/&gt; Developing automated systems to control experiment
scheduling and allocation while maintaining simple user interfaces&lt;br/&gt;
Extending Emulab algorithms and software to handle a wider variety of hardware,
including wireless nodes&lt;br/&gt; Developing methods for sharing, saving and
restoring state between machines &lt;br/&gt; Maintaining performance isolation
while multiplexing multiple virtual nodes on a single computer&lt;br/&gt;Thus,
the work generalizes existing capabilities for configurable experimentation in
distributed systems testbeds to include wireless as well as wired linked, mobile
as well as fixed nodes, and high-end nodes with gigabit links.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emulabs exhibit great individual power in experimentation
and teaching; hence, connecting these into one large "Research and Education
Grid' offers more power and flexibility. Gaining access to an immensely diverse
and powerful resource, small institutions can contribute, because adding sites
to the Grid will be easy and cheap. Since Emulab is already in use as a tool for
education in several institutions, its education and research impacts remain
very broad.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;