* 0321760
* Support of UNAVCO Community and Facility Activities
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2008
* William Prescott, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2008
* USD 15,841,077.00

0321760&lt;br/&gt;Prescott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dense GPS observations in space
and time are resulting in fundamental new discoveries in the earth sciences,
discoveries that have an enormous impact on our understanding of global and
regional plate tectonic interactions and have implications for mitigating
earthquake and volcanic hazards in densely populated regions of the world.
Support through this cooperative agreement will provide for the management and
operation of the UNAVCO national Global Positioning System (GPS) support
facility over a period of four years. The UNAVCO facility has historically
provided centralized support to assist the geosciences community with the
acquisition, archival, distribution, and application of high-precision GPS data
to study solid-Earth processes and hazards through NSF and NASA support.
Management responsibility for facility operations will be under UNAVCO, Inc., a
recently incorporated (April 2001) and independent 501(c)(3) non-profit research
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UNAVCO, Inc. managed facility will
provide assistance to researchers in all phases of GPS-facilitated geosciences
research including: planning; equipment selection and equipment loans and/or
procurement and budgeting assistance for necessary equipment; logistics and
field engineering support for the monumentation and commissioning of GPS
receivers in either permanent, continuously operated networks (CGPS) or discrete
campaign-style occupations of GPS benchmarks; technology development activities;
and data security, quality control, retrieval, archiving and analysis. The
facility will also support NASA/Solid Earth and Natural Hazards (SENH) program
activities and plays a crucial role in monitoring and maintaining a subset of
NASA's GPS Global Network (GGN). In the latter, the UNAVCO facility will provide
maintenance and security for the continuous operation of a large number of
stations within the International GPS Service (IGS) network. The IGS network
provides fiducial stations, orbits, and clock estimates for GPS users worldwide.
Facility leadership serves as an advocate and technology advisor for high
precision GPS research in the earth sciences. The facility will support
community involvement in the governance and operation of the facility through
providing support for interactions including: an annual community meeting;
meetings of the steering committees and support of focused scientific workshops.
Educational and outreach (E&amp;O) activities will include the addition of a
full time E&amp;O Coordinator and the development of a student intern program.
The UNAVCO, Inc. facility and management structure provide NSF and NASA with a
single point of contact that allows for effective and accountable management of
facility resources. NASA support of this facility will occur via annual
interagency transfers through NSF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;