* 0321004
* Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Geochemical, Biogeochemical and Petrological Research
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Paul Loubere, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 205,527.00

0321004&lt;br/&gt;Loubere&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides partial support for the purchase of an
stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer (SIRMS) equipped with specialized inlet
systems for carbonate and water analysis and for gas chromatography. This
facility will support research and instruction at Northern Illinois University
in three areas: (a) aqueous, carbonate and silicate geochemistry, (b)
biogeochemistry and (c) geomicrobiology. The facility will accommodate a wide
variety of users and will provide rapid, easy, automated sample analyses. NIU
faculty including Paul Loubere, Melissa Lenczewski and Gene Perry will use the
SIRMS for stable isotopic studies of silicates, carbonates, natural waters,
organic matter and specific organic molecules. Research areas to be addressed
include mineral equilibria; petrogenesis of rocks from North America, Central
America and Antarctica; mineral precipitation and diagenesis; the marine carbon
cycle; the role of tropical oceans in climate change; timing and causes of
glaciation at high latitudes; the elemental fluxes through volcanic arcs;
groundwater geochemistry including the degradation of anthropogenic compounds;
and topics in geobiology. The facility will also benefit scientists at other
regional mid-west institutions including Illinois State, Southern Illinois and
The Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago. The facility will increase
collaborations among a broad range of researchers and their students at a number
of these institutions. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;