* 0322355
* US-Sri Lanka Cooperative Research:  Study of Dye-Sensitized Semiconductor Nanostructures
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Unil A. Perera, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 39,900.00

0322355&lt;br/&gt;Perera&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports a
joint research project between Dr. Unil Perera, Department of Physics and
Astronomy, Georgia State University (GSU), Atlanta, Georgia and Dr. Keerthi
Tennakone, Department of Physics, Institute of Fundamental Sciences (IFS),
Kandy, Sri Lanka. The PIs will investigate composite nanocrystalline material,
focusing on devices based on dye-sensitized (DS) semiconductor nanostructures.
Dr. Tennakone's team at IFS is conducting research on these DS semiconductor
nanostructures, with a focus on the visible light applications (solar cells)
while IR applications have not been studied. The GSU group has been studying
infrared (IR) detectors, has developed novel IR detection mechanisms and is
working on developing IR detectors for various wavelengths. Dr. Perera has an
NSF grant for the development of heterojunction interfacial workfunction
internal photoemission (HEIWIP) detectors. This work on IR detectors has a very
close connection to the solar cell research. By combining the expertise on both
sides, it is expected that the solar cell performance could be improved by
enhancing the IR absorption and conversion in these DS semiconductor
nanostructures. Different types of dyes will be studied to explore the IR
absorption behavior and to obtain the optimum performance of these low cost
devices. The IR absorption studies of different dyes will allow the GSU group to
develop another type of an IR detector especially for low cost applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project's goal is to advance solar cell
research and to provide novel low cost infrared detectors operating at or near
room temperature. The results of the proposed research will improve the
understanding of detectors and form the basis for the next generation of
detectors. It will enable GSU to involve Sri Lankan junior scientists in a
valuable research experience while working in cutting edge research in the
semiconductor device areas. This will impact significantly the advancement of
knowledge, physics and engineering education, and will make a significant
contribution to both nations' science and technology. The collaborations will
also ensure effective transfer to emerging high-tech applications both in
commercial and government laboratories and especially on the Sri Lankan side.
&lt;br/&gt;