* 0322356
* Center Grant for the Analysis of Pathways from Childhood to Adulthood
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Jacquelynne Eccles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 07/31/2009
* USD 2,499,573.00

This Children's Research Initiative Center will bring together investigators
from 20 multi-disciplinary national and international longitudinal projects to
work collaboratively on analyses aimed at resolving some of the key issues about
how children's environment affects their development during middle childhood.
Specifically, the Center will focus on disentangling the complexity of
influences on children as they develop through adolescence, into adulthood, and
even into rearing their own children. The investigators will address common
issues of importance with their data using state-of-the-art analysis techniques.
The Center will focus on four specific questions: 1) Is middle childhood a
particularly sensitive time during which attitudes, beliefs, and views of the
self crystallize and thus determine later life success (e.g., occupational,
educational, relationship success) or difficulty (e.g., aggressive behavior,
depression)? 2) Which childhood influences (e.g., family, school, peer) matter
the most for positive and negative adolescent and adult outcomes, and at what
points in time do they have the most influence? 3) Do personal characteristics
of the child (e.g., temperament, intelligence, gender of the child) influence
the impact of family, school, and peer influences in predicting later life
outcomes? 4) How similar are parents and their children in positive behaviors
(e.g., social skills, intellectual achievement) and negative behaviors (e.g.,
aggression), and how do family, peer, and school influences affect these cross-
generational similarities and differences? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the
influences studied in any one project are limited, taken together the many
projects participating in this Center can examine a wide range of influences
during childhood. In addition, because of the breadth of these longitudinal
projects, the Center's efforts will foster new methodological and statistical
approaches. The Center will promote innovative, multi-disciplinary training of
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral students through courses, workshops,
and collaborative research experiences. The findings are expected to lead to the
creation of effective interventions for improving life outcomes by identifying
specific factors that have powerful short- and long-term influences on
development. Analyses will address the effects of family, peer, school,
neighborhood, and media influences on socially and clinically important outcomes
such as school success/failure, depression, aggression/delinquency, and
relationship success. Finally, in partnership with school systems, community
groups, and mental health agencies, the Center will move towards design and
implementation of scientifically based interventions to reduce the incidence of
these problems and to promote life success. &lt;br/&gt;