* 0322673
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Stephen Rathbun, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard L. Berger
* 07/31/2004
* USD 65,347.00

Funding supports the purchase of a share of a 128-node Lion-XL Linux cluster, a
disk array, and supporting central server and network equipment dedicated to the
support of research in the statistical sciences at Pennsylvania State
University. By distributing large-scale jobs on the Lion-XL Linux cluster,
computing speed can be improved by two or more orders of magnitude than can be
achieved from any single machine alone. This facilitates the efficient
implementation of computationally intensive algorithms for complex hull peeling
of massive astronomical data, fitting 2-D multiresolution hidden Markov models
to images, Monte Carlo simulations to assess performance of covariate selection
procedures, nonparametric maximum likelihood estimation of the number of genes
in a cDNA library, and Markov Chain Monte Algorithms for spatiotemporal
prediction of soil moisture fields. The disk array is used to store massive
astronomical, environmental, genomic, and image data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
funded equipment is used to support five applied statistical research
projects:&lt;br/&gt;1. Analysis of Massive Streaming Data in Astronomy (G.J.
Babu). Methods are developed to efficiently obtain statistical summaries of data
from the Micron All Sky Survey and Sloan Digital Sky Survey. Obtaining such
summaries is challenged by the size of these data, ranging up to tens of
terabytes in length (millions of millions in length). &lt;br/&gt;2. Studying
Digital Imagery of Ancient Paintings by Mixtures of Stochastic Models (J. Li).
Methods are developed to profile the styles of Asian artists, providing a
powerful tool to art historians for studying connections among artists or
periods in art history.&lt;br/&gt;3. Model Selection for Semi-parametric
Regression Analysis (R. Li). Semi-parametric regression models have found many
applications in medical research. Methods for model selection are required to
determine what characteristics of individual patients significantly impact their
health outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;4. Mixture Modeling in EST Data (B. Lindsay). Methods
are developed for estimating the number of expressed genes in a DNA library.
Such estimates are required to further our understanding of gene
function.&lt;br/&gt;5. Hierarchical Spatiotemporal Modeling of Soil Moisture. A
statistical approach is developed for large-scale prediction of patterns of
variation in soil moisture, based on borrowing strength from multiple data
sources including field sampling, remote sensing, and soil maps. Such
predictions are required for global circulation models of climate change,
hydrological and contaminant transport models, and for decisions regarding land
use, crop selection, and irrigation.&lt;br/&gt;This research impacts not only
the research of the investigator and his colleagues, but also the research of
their collaborators in astronomy, environmental sciences, genetics, and art
history. Graduate students of the participating researchers are central
participants in the development of algorithms for exploiting the distributed
computing environment of the Lion XL Linux cluster.&lt;br/&gt;