* 0322844
* Superconducting Metamaterials
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Steven Anlage, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 09/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

A new class of materials (metamaterials) has been discovered that propagate
electromagnetic waves with fantastically novel and exciting properties. Certain
of these metamaterials are expected to behave as if they have a negative index
of refraction, turning ray optics on its head and leading to many counter-
intuitive results. However, the understanding of metamaterials and their
applications is still in its infancy. Even the most basic predictions, and the
outcomes of the associated experiments, are hotly contested. Because of the high
ratio of theoretical to experimental work in this field, there is a clear need
for more experimental work on the most ideal (i.e. closest to theory) materials
that can be produced. The objective is to investigate key fundamental questions
about negative permittivity, negative permeability, and negative index of
refraction materials using superconducting metamaterials to provide definitive
answers. Specific activities include development of novel superconducting
tunable negative-e and negative-u metamaterials, direct measurement of
evanescent wave amplification in a superconducting left-handed material
development of a novel ultra-compact rf resonator, and the use of
superconducting phase-slip centers to quantum mechanically tune the properties
of nano-engineered superconducting metamaterials. The broad impact of the
proposed work includes demonstrating qualitatively new ways of manipulating
microwave signals, developing novel microwave applications of these materials,
including resonators, band-pass and band-stop filters, near-field lenses with
unprecedented properties, and negative refracting materials, all with myriad new
uses in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work investigates and
promotes applications of metamaterials for the RF and microwave industry. There
are concepts for new and possibly superior microwave filters (band pass, stop,
tunable, etc.), radically improved methods to image microwave properties of
materials and devices, the development of new resonant structures that may
improve NMR and MRI systems, and many other potential applications. These
developments will be of direct and measurable value to society through the
generation of high tech jobs, improvement of wireless communications, and a
positive impact on health care. The project will train two graduate students,
with backgrounds in electrical engineering and physics, to discover new
phenomena at the cutting edge of electromagnetic research. The PI's group has a
history of broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in his
research group and is involved in outreach activities with nearby minority-
dominated middle and high schools. This activity will establish a new branch of
metamaterials research that is expected to make significant contributions to
fundamental understanding and new applications. These activities will create new
partnerships, collaborations, and facilities that will alter the landscape of
this field. The results will be disseminated through publications, talks and
posters at international conferences, a research web site, and continuation of
the extensive outreach activities by the PI and students.&lt;br/&gt;