* 0322271
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Three-Dimensional Effects in the Fracture of Functionally Graded Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* John Lambros, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 33,950.00

0322271 &lt;br/&gt;Lambros&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research between Dr. John M. Lambros, Department of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois and Dr.
Gunay Anlas, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Bogazici University,
Istanbul, Turkey. Functionally Graded Materials (FGMs) are materials possessing
a continuous spatial variation of properties and typically are composed of a
metal/ceramic combination in which their relative volume fractions are
continuously varied. FGMs are candidate materials for simultaneously providing
both structural support and thermal, impact or wear protection. Their widespread
use has not materialized thus far, partially because of a lack of understanding
of the mechanics of such continuously inhomogeneous materials, and in particular
their fracture response. Although several analytical and numerical results exist
in the literature, these are primarily two-dimensional and most often involve
symmetric (i.e. mode I) conditions. Far fewer experimental studies exist, but
the relation between theory and experiment is tenuous at best since the validity
of theoretical results, usually asymptotic in nature, in experimental situations
is not clear. Emphasis will be placed on three less studied aspects of the
fracture of FGMs: (i) the development of three dimensional stresses at a crack
tip in an FGM as dependent on the property gradient, (ii) the extent of validity
of asymptotic fields in actual situations of cracked FGMs, and (iii) the
influence of near tip mixed mode conditions (whether from loading or material
gradient asymmetry) on both of the above. Two (2D) and three (3D) dimensional
finite element simulations will be performed on physically relevant geometries
(three and four point bend, edge crack, compact tension) of cracked graded
plates. The results will shed light on the development of through thickness
stresses ahead of the tip and will provide an inner boundary for the region of
validity of the asymptotic theory. The results will be verified by comparison
with experiments on the polymer-based model FGM that Dr. Lambros has developed.
The research will help extend fundamental understanding of the processes
involved in the fracture of FGMs, especially in regard to three dimensional
stress development, dominance of asymptotic fields and mixed mode near tip
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Dr. Alnas' expertise is in the areas of
theoretical and numerical analysis of fracture of composites, interfaces and
graded materials. Most of the 2D and 3D simulations will be performed in Turkey
using ABAQUS as the main platform. Additional experiments, as well as some
simulations directly linked to them, will be performed at UIUC. A short planning
trip and at least two meetings a year will be held alternately in the United
States and Turkey. Drs. Lambros and Anlas will be accompanied by their
respective graduate students. Bogazici University graduate students will have
the opportunity to work with the experimental set-ups at UIUC. Advanced courses
involving FGMs will be developed in Turkey and UIUC. American researchers and
graduate students at UIUC will have a chance to cooperate with their Turkish
partners.&lt;br/&gt;