* 0322062
* US-India Workshop:  Molecular Biology and Biotechnological Applications of Mycorrhizal Fungi
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/2002,04/30/2004
* Gopi Podila, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2004
* USD 15,600.00

0218398&lt;br/&gt;Podila &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award will
enable participation by six American scientists in the US-India Workshop:
Molecular Biology and Biotechnological Applications of Mycorrhizal Fungi. Co-
organizers G.K. Podila of Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI and
Ajit Varma of the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), New Delhi will convene a
workshop at JNU, December 19-23, 2002 to discuss the beneficial effects of the
soil fungi known as mycorrhizae on plants. The goals include: 1) a reappraisal
of the importance of mycorrhizae to the health, growth and well-being plants,
and 2) a discussion of their positive influence on reducing plant disease and
returning crop production systems to levels of sustainability without large
inputs of pesticides or chemical fertilizers. On this important topic,
application technologies are being developed worldwide on biological diversity
and the functioning of mycorrhizae in all ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This workshop is expected to raise awareness and
appreciation of the role of mycorrhizae. For the U.S., the participants will
become informed about the availability of mycorrhizal biodiversity from India
and its potential applications in this country; for India, there is great
potential to harness the usefulness of this type of soil fungi and positively
impact economic development. For both countries, it is hoped the discussion will
inform the thinking and practices that guide management strategies in
agriculture and forestry, result in a more comprehensive view of the important
role of mycorrhizae on the well-being of all plants, and foster better
scientific relations between the U.S. and India. This activity is supported by
the Indian Department of Science &amp; Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;