* 0322027
* Magnetic Rings for Memory and Logic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

In this project, the properties of mesoscopic magnetic rings will be
investigated, and their utility in magnetic devices such as memory or logic
cells will be explored. Thin-film magnetic rings, with diameters of 200 nm and
above, can be magnetized in several distinct states. For example the
magnetization can be oriented circumferentially around the ring (a 'vortex'
state), or the ring can contain two head-on walls at opposite ends of a diameter
(an 'onion' state). Recently, another state (a 'twisted' state) was observed
which consists of a vortex state containing a 360 wall. Rings can be
reproducibly switched between these states, introducing the possibility that
rings could be candidates for magnetic data storage or data manipulation
devices. In this project, circular and elliptical rings will be fabricated using
electron-beam lithography combined with ion-beam sputtering. Rings will be made
from single magnetic layers, exchange-biased layers and spin-valve multilayers.
Their magnetic states will be determined as a function of geometry. In
particular the stability of the vortex, onion and twisted magnetization states,
the possibility of moving walls around the ring, and pinning of the walls will
be examined. Micromagnetic modeling will be used to help interpret the
observations. Magnetoresistance measurements on small rings will be made by
electrically contacting the rings in a two-level lithography process. Based on
the results, a magnetic random access memory cell will be prototyped, in which
data bits are stored in the ring as different magnetization states. Bits will be
written by applying a field and read back using magnetoresistance. The
possibility of designing a magnetic logic gate will also be assessed, in which
data bits (represented by domain configurations) can be written, manipulated,
and read back.

Education and communication activities will be carried out in combination with
these research activities. These will include the participation in research of
two graduate and several undergraduate students, the incorporation of research
findings into teaching, and the continued development of a series of local
school outreach activities. In addition, a software tool will be designed
suitable for senior high school or freshman college students, which will
illustrate magnetic fields, flux density and magnetization, and allow students
to explore hysteresis phenomena, improving their understanding of magnetic
materials and devices.

