* 0322548
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Improved Hydrogeophysical Assessment of Recharge Beneath Ephemeral Streams and Applications in Arid Areas
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Paul Ferre, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 24,000.00

0322548 &lt;br/&gt;Ferre&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for support of a
joint research project by Dr. Paul Ferre, Department of Hydrogeology and Water
Resources, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona and Dr. Hesham El-Kaliouby,
Department of Geology and Geophysics, the National Research Center, Cairo,
Egypt. The purpose of the research is: 1) to apply nondestructive, geophysical
methods to monitor changes in water storage throughout the vadose zone beneath
an ephemeral stream; 2) to determine the temporal relationships between
streambed infiltration, subsurface redistribution, and recharge; and 3) to
describe these relationships in a manner that will allow for improved
representation of streambed recharge in hydrologic models. The two scientists
will develop field geophysical methods for quantifying recharge beneath
ephemeral streams. This data set will provide a unique opportunity to calibrate
a transient unsaturated flow model through a thick vadose zone, leading to
improved understanding of water movement beneath ephemeral streams. Measurements
will be collected with noninvasive surface time domain electromagnetic
instrument. A simplified conceptual model of streambed recharge will be
developed based on interpretations of the field measurements with numerical
models. This description of the subsurface hydrology of arid regions is critical
to define the spatial and temporal distributions of recharge for use in
sustainable development planning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The sustainable
development of arid and semi-arid regions can be achieved only through the
establishment of a sustainable water budget at the basin scale, which depends on
an improved, quantitative understanding of recharge. For many semi-arid
environments, recharge beneath ephemeral streams dominates total recharge;
however, this topic has received little study. One of the most difficult
challenges facing a quantitative study of recharge beneath ephemeral streams is
the need to make accurate, detailed hydrologic measurements to depths in excess
of 50 meters. Current methods of measuring the water content or matric potential
have limited depth resolution and maximum depths of practical measurement, while
profiling the hydraulic conductivity from measurements on soil cores is time
consuming and expensive. As a result, existing methods are incapable of
monitoring these properties over the entire thickness of the deep vadose zones
that are typical in arid and semi-arid regions. The significance of this work
lies in the convergence of hydrology and geophysics leading to critical
measurements that cannot currently be made to quantify recharge. This work
should lead to a more efficient water planning that can be achieved with these
improved recharge estimates. Funding for this project is provided by the Office
of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;