* 0322818
* Genetics of Rapid Multivariate Evolution and Speciation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Michael Bell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2008
* USD 424,000.00

This project exploits rapid evolution in a lake population of threespine
stickleback fish (Gasterosteus aculeatus) to address two evolutionary questions.
(1) Does genetic variation bias the direction of evolution? Genetic covariance
matrices (G matrices), which summarize heritable trait variation and
associations, will be computed for the lake population and its marine ancestor.
The G matrices will be compared to each other and to phenotypic covariance
matrices (P matrices), which summarize total trait variation and associations. G
and P matrices will be analyzed to infer whether they have biased the direction
of evolution within the descendant lake population and G has evolved. (2) Does
adaptation to ecological conditions in the descendant lake population reduce
interbreeding between the descendant and ancestral poulations, i.e., is the
descendant a new species? Mate choice experiments will be used to see if these
populations prefer members of their own population to those of the other as
mates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will indicate whether genetic
variation biases evolution of natural populations and new species form as a
byproduct of adaptation to ecological conditions. It will improve our
understanding of stickleback diversification and rates of adaptation to new
environments and speciation, which have implications for restoration of
biodiversity. Finally, it will facilitate collaboration between biologists at
the University of Alaska, Anchorage and Stony Brook University and give graduate
and undergraduate students at both institutions research experience.&lt;br/&gt;