* 0322213
* Conference on Research in Income and Wealth:  Measurement Issues in Economics - The Paths Ahead.  Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches, September 2003, Washington, DC
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Ernst Berndt, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

In recent years much greater professional attention has come to be focused on
issues in economic measurement, not only by academic researchers and economic
policy analysts, but also by professional economists in government economic
statistical agencies. This attention is due, in part, to Federal Reserve Board
Chairman Alan Greenspan, who indicated to the Senate Finance Committee in 1995
that he believed the U.S. consumer price index significantly overstated true
price inflation. This belief was confirmed by the Boskin Commission, that
concluded that the best estimate of the bias in the CPI was about 1.1% per year,
and that a bias of this magnitude would cost the federal government around $1
trillion over the succeeding 12 years. Academic researchers like William
Nordhaus also expressed skepticism that official statistics captured the true
dynamism of the U.S. economy. This problem was attributed, in part, to the
difficulty in measuring technological improvements in product quality, and, as
Chairman Greenspan's 1998 remarks indicated, to persistent difficulty in
estimating the output of the service sectors of the economy: "Indeed, the
published data indicate that the level of output per hour in a number of
service-producing industries has been falling for more than two decades. It is
simply not credible that firms in these industries have been becoming less and
less efficient for more than twenty years." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zvi Griliches
was a leader in the effort to improve the quality of economic statistics,
particularly in the field of price hedonics and quality change, and in area
service sector output (it was he that coined the term "hard-to-measure" sectors
in reference to services). In recognition of his contributions, the Conference
on Research in Income and Wealth is sponsoring a conference in the Washington DC
area, September 19-20, 2003, co-organized by Ernst R. Berndt and Charles R.
Hulten. The proceedings will focus on the problems of measuring the price and
quantities of those outputs and inputs that have proved particularly
challenging: unresolved issues from past like the measurement of service sector
output and the problem of estimating capital stocks and incomes; problems
receiving much current attention such as the treatment of product quality change
in the CPI and real output statistics; and emerging problems of defining output
and measuring prices in sectors associated with the "New Economy". While each
problem has its own peculiarities, a common thread runs through many of them:
what, exactly, is the nature of the commodity in question and in what units
should it be measured? Not only are these measurement issues intellectually
challenging, but progress is being made, and the policy implications are
profound. The CRIW will continue its long tradition of organizing and publishing
results of research involving measurement of economic phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants at the conference (presenters, discussants
and attendees) will include diverse representatives from academia, government
and the private sector who are engaged in the collection, interpretation and
analysis of economic data. Special priority is being given to participation by
individuals who previously have not had a great deal of exposure at NBER/CRIW
and related academic conferences. The conference program will also include a
user's guide paper describing the recent released BLS' s new time use survey
data set.&lt;br/&gt;