* 0322286
* Collaborative Research: Fabrication of Functional Oxide Nanotubes and Nanorods for Nanoelectromechanical Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Jiping Cheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 01/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

One-dimensional nanostructures such as nanotubes and nanorods can function as
miniaturized devices as well as electrical interconnect, thus may become
important building blocks for nanoscale electronics and mechanics. This project
proposes to study the controlled growth of binary oxide semiconductor ZnO
nanotubes and nanorods, and their applications in nanoelectromechanics. The
objectives of this research include: Controlled fabrication of binary
semiconductor (piezoelectric) ZnO nanotubes and nanorods with diameter from a
few tens of nanometers to a few micrometers, and length from a few microns to a
few hundred microns. On-chip assembly of ZnO nano-structures to fabricate on-
chip nano-resonators. Characterization of mechanical, electrical, and
electromechanical properties of on-chip nano-resonators. Design, modeling and
characterization of nano-resonators based on the piezoelectric properties of ZnO
nanotubes and nanorods for RF and microwave frequency communication
applications. The expected outcomes of this research include a systematic study
for controlled fabrication of binary oxide nanotubes and nanorods, a development
of innovative on-chip assembling techniques for manufacturing nanodevices, and
the characterization of the electromechanical properties of these novel on-chip
nano-resonators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential technical applications of
this research include on-chip nano-devices and systems including nano-
resonators, nano-electro-mechanical filters for RF and microwave frequency
control applications, nano-resonators for sensor applications, as well as for
optical device applications, etc. The proposed fabrication processing methods
can be applied for manufacturing other binary semiconductor nano-materials, such
as AlN, GaN, etc. The study of piezoelectric or nanoelectromechanical properties
and their scaling trend of zinc oxide nanostructures will provide fundamental
understanding of nanoscale device design and fabrication for applications that
conventional bulk materials and micro-scale materials could not reach. The
broader impacts to education and training will include: Providing hands-on
research training opportunities for K-12 students and underrepresented
undergraduate students in each summer semester through University of Pittsburgh
INVEST NOW program and the Diversity and Minority Engineering Programs; Training
undergraduate and graduate researchers on the fabrication and applications of
nanomaterials and nanoelectromechanical devices; Incorporating the fabrication
of oxide nanostructures and devices into the current Microfabrication Lab course
as a nanofabrication component. &lt;br/&gt;