* 0322535
* Dissertation Research:  Popular Technology: Participatory Strategies for Community- Relevant IT Expertise
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Nancy Campbell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 08/31/2004
* USD 8,166.00

This STS dissertation research project is guided by the following three
questions: 1) How are low-income women structurally positioned in relation to
technology? How does this positioning limit the potential of traditional
technology training programs? 2) What are the factors for success in
technological education and participatory design in the service of social change
(popular technology)? 3) What are the factors that constrain or enable
successful and ethical use of technological and academic expertise in grassroots
social change projects? This research project studies the design and
implementation of popular technology programs at the Troy-Cohoes YWCA in Troy,
NY. The field site brings to light some of this country's most disturbing social
and economic inequalities in an extremely diverse residential context where an
empowerment model of personal and social change is central, the sharing of
resources, knowledge, and assets is common, and the economic empowerment of
women and girls and the elimination of racism is the mission. The research
questions will be pursued through a mixed-methods approach including
participatory action research (PAR), focused interviews, and critical discourse
analysis. NSF will support 12 months of field research to complete the
participatory design of a suite software intended to help low-income women
navigate the social and human services system, assess and evaluate this software
and the collaborative process of its design, and to conduct focused interviews
to broaden the applicability and generalizability of the PAR research. This
study will make significant scholarly and practical contributions by
contributing to better empirical understandings of the relationship between
technology and poverty in the contemporary U.S. context, examining the
applicability of new participatory approaches to technologically mediated
university-community research, and critiquing existing understandings of
"technocratic" and "lay" expertise. This proposal also responds directly to the
NSF's criteria for significant broader impacts: it broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups (particularly women, people of color, and the
economically disenfranchised) in community-based technological design and
implementation; it builds a significant infrastructure for university-community
engagement and partnership across social and economic strata; and it explores
and evaluates models that integrate undergraduate research and education by
providing opportunities for community theory/practice learning for RPI public
service interns.

