* 0322755
* Empirical Similitude
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Matthew Campbell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 12/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

The goal of this project is to advance the fundamental understanding of
mathematical predication through Empirical Similitude Method (ESM), a novel
approach that takes non-linearities and property variations into account to
estimate the performance of an actual product. The Traditional Similitude Method
(TSM) or Dimensional Analysis incorporates the Buckingham's Pi theorem to
predict the behavior of a system by analyzing and testing its corresponding
scaled prototype. The constraints and limitations in using this method lie in
the assumption that the system follows a power law, the scaling parameters
obtained after analysis are unique and constant through the entire range of
application, and the parameters are indicative of the actual system only. The
TSM analysis is primarily confined to prediction in focused domains. Preliminary
work in ESM has been achieved by implementing systematic numerical manipulations
in the algebraic domain by using tools including Conformal Mapping, Linear
Algebra, Vector Calculus and Statistics to address the concerns of various forms
of distortion comprising model distortion like isotropic and orthotropic
properties, geometric distortion including shape and orientation, parametric
distortion like size and dimensions and feature distortion like square holes vs.
round holes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a comprehensive
mathematical derivation that gives insights into the existing methods of ESM and
further extends this process for complex systems. Research tasks include
extending the Conformal Mapping, evaluating the system in the Z-space or the
imaginary domain, developing a pragmatic definition for Lumped Empirical
Similitude Method and using the Circulant Matrix approach to establish the
practical reasoning of ESM. Collaboration with industry on such applications as
scaled automotive crash testing will demonstrate the significant impact this
approach can have to numerous complex systems problems. The researchers will
also explore a collaborative research activity with a group of faculty at Texas
A &amp; M University (TAMU). This collaboration will investigate possible
connections between this work and research into probability modeling of design
spaces with the characterization of uncertainties being conducted at
TAMU.&lt;br/&gt;