* 0322395
* Feedback Control Design for Bipedal Robots
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Jessy Grizzle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2008
* USD 525,600.00

The motivation for studying walking robots arises from diverse sociological and
commercial&lt;br/&gt;interests, ranging from the desire to replace humans in
hazardous occupations, to the restoration of&lt;br/&gt;motion in the disabled,
the possibility of using legged locomotion in terrain that is unsuitable
for&lt;br/&gt;wheeled locomotion, and the psychological appeal of machines that
operate in anthropomorphic or&lt;br/&gt;animal-like ways. Feedback control is an
integral part of achieving bipedal locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;Control system design
for biped robots poses numerous challenges due to the many degrees
of&lt;br/&gt;freedom in the mechanisms, the intermittent and unilateral nature
of the contact conditions with&lt;br/&gt;the environment, and underactuation.
The most technologically advanced biped robots today are&lt;br/&gt;walking on
the basis of a heuristic control principle that imposes a flat-footed walking
motion in&lt;br/&gt;order to avoid dealing with the underactuation that comes
with foot rotation (i.e., toe roll and&lt;br/&gt;heel strike). Professor
Grizzle's research will develop the analytical foundations of walking with
an&lt;br/&gt;anthropomorphic gait. By not relying on heuristics, significantly
improved feedback controllers will&lt;br/&gt;be designed that allow the natural
rotation of the foot during the stance phase of walking, while&lt;br/&gt;still
guaranteeing stability of the walking motion. Beyond a certain speed, walking is
no longer&lt;br/&gt;efficient (or even possible). The extremely challenging
problem of controlling a running motion&lt;br/&gt;of a bipedal robot will be
investigated, both theoretically and experimentally. These results
will&lt;br/&gt;greatly enhance the ability to design machines that can perform
human-like tasks. Another portion&lt;br/&gt;of the research will look at
controlling a robot with a passive knee (active damping but
otherwise&lt;br/&gt;unactuated), analogous to walking with a modern
prosthetic.&lt;br/&gt;Professor Grizzle is actively engaged in undergraduate and
graduate student education. NSF&lt;br/&gt;support of this research proposal is
enhancing the research and education infrastructure at the&lt;br/&gt;University
of Michigan through the construction of a biped robot prototype. The robot
affords&lt;br/&gt;experimental facilities and numerous projects for students.
This research grant provides for the&lt;br/&gt;training of one PhD student, and
a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) supplement to&lt;br/&gt;this
grant will provide a meaningful research experience for two undergraduate
students. Special&lt;br/&gt;attention is being paid to recruiting at least one
of these students from an underrepresented group.&lt;br/&gt;Professor Grizzle is
also more broadly sharing the excitement of a research career in
engineering&lt;br/&gt;by making presentations on bipedal walking robots to
undergraduate student groups, and high&lt;br/&gt;school students. On the basis
of his research findings in biped robot locomotion control,
Professor&lt;br/&gt;Grizzle is forging research relationships with colleagues in
neurology and rehabilitation. His goal&lt;br/&gt;is to transfer the deeper
understanding of bipedal posture and locomotion that is resulting
from&lt;br/&gt;the study of robots, to the development of improved
rehabilitation therapies for a class of patients&lt;br/&gt;who have suffered
strokes or spinal cord injuries.&lt;br/&gt;The research findings of this grant
are maintained on Professor Grizzle's web site; see above for&lt;br/&gt;the URL.