* 0322021
* GOALI: Measurement and Control of Spin Dynamics in 6.1-Angstrom Heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jennifer Zinck, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 08/31/2007
* USD 330,000.00

This project centers on a comprehensive experimental program aimed at exploring
and applying the unusual properties of 6.1-angstrom heterostructures
(InAs/GaSb/AlSb) for potential spintronics applications. Novel mid-infrared
ultrafast optical tools and techniques will be used to quantify the material
properties governing spin dynamics in these heterostructures, including spin
relaxation and spin transport, and the results will be used as a basis for
spintronic device development. Special emphasis will be placed on spin dynamics
in (110)-oriented 6.1-angstrom heterostructures and on the role of interfaces in
controlling these dynamics. As was recently demonstrated by the PI and Co-PI,
(110)-grown InAs/GaSb superlattices offer significantly enhanced spin lifetimes
due to the absence of native interface asymmetry contributions to precessional
spin decay, which dominates in corresponding (001) 6.1-A structures. Through a
long-standing collaboration with Professor Michael Flatte of the University of
Iowa, this experimental program will be coordinated with theoretical
calculations of spin-dependent band structures, spin lifetimes, and spin
transport. The program will also benefit from several other collaborations,
including one with HRL Laboratories, where the first MBE growth of a
(110)-oriented InAs/GaSb short-period superlattice was recently demonstrated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The 6.1-angstrom heterostructures are intrinsically
interesting owing to their unusual band alignments, strong spin-orbit coupling,
novel interface properties, and large electron mobilities. Many of these same
properties make these materials intriguing for spintronic device applications.
The measurements proposed here will provide a crucial contribution to the state
of knowledge regarding spin dynamics in this technologically important system.
Our studies of the relationship between spin lifetimes and interface properties
in (110)-oriented structures will allow us to explore the extent to which
interface control can further enhance spin relaxation times. Such a result would
substantially widen the scope of potential spintronics device architectures
based on this system. The results will also contribute to broader current
research efforts focused on improving interfaces in the 6.1-angstrom
heterostructures, which could lead to improvements in advanced electronic and
optoelectronic devices, such as resonant interband tunneling diodes and mid-wave
and long-wave infrared lasers and detectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed
program, which involves an industrial collaborator, will expose graduate and
undergraduate students to a broad range of specialized courses, state-of-the-art
laboratory facilities, and a multi-disciplinary research environment, thus
providing them with excellent training for careers in either industry or
academia. This program will also contribute to the increased participation of
women in scientific research, through fostering the academic career ambitions of
the Co-PI. The project will support K-12 outreach through its contributions to
an established University of Iowa educational program, Family Adventures in
Science, a hands-on weekend program targeted at children age 12 and under.
&lt;br/&gt;