* 0322274
* The Impact of the Stalinist System on Science:  Nuclear, Low Temperature and Theoretical Physics in Ukraine, 1930-1960
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Paul Josephson, Colby College
* Fixed Amount Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 12/31/2005
* USD 32,934.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES 0322274&lt;br/&gt;Paul Josephson, Colby
College&lt;br/&gt;"The Impact of the Stalinist System on Science: Nuclear, Low
Temperature, and Theoretical Physics in Ukraine,
1930-1960"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ukraine was a leading center of
nuclear, theoretical and low temperature physics in the 1930s. Niels Bohr, Paul
Dirac, P. M. S. Blackett and Boris Podolsky, among many others, visited its
renowned center of research in Kharkiv, the Ukrainian Physical
Technical&lt;br/&gt;Institute (UFTI). Kirill Sinelnikov, who studied with Ernest
Rutherford in Cambridge, directed the institute for many years, while future
Nobel laureate Lev Landau began his career at UFTI.&lt;br/&gt;Leading Soviet
physicists and representatives of the Communist Party set out to establish UFTI
at the beginning of Stalin's crash program for industrialization and forced
collectivization of agriculture in the late 1920s. Within a few years, the Great
Terror commenced, leading to the arrest, interrogation, imprisonment and
execution of millions of innocent citizens. The purges seem to have reached an
intensity in Kharkiv unrivaled elsewhere in the USSR. In this project, a
uniquely qualified international team of researchers will examine in great
detail the history of Ukrainian physics. Specifically, using materials in
government and institute archives, interviews, and local newspapers, the
researchers will explore the impact of the Stalinist system on the physics
community. By impact of the Stalinist system we mean: centralization of science
policy; an emphasis on applied science at the expense of basic research; the
introduction of a new system of planning of scientific activity; the
establishment of autarky or international isolation in science; and the
ideologization of science.&lt;br/&gt;This project will make several important
contributions to the history of science. First, it will add to our understanding
of the interaction of Stalinism and science. Second, it will reveal to what
extent the experience of Ukrainian scientists differed from that of scientists
in the physics discipline elsewhere in the USSR. Third, it will add a new
chapter to the growing literature on cold war science. Fourth, by providing
modest funding to Ukrainian specialists and several graduate assistants, it will
support science studies which we believe are important to the ongoing evaluation
of the place of science in contemporary Ukraine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;