* 0322107
* NR: A Formal Approach to Traffic Grooming in Optical Networks with General Topologies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Carla Savage, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2007
* USD 404,968.00

The goal of this project is to develop a formal framework of algorithms and
techniques for traffic grooming to exploit recent advances in optical network
technology. The results from these activities will be a suite of traffic
grooming algorithms with formally verified properties, which can be flexibly and
efficiently applied within a variety of optical network and cost models, and
which will address both the off-line and on-line versions of the problem. In
contrast to the recent work on traffic grooming techniques that was in the
context of SONET/SDH rings, with the development of generalized multiprotocol
label switching (GMPLS) technology (also referred to as multiprotocol lambda
switching, MPLambdaS, when switching is based on wavelengths), this project will
particularly focus on optical WDM networks with a general topology.
Consequently, a new problem arises in which the objective is to groom a set of
MPLS traffic streams into lightpaths for transport over an MPLS network of a
general topology so as to minimize the overall network cost. There are many
unanswered questions yet to resolve in this field. Specific objectives include
the refinement of optical routing models to incorporate traffic grooming, and
the evaluation of trade-offs between decreased wavelength requirements and
increased hardware costs in optical networks. Furthermore, this project will
develop optimal or near-optimal traffic grooming strategies for elemental
topologies under a number of cost models, and it will also study the grooming in
general topologies by decomposition into or synthesis from elemental topology
building blocks. It is widely expected that the results of this work will
benefit the high-speed backbones of tomorrow's network and information
infrastructure will consist of networks utilizing hybrid optical and electronic
switching to enable high-performance MPLS transport.