* 0322583
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Peter Monk, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2005
* USD 75,023.00

The Department of Mathematical Sciences at the University of Delaware will
purchase a distributed memory parallel computer which will be dedicated to the
support of research in the mathematical sciences. It will be used for several
research projects, including: Ordering and coarsening dynamics for an fcc binary
alloy (Braun); Domain decomposition for modal computations (Driscoll);
Electromagnetic scattering (Monk); Vortex computations of vortex dipole
evolution, dipole pair collisions and simulations of synthetic jets (Rossi).
These projects all involve the numerical solution of complex partial
differential equations in applied mathematics. Realistic solutions use
algorithms which have large memory and time requirements. The proposed Beowulf
cluster of 32 processors linked with a dedicated Myrinet will allow us to
investigate these problems efficiently using parallel algorithms.&lt;br/&gt; The
broader impacts of our proposal are twofold. First, we will&lt;br/&gt;generate
new results of interest to environmental and materials scientists, fluid
dynamicists, electrical engineers and the defense industry. Second, through
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in the proposed projects, we
will prepare a new generation of applied mathematicians skilled in parallel
computation.