* 0322338
* Architectural Effects in the Phase Formation and Miscibility of SCLCPs Prepared by ATRP
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2010
* Coleen Pugh, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2010
* USD 605,200.00

In contrast to polymers based on conventional, non-mesogenic monomers, the
effect of architecture on the properties of side-chain liquid crystalline
polymers (SCLCPs) has barely been investigated. The synthesis of cyclic and
branched SCPCPs is proposed in order to determine if high degrees of branching
hinders the ability of the polymer to form a liquid crystalline phase, and in
order to investigate whether or not the presence of a long mesogenic side chain
in every repeat unit influences any of their solution and solid-state
properties, such that the SCLCPs might appear to have greater branching than
their nominal values. In particular, an ideal architecture is sought for
generating SCLCPs with exceptionally fluid mesophases, such that either new
applications can be identified or in order to compete with LMMLCs for
applications that would benefit from the structural integrity of a polymer.
These different architectures are also needed to investigate the source of the
broad phase transitions often exhibited by SCLCPs synthesized by non-living
polymerizations. New chemistry is proposed to synthesize the first cyclic
polyacrylates and the first hyperbranched polyacrylates that are chemically
analogous to linear polyacrylates; the hyperbranched polymers will contain an
ester group attached to every other carbon atom along the polymer backbone, with
a non-initiator-containing alkylester attached as a free side chain. All of the
proposed architectures are new to the field of SCLCPs. The solution behavior of
the polymers will be investigated by light scattering measurements and GPC as a
function of molecular weight. The thermotropic behavior of the homopolymers will
be determined as a function of molecular weight and extent of branching by DSC,
polarized optical microscopy and possibly X-ray diffraction. Polarized optical
microscopy will also be used to qualitatively determine how the extent of
branching affects the polymers' dynamics, which will be correlated with the
13C-NMR T1C spin-lattice relaxation times of specific carbons within the
mesogen, spacer, branch points and/or polymer backbone of each architecture. The
spatial distribution of the components of the architectural blends will be
characterized by magnetic resonance imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is a multidisciplinary project that will train graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, including at least two women, in organic, polymer and
physical chemistry. Undergraduate students may contribute through an REU summer
supplement during summer months, with mentoring by the graduate students. All
participants will present their work routinely at group meetings and ACS and
Gordon conferences. Students and postdoctoral researchers will learn how to use
Schlenk line synthetic techniques, and how to use NMR, GPC, DSC, polarized
optical microscopy and light scattering in order to characterize their polymers,
precursors and blends. Those students working on the chain transfer study will
also learn how to use a high vacuum line for their kinetic measurements. This
work may also contribute to improving the infrastructure of the University of
Akron through the acquisition of an NMR imaging instrument if the university
instrument proposal is successful.&lt;br/&gt;