* 0322114
* GOALI: Planning Horizons for Optimal Decision Making Over Time with Applications to Production Systems Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Daniel Reaume, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2008
* USD 256,931.00

&lt;br/&gt;Within the context of today's rapidly changing world, firms are
confronted daily with the challenge of making decisions that not only make
economic sense now but also position the firm for grappling with a future often
characterized by rapidly evolving technology and markets. Key to making these
decisions are the planning horizons employed. Historically, selection of
planning horizons has been based upon tradition or engineering judgment. If that
horizon is myopic, the resulting decision can be short-sighted and fail to
anticipate events that can render today's decision unwise. If the horizon is too
long, considerable resources may be expended to collect irrelevant data and the
resulting problem can present formidable computational demands. The overall goal
of this research is to provide a rational framework that leads to a planning
horizon choice that is efficient and yet far-sighted, leading to decisions which
are undistorted by unanticipated end-of-study effects. Examples of such
decision-making problems include the sizing and timing of capacity expansions,
planning for production scheduling and maintenance tasking, and the replacement
and acquisition of new equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to validate
the models and methods developed on the problem of jointly optimizing
manufacture and maintenance schedules in the context of vehicle production along
a collection of production lines at General Motors. The research will be
collaboratively pursued with faculty and students at the University of Michigan
and research engineering staff at General Motors R &amp; D Laboratories. The
intellectual merit of this work includes establishing methods and conditions
under which one may finitely compute an optimal first policy to a problem with
infinite data, thereby extending solution procedures to cover nonhomogeneous
Markov decision processes. The broad impact of this work lies in the potential
of the models, algorithms, and rules-of-thumb developed to assist decision
makers in deciding how far into the future they need to look to make a wise
decision today. This research will be grounded in a real application arena at
General Motors with the intent of increasing the productivity and reliability of
national manufacturing systems. Students will serve as interns at GM thus
directly assisting in the transfer of technology both in the research and
educational domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;