* 0322461
* Analysis of a Newly-Identified Voltage-Activated Potassium Current in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Satpal Singh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 414,250.00

Potassium channels are cellular proteins that play a vital role in physiological
functioning of the nerves, muscles and other cells. A previously unknown novel
type of potassium channel (named IKF) has been identified. This project will
study: (i) how this channel functions, (ii) what pharmacological agents interact
with this channel to either inhibit or enhance its activity, and (iii) what
intracellular signaling mechanisms are involved in modulating this channel.
These channel properties will be studied using methods that measure electrical
activity of the channel in a model system that is well suited to genetic
manipulation. The electrical measurements will provide information about the
functioning of the channel. Effects of pharmacological agents will be studied by
measuring the function of the channel after applying various drugs and toxins.
Similarly, the use of drugs and genetic perturbations that effect the
functioning of the channel will provide information on pathways that modulate
the channel.

The recent genomic revolution has led to the discovery of a large number of
genes that code for potassium channels. In contrast, relatively few channels,
including the IKF channel, have been identified at the physiological level. This
project will help understand the physiological role of the IKF channel and will
subsequently allow the establishment of a link between the channel and the gene
that codes for it. The study will provide a fundamental framework for
understanding the role of IKF and related channels in normal cellular
physiology. Furthermore, this work will contribute to the infrastructure of
science by providing training to undergraduate and graduate students pursing
careers in the biological and the pharmacological sciences.

