* 0322905
* Exploratory Synthesis of Novel Classes of Inorganic Solids of Electronic, Magnetic, and Catalytic Importance
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Shiou-Jyh Hwu, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/2006
* USD 451,344.00

The objective of this research is to explore new classes of compounds that
exhibit novel frameworks of electronic, magnetic and catalytic importance. The
scope of the proposed project covers a broad range of fundamental inorganic
chemistry, including synthesis, structure, bonding, electronic structure,
magnetochemistry, and materials chemistry. The significance of this research
endeavor includes: 1) discovering novel solids containing nanostructured
transition metal (TM) oxide frameworks of fundamental and technological
importance in, for instance, quantum computing, 2) developing, via recently
implemented salt inclusion reactions, new hybrid materials exhibiting unique
chemical and physical properties and 3) collaborating with researchers in
various disciplines and different research institutions, including national
laboratories, to facilitate in-depth structure and property correlation studies.
This interdisciplinary research program will impact students in multiple ways,
training and preparing them to fulfill the need for researchers with
multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
skills essential to addressing the varied career demands of the future in solid
state materials science. %%% The objective of this research is to explore new
classes of materials that exhibit novel frameworks of electronic, magnetic and
catalytic importance. A long-established area of scientific excellence in
Europe, solid-state chemistry has emerged in the US in the past two decades as a
field experiencing rapid growth and development. Recent advances in technology
and the need for new materials in device applications have continuously driven
the rapid growth of solid-state science. This proposed research is designed to
nurture and train students to meet the need of globally prepared researchers who
are well versed with multidisciplinary backgrounds and possess the technical,
professional, and personal skills essential to addressing the varied career
demands of the future. By equipping more chemists to pursue career positions in
areas allied to materials chemistry, we will be enhancing the skill base in an
area of vital importance to the US economy. Funding of the proposed research
program will support advanced materials research as well as the long-term
health, vitality, and infrastructure of each discipline, as their skills and
knowledge make a considerable contribution to the high technology materials
endeavors in the US. ***