* 0322441
* Collaborative Research: A Hybrid Systems Framework for Scalable Analysis and Design of Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Katia Obraczka, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2008
* USD 179,877.00

This collaborative project delineates an ambitious multi-disciplinary three-year
research and education plan to develop a scalable framework for modeling,
analysis, and design of protocols for heterogeneous communication networks. It
encompasses the design of models for hybrid networks and will provide tools for
protocol design and analysis. Hybrid models combine discrete events with
continuously varying quantities. They allow some of the discrete events that
occur in computer networks to be aggregated and, as a result, networks can be
described in terms of continuously varying quantities (such as rates of
occurrence of events). However, they can still retain discrete events of
interest (e.g., transitions between modes of congestion control, blackouts in
wireless networks, changes in routing, etc.). Different aggregation levels
result in multi-resolution models, which scale to arbitrarily large, high-
bandwidth networks and thus constitute invaluable tools for protocol design and
evaluation. The research proposed will produce the scientific foundation for a
scalable methodology to study heterogeneous data communication networks,
including the development of multi-resolution models for large-scale,
heterogeneous communication networks based on a hybrid systems formalism,
development of model-based tools for formal analysis of data communication
networks, and in particular, for evaluating and tuning network protocols, and,
development of model-based control-theoretical tools for designing network
protocols that satisfy application-specific (e.g., bounds on sending rate
variation) and/or general (e.g., fairness) performance constraints.