* 0322171
* Analysis of Chromosome Cohesion in Arabidopsis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Christopher Makaroff, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2007
* USD 492,000.00

Chromosome cohesion plays a central role in chromosome segregation during both
mitosis and meiosis. The REC8/SCC1-like proteins are integral components of the
mitotic and meiotic cohesion complexes and appear to be the regulatory point for
the release of cohesion. Studies in a variety of organisms indicate that while
sister chromatid cohesion is a highly conserved mechanism, important differences
exist in cohesion at the centromeres verses chromosome arms, between mitosis and
meiosis and across different species. Earlier studies identified four
REC8/SCC1-like proteins in Arabidopsis (SYN1-4). One of these proteins, SYN1 is
essential for meiosis while SYN2 and SYN4 may participate in mitosis. The fourth
Arabidopsis cohesin protein, SYN3, appears to have a novel role in the plant
nucleolus. This project involves a number of studies designed to better
understand the Arabidopsis cohesin proteins. (1) Immunolocalization experiments
and the analysis of mutant plants will be conducted to determine the function(s)
of SYN2, SYN3 and SYN4. In particular the role of SYN3 in the nucleolus will be
investigated. (2) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies to examine
axial element formation in syn1 plants and immuno-TEM studies to examine the
distribution of SYN1 on meiotic chromosomes will be conducted to further
investigate the role of SYN1 in homologous chromosome pairing and synapsis
during meiosis . (3) Proteins that interact with SYN1 and/or influence its
distribution on chromosomes will be identified through yeast two hybrid screens
and mutant analysis and their role in chromosome cohesion investigated. Together
these studies will provide insight into the specific roles of the Arabidopsis
SCC1/REC8-like cohesin proteins in meiosis and mitosis and help fill a void in
our understanding of plant cohesin proteins in general. Finally, they will yield
new insights into the process of sister chromatid cohesion, different ways
organisms control this important process and potentially new roles for the
cohesin proteins.