* 0322988
* Science, Technology and Public Opinion in Los Angeles Resource Policy, 1930s - 1950s
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Sarah Elkind, San Diego State University Foundation
* Fixed Price Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 110,799.00

This proposal is to complete the research and continue the writing of a book
examining science, technology and urban environmental policy in the twentieth
century. Specifically, it aims to incorporate an explicit examination of science
and technology, as well as public reactions to specific technical proposals,
into a comprehensive study of urban environmental politics. This addition will
yield a more complete analysis of important changes in twentieth century urban
environmental policy. The project focuses on the decades around World War II
because this period is generally neglected by historians of urban politics and
technology, and yet is formative in the history of the modern American city. The
study uses six case studies from Los Angeles' history -- air pollution,
flooding, coastal erosion and pollution, water supply, hydroelectric power
development, and offshore and urban petroleum production -- because this city
faced an unusual range of environmental problems, and yet is widely considered
the prototypical twentieth-century American city. The activities funded by the
grant will use the methods of history of science and technology, specifically
the analysis of technical reports prepared for Los Angeles and collaboration
with technical experts, to evaluate the merits of the proposals for Los Angeles'
environmental problems. The grant also emphasizes the use of cultural history to
examine popular media for evidence of the public's understanding of and response
to Los Angeles' environmental policy problems. This project is unique because it
places science and engineering in their broader political and social contexts,
and integrates the technical with the historical. The study will explain
technical issues in clear, lay terms, and will analyze how communities used this
technical information to devise effective policy. The project considers voters'
reactions to Los Angeles' problems, as well as the impact that scientists and
engineers had on the political process. Few histories of technology, environment
or cities, combine the systematic study of technology with a thorough discussion
of political decision-making. Fewer still consider the popular reaction in the
political process. This research will augment the incorporation of research
findings into classroom teaching. The funded work has particular significance
for teaching of future primary and secondary educators, and for ongoing
collaboration with public high school teachers by encouraging interdisciplinary
approaches to both history and science. The work proposed will create a book as
a model of interdisciplinary study for historians of various specialties and
approaches. It will also explain how scientific development, technical experts,
interest groups, public reaction, and federal and local agencies all interacted
in the development of public policy in a case-study form familiar and accessible
to modern policy analysts.

