* 0323129
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Sustaining Cooperative Multinational Marine Fishery Management in the Face of Environmental Variability
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Robert McKelvey, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 11/30/2007
* USD 299,998.00

The goal of this collaborative research is to address the question of achieving
stable and mutually beneficial management of multinational marine fisheries in
an unstable climatic environment. Specifically the study will examine the
effectiveness and robustness of alternative institutional arrangements for joint
management of commercially harvested trans-boundary fish stocks in the presence
of environmental uncertainty. The project will focus on the disruptive effects
of poorly predicted oceanic environmental variability, including sudden climatic
regime shifts, and will address the value of improved predictability. It is well
known that uncoordinated fishing often will lead to over-harvesting and fish
stock depletion, with destructive biological and economic implications. It
becomes also a multinational political question when the fish stock ranges
across national jurisdictional boundaries, and especially onto the "global
common" of the high seas. In this context, cooperative management can be
difficult to achieve and sustain, even in a stable oceanic environment. It is
doubly difficult when sudden and unexpected climatic shifts occur, such as
instances of the Pacific Ocean El Nino-Southern Oscillation phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's activities consist of several interrelated
components. The empirical component, led by NCAR personnel, will produce a
systematic comparative history of multinational management institutions for the
world's tuna fisheries, highlighting specific issues and key relationships that
are to be examined through the modeling. The complementary modeling activities,
centered at the University of Montana, utilize game theoretic concepts, and are
realized through dynamic mathematical and computer-based analysis. The
"incomplete-information multilateral fish-war model" focuses on cases of
decentralized but coordinated management, where the climatic regime shifts have
asymmetric effects and the parties differ in their access to information and in
their goals and attitudes toward risk. The component on "modeling coalition
formation and stability in multilateral fisheries management" will examine the
internal politics of alternative multilateral governance arrangements, the entry
and exit of nation states from the joint governing body, the endogenous
formation of voting coalitions within the body, and of "spillover effects" among
coalitions. Finally, in an "integrative phase" the full research team will
examine the implications of the modeling results for each empirical case study,
both to better understand historical patterns and to evaluate alternative,
potentially more robust, cooperative management arrangements. The goal here is
to make this work more fully relevant to policy studies.&lt;br/&gt;