* 0323640
* Device Processing Studies of Aluminum-Rich AlGaN Superlattices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Henryk Temkin, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 425,999.00

The PIs will investigate critical issues in growth and processing of deep
ultraviolet light emitting diodes (LEDs). The wavelength range of interest is
from 280 to 240 nm, and will be reached using AlN/AlxGa1-xN superlattices (SLs)
with nanometer periods (1.25 - 2.25 nm). Their specific goals to advance from
growth to device processing are: 1. High p-type carrier concentrations are
difficult to obtain due to the increasing hole activation energy in AlxGa1-xN
with increasing x. Experiments will address the optimization of energy gap while
reaching high carrier concentrations. 2. LED performance relies on the ability
to form Ohmic contacts to p-type and n-type materials. The situation for these
materials is complicated by the presence of native oxides which form upon
exposure to air. They propose to study and improve contact resistance for these
Al-rich surfaces by controlling air exposure between growth and metal
deposition. 3. Producing mesa device structures relies on plasma etching. Their
preliminary work shows the AlN/AlGaN SL etch rates to depend on composition and
doping. Furthermore, they find a delay in the onset of etching, once plasma
conditions are established, which we attribute to native oxide formation. They
will study these effects for controlling the etch of device structures. The
influence of etching conditions on their ability to form Ohmic contacts needs to
be understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They propose systematic experiments to
address these important issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This
fundamental research addresses must be carried out to produce deep UV LEDs.
Advanced growth methods will be developed to control energy gaps and material
quality in AlN-rich materials. Implications for doping will be studied, and
processing issues of electrical contacts and plasma etching addressed. The final
goal is to demonstrate a deep UV LED operating in the 240 nm range. The
application of high power LEDs in the deep UV range extends to biological,
chemical, and environmental sensing, thus relating to current national security
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The interdisciplinary research
setting combines physics, materials science, and advanced engineering. This
provides excellent opportunities in these areas for graduate and undergraduates
students from science and engineering, developing important technical, team, and
leadership abilities. They will continue their involvement in Texas Tech,
regional university, and local outreach and recruitment activities. These
efforts strive to increase the number of qualified students in their University
research community, interest young students in science and engineering careers,
and recruit from the regional community of students rich in underrepresented
talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;