* 0323429
* Smart microfluidic systems based on dielectrophoresis and electrowetting
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Alan Raisanen, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 196,000.00

The project objective is to develop and test methodologies for optical sensing
and real time control of electric-field-mediated microfluidic systems for the
laboratory-on-a-chip. We will investigate novel flow control and monitoring
strategies that combine modulation of voltage and frequency. Success will help
in planning future research aimed at implementation of this liquid actuation
scheme in a new class of smart, high-speed, microfluidic systems. The project
addresses the challenge of how to monitor and control this rapid motion for
implementation in the laboratory on a chip. Prior microfluidics research offers
little or no guidance about how to control the high-speed, dynamic behavior of
sessile, sub-nanoliter liquid masses on substrates.&lt;br/&gt;The experimental
strategy is to investigate and combine three means to achieve this control
voltage magnitude modulation, frequency modulation, and dynamic switching of
segmented electrodes. Of these, frequency modulation is most unique because it
provides access to the complementary attributes of EWOD and DEP by frequency
tuning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developmentally, TAS and the lab-on-a-chip, are
more than ten years behind MEMS and EWOD/DEP-based microfluidics features on-
chip manipulation with accessible, planar geometries, thus opening the door to
simplified analyte sample injection methods and reduced tendencies to clogging.
These electromechanical actuation mechanisms may constitute a solution to the
priming and sample introduction bottleneck associated with enclosed
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project offers fine opportunities for post-
graduate level interdisciplinary research, but perhaps just as important is that
we can tap into a genuine excitement about this work displayed by undergraduates
and by secondary school students. We will exploit this curiosity by continuing
to provided internship opportunities for undergraduates in our laboratory and by
expanding our outreach to high school and middle school girls participating in
summer science camp at the University of Rochester.&lt;br/&gt;