* 0323141
* Strong-Coupling of Quantum Dots and Micro-cavities for Efficient Single and Double Photon Sources and Quantum Logic
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Michael Raymer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

0323141&lt;br/&gt;Raymer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will implement a novel
approach for reaching the cavity-QED strong-coupling regime with a single
semiconductor quantum dot (QD) and a mode of an optical micro-cavity. Such
coupling, not yet achieved in any laboratory, implies that a single photon can
strongly drive the QD, and that emission from an excited-state QD will occur
deterministically and predominantly into a single mode of the light field. This
extreme degree of control at the single-quantum level will potentially enable
the PI to develop several useful applications in Quantum Information
Processing:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Deterministic production of single photons
on demand (useful for ensuring the security of quantum
cryptography);&lt;br/&gt;2. Writing and reading of quantum information into and
out of material systems;&lt;br/&gt;3. Deterministic production of pairs of
polarization-entangled photons on demand (useful as a resource for quantum
communication or for linear-optics computing);&lt;br/&gt;4. Quantum information
processing or computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immediate goal will be to
demonstrate that the external-cavity system already constructed in our
laboratory will provide a sufficient level of coherent coupling between a QD and
an optical cavity mode to meet requirements for QD-based Quantum Information
Processing (QIP). The second goal during the 3-year funded period will be items
1 and 2 above. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to a potential
revolution in communications technology if quantum techniques truly become
operable. The research here will contribute to the development of efficient
solid-state sources of single photons and photon pairs, as well as the coherent
control of single quantum dots that is needed for manipulating electronic and
spin states in these systems for quantum computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Information Science is popular with students -
both graduate and undergraduate. It is attracting students into research.
Undergraduates, including male and female, have worked on the project. The
project has also attracted visiting scientists and students from abroad,
providing a culturally broadening experience for the students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The material is finding its way into undergraduate and
graduate-level courses. The PI recently initiated and taught a new course at the
level of undergraduate non-science majors, called The Physics Behind the
Internet, for which he has recently authored a textbook.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;