* 0323856
* Monitoring, Control, and Adjustment of Non-Homogeneous Healthcare and Patient Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* James Benneyan, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 06/30/2007
* USD 325,301.00

This research project is to develop new statistical process control (SPC) and
bounded feedback adjustment (BFA) methods for healthcare adverse event and
patient physiologic data that exhibit non-homogeneity or autocorrelation.
Examples include surgery complications where each patient has a different
survival likelihood and diabetic glucose levels that are desirable to control to
minimize deviations from a target value. The risk-adjusted research will include
new Shewhart, EWMA, and Cusum methods based on a mixed-risk model for non-
identical dichotomous events. Numeric code will be developed to compute exact
run length properties and investigate the effect of possible approximations. The
feedback control research will integrate SPC with deadband adjustment charts (as
opposed to continual adjustment), an area with important healthcare applications
that remains relatively unexplored. This will include determining statistical
properties of the bounded adjustments and evaluating the performance of
parametric and non-parametric approaches to integrating BFA and SPC. Cost models
will be developed for these integrated methods and used to determine their
optimal simultaneous design, as well as the consequence of sub-optimal designs
and robustness to model misspecification. Developed methods will also be
validated empirically working with three academic
hospitals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this research include
improved healthcare process safety, better control of patients' health status,
and significant reduction in associated costs. The developed methods will
provide greater ability to detect important changes by accurately accounting for
the natural statistical behavior inherent in many healthcare processes.
Important medical adverse events include medication errors, surgical site
infections, ventilator-associated pneumonia, and wrong-site surgery, together
estimated to result in 770,000 to 2 million patient injuries, 45,000 to 98,000
deaths, and $8.8 billion annually nationwide. Important feedback control
applications include oral anticoagulant self-dosing, hormone self-regulation,
and ICU patient blood counts and oxygen saturation levels, where continuous
control is not practical and competing costs of adjustments, deviations from
desired levels, and delayed change detection need to be balanced. The project's
integrated methods will optimize the control of these processes and reduce the
time and costs in detecting systemic changes. This research also will be benefit
similar problems in other industries and will develop graduate students with a
healthcare focus.