* 0323814
* Control and estimation in distributed  actuator/sensor arrays with application to micro-systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Bassam Bamieh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 210,000.00

Large arrays of spatially distributed dynamical systems are becoming
increasingly prevalent in modern&lt;br/&gt;technological applications.These
systems can range from the macroscopic,such as vehicular platoons
or&lt;br/&gt;Unmaned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)in formation .ight to the microscopic
such as micro-mirror or micro-&lt;br/&gt;cantilever arrays.A signi .cant impetus
for research on these systems has come from the .eld of
Micro-&lt;br/&gt;Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS)where the construction of very
large arrays of sensors and actuators is&lt;br/&gt;now feasible and
economical.It is widely recognized that one of the next frontiers in this area
is the systems&lt;br/&gt;leve design of such MEMS,as well as their integrated
distributed feedback control and estimation.&lt;br/&gt;From the systems point of
view,these large actuator/sensor arrays are coupled dynamical systems
with&lt;br/&gt;a large number of inputs and outputs.Traditional control and
estimation techniques are not immediately&lt;br/&gt;applicable to these systems
for two main reasons:(a)the computational complexity due to the large scale
is&lt;br/&gt;daunting,and (b)a crucial design consideration is the distributed
nature of control and estimation,i.e.which&lt;br/&gt;sensors should communicate
with which actuators,and the localization and decentralization requirements
on&lt;br/&gt;the controllers.The second problem,in its general form,is widely
recognized to be a very di .cult one,with&lt;br/&gt;about three decades of
related research in the area of decentralized control.It is thus likely that
progress will&lt;br/&gt;only come from exploiting special structures inherent to
certain spatially distributed control and estimation&lt;br/&gt;problems.Recent
work by the PI has elucidated e .ective methods for addressing both of the above
issues for&lt;br/&gt;spatially distributed systems with certain types of
invariances and symmetries.The methods also provide&lt;br/&gt;guidelines and
benchmarks for systems that may not posses those symmetries as
well.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to carry out a combined theoretical and experimental
research program in the modelling,&lt;br/&gt;distributed controller design and
estimation for large networks of sensors and actuators under a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;relevant design constraints.These ideas and design techniques will
be applied to the multi-micro-cantilever&lt;br/&gt;systems we have been testing
at UCSB.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed research are
twofold.The .rst is the development of systematic&lt;br/&gt;design methodologies
for distributed robust control systems which have architectural
constraints.These con-&lt;br/&gt;straints include the ocalization of information
passing between sensors and control units.Such
architectural&lt;br/&gt;constraints are a compromise between fully centralized
and fully decentralized control,and are thus expected&lt;br/&gt;to be
tractable.Another important aspect of the proposed research is the synergy
between MEMS problems&lt;br/&gt;and control theory.Integrated systems design is
becoming an increasingly important issue in MEMS.Our&lt;br/&gt;work in
particular will contribute to this in two ways.The .rst is in using distributed
estimation as a method&lt;br/&gt;for simplifying sensor design in a MEMS
array,and the second is in the use of feedback
(electronically)to&lt;br/&gt;simplify the mechanical MEMS
design.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:This project is based on a synergistic
interaction between control theory and MEMS.&lt;br/&gt;Ideas from control
engineering are used to design radically simpler MEMS systems,and architectural
issues&lt;br/&gt;in MEMS systems are posing new control problems.Students
involved in this research will have inter-&lt;br/&gt;disciplinary training in
both dynamics and controls and in MEMS.We anticipate that our results
will&lt;br/&gt;enable the design of e .cient MEMS systems which are expected to
become an important component of the&lt;br/&gt;technological economy.