* 0323166
* Dissertation Research:  Exhibiting Real America: History and Heritage in Museums of Science, Technology and Industry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Bruce Hevly, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 02/29/2004
* USD 8,000.00

A National Science Foundation Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant
will be used to begin a history of how the nation's industrial and technological
heritage has been defined. The central means of understanding this heritage is
how it has been presented in museums of technology, industry, and science,
particularly through representations of memory and authenticity, key terms by
which heritage and identity are forged. More specifically, this study will
examine how past representations of what is authentic, both in terms of history
and the objects themselves, change through the material culture of the museum,
that is, the artifacts, arrangement of the artifacts, attempts to contextualize
artifacts, the architecture, the location, all of which mark an understanding of
how to portray a "real" past and what artifacts are counted as the "real" thing.
Although the larger project includes other museums, research supported by a NSF
grant will be limited to two sites, the Smithsonian Institution and the Chicago
Museum of Science and Industry, both of which will serve as focal points for
understanding federal and national "layers" of heritage and museum history.
Research will concentrate on locating artifacts and exhibits that played a
formative role in the development a national sense of inventiveness, innovation,
technological prowess, or material capabilities, particularly as they relate to
flight, industrial manufacturing, and the military, and on collecting
information on the debates, correspondence, and discussions between those
responsible for putting them together. As a policy guide, this dissertation
seeks to outline a philosophy of preservation and a framework for making
connections between public and academic discourses about history and heritage.
Heritage has long functioned as a touchstone for preservation efforts, and
attention is increasingly turning to sites of past industry and engineering as
potential heritage zones. There is much at stake with these projects to turn
industrial pasts into tourist dollars, revitalizing economically stagnant cities
and towns. With such a clear impact on the prospective fortunes, the past may
bend too much to serve the present. The artifacts of heritage sites or zones not
only involve big business but big politics. In the wake of the attacks on the
World Trade Center in New York City much thought has been given to memorializing
the event. Clearly, heritage and commemoration are a tremendous source of
political capital. Thus a primary goal in this history of museums is to think
deliberately and systematically about uncoupling history and heritage, and the
ramifications of the distinction on the politics of representations of the past.
An essential part of this project includes constructing a philosophy of heritage
and preservation to inform not only museum practice, but dialogue between public
and academic domains more broadly. This dissertation proposes to ground such a
philosophy in an understanding of authenticity, of how the past is portrayed as
real. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;