* 0323410
* Risk Management For Global Financial Organizations: Applying Large-Scale Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* John Mulvey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 297,931.00

The research focuses on risk management at the strategic (enterprise) level,
with an emphasis on global financial companies. The research will demonstrate
that a decentralized optimization-based planning model provides a practical
approach for global risk management. Successful risk management depends upon an
organization's ability to achieve well-defined objectives. These systems not
only protect an organization against losses, but also increase risk-adjusted
profits. The research will compare leading approaches for optimizing a firm
under uncertainty, including resource and price directive procedures. Senior
management and regulators will evaluate the strategies. Building on previous
work with financial companies, the research will extend ongoing risk management
systems to address decentralized elements. The research will study the selection
of firm-critical scenarios as part of risk transfer mechanisms. Since dynamic
financial models possess benefits over traditional single-period approaches,
decentralized optimization will be deployed in a discrete-time, multi-period
setting. The research addresses problems in current risk management practices:
(1) historical data may misrepresent the future, especially regarding rare
events; (2) financial organizations fail to predict future performance under a
set of plausible scenarios; (3) regulations may work at cross purposes for
mitigating enterprise risks; (4) regulators lack experience in technical
aspects; and (5) managers possess inconsistent guidelines for evaluating risks.
Each topic will be evaluated during the project
tenure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global risk management has become a significant
concern due to several emerging trends. Modern financial companies span a wide
spectrum of activities in global markets from insurance to investment banks,
retail banks and security brokerages. While these organizations attempt to
diversify risks, recent events have shown that large financial organizations are
unable to fully anticipate their overall loss exposure, especially during
stressful conditions. European financial firms have lost considerable market
value due to convergence of losses. In the US, pension plans have reduced their
ability to pay beneficiaries. The research's risk management techniques can have
a positive impact on professional practice. Companies that operate in an
efficient manner are less likely to fail, thus reducing external societal costs.
The current US pension problem is an example, whereby improved asset-liability
management would have been beneficial.