* 0323349
* Novel CMOS Circuit Design Techniques for Multi-Gb/s Broadband Communications Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Michael Green, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project entails the investigation of new design techniques that
enhance the speed and performance of CMOS broadband
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of distributed amplifier structures is
proposed to increase the speed performance of elementary broadband structures,
including clock divider and 2-to-1 select circuit. Preliminary results suggest
that a distributed clock divider designed using a 0.18 u CMOS process can
function with an input clock frequency of over 32GHz.A 2-to-1 multiplexer built
in the same technology can operate at a bit rate of 20Gb/s.The speed
capabilities of these distributed blocks is double what can be achieved using
conventional lumped circuit design techniques. Another significant advantage of
using distributed structures is that the output transmission line can be
designed to match to the output termination, thereby eliminating the requirement
for a dedicated output buffer. This in turn results in significant power
savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of high-speed clock/data recovery (CDR)
circuits is difficult and complex. In particular, there is a critical trade-off
between low jitter and large frequency locking range. Many CDR designs resolve
this conflict by using a dual-loop architecture. One loop is used to lock the
frequency (which often requires a reference clock input); the other loop
incorporates the low-jitter CDR. These architectures entail a large amount of
complexity and dissipate large power. In this proposal we present a novel CDR
circuit that combines the advantages of linear and binary phase detectors so
that both low jitter and high frequency locking range are possible. The proposed
CDR naturally incorporates a dc control voltage that allows its phase detector
characteristic to be optimized according to these two
specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since much of the performance bottleneck of
wide-area networks is in the electronic components rather than the optical fiber
itself, the proposed research will have a significant impact on wireline
communications infrastructure by enabling the design of faster and higher
performance circuits in optical communications systems. Other communications
systems, such as gigabit ethernet and fiber channel, will be similarly
enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;