* 0323201
* Applying the Transactional Interpretation to Conceptual Problems in Quantum Theory
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Ruth Kastner, Kastner                 Ruth           E
* Fixed Amount Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 02/28/2005
* USD 32,650.00

In recent years, numerous paradoxes have arisen which raise questions about what
can be inferred about a quantum system based on its theoretically calculated
quantities, such as weights and probabilities and, more recently, its ``weak
values''--- time-symmetric quantities applicable to pre- and post-selected
systems. The proposed research would apply to the analysis of these problems a
somewhat neglected interpretation of quantum theory, namely the ``Transactional
Interpretation'' (TI) of John Cramer (1980). TI proposes that quantum events are
mediated by spacetime ``transactions'' consisting of a distinctive type of
interaction between the usual future-directed ("retarded") and past-directed,
"advanced" waves. The proposed research consists in applying the transactional
model to current thought experiments such as Hardy's experiment (1992) and the
three-state paradox, both of which present conceptual difficulties, and
investigating how this application affects what conclusions are possible
concerning the ontology of the systems involved in such experiments. The
proposed project's intellectual value lies in its direct bearing on longstanding
problems in the interpretation of quantum theory, in particular the ontological
status of quantum systems between measurements, which remains deeply obscure
under the standard time-asymmetric approach. In terms of broader implications,
the project is also of historical value in its examination of an under-
recognized proposal of several decades ago. A study of this neglected
interpretation sheds light on the reasons for its neglect and on what those
reasons tell us about human expectations of physical theories---i.e., what such
theories should assume about the world, as well as what kind of information they
should provide. In particular, humans have a very compelling intuition about the
temporal ordering of cause and effect, and this intuition tends to constrain the
construction and interpretation of theories. TI denies that intuition. Yet it
appears to offer effective solutions to longstanding puzzles of quantum theory
such as ``wave function collapse'' (exactly where/when/how does it occur?) and
the problem of measurement. If TI is the correct way to interpret quantum
theory, this implies that humans need not view the past as equivalent to ``what
has already happened''; certain aspects of the past might remain open to change
based on future events. Such an understanding radically changes the relationship
of humans to their world of experience, both inner and outer, in a way that has
the potential to extend beyond basic intellectual understanding (as in puzzle-
solving) to cultural and societal possibilities.

