* 0323131
* Geographical Analysis in Vaccine Efficacy Trials: Spatial Confounders, Effect Modifiers, and Herd Immunity Measurement
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Michael Emch, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 37,936.00

This research project will develop and test spatial analytical methods for
vaccine trials because existing methods limit the extrapolation of results and
are sometimes of questionable validity. It will use spatial methods to control
for heterogeneous disease exposures (spatial effect modifiers) and spatial bias
in disease outcomes (spatial confounders). In 1985, a community-based,
individually-randomized oral cholera vaccine trial was conducted in Matlab,
Bangladesh. The double-blind trial measured the efficacy of two vaccines, the B
subunit-killed whole cell (BS-WC) and the killed whole cell only (WC) vaccine.
Females aged 15 years and older, and children aged 2 to 15 were the target group
in the trial. To identify the cholera cases from the study area, the
investigators conducted a passive surveillance at one hospital and two
community-based treatment centers. During 5 years of follow-up, the protective
efficacy for the BS-WC group was 49% and for the WC group it was 47%. Passive
surveillance can introduce bias because access to treatment centers, which is
usually a function of distance, influences health-seeking behavior. Also,
efficacy might differ in different parts of the study area because socio-
environmental circumstances and therefore disease exposure levels vary in space.
This study will use a geographic information system (GIS) to determine: (1) how
cholera vaccine efficacy varies spatially in the study area; (2) what ecological
socio-environmental variables are related to cholera vaccine efficacy (i.e.,
which variables are effect modifiers); (3) how protective efficacy varies with
access to treatment facilities (i.e., whether access is a spatial confounder;
and (4) whether cholera incidence in the placebo group is related to vaccine
coverage rates (i.e., is herd immunity important). We will use three data sets,
already collected by the investigators, including: (1) a large cholera vaccine
trial database, (2) a comprehensive longitudinal demographic database of the
rural population of approximately 200,000 from which the vaccine trial
participants were selected, and (3) an accurate household-level spatial database
of the same study area population. This spatial database, in conjunction with
the demographic and vaccine datasets, will facilitate adding an integrated,
comprehensive, and accurate spatial component to all three datasets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study are both theoretical and
methodological. It will build on the medical geographic theory of disease
ecology by showing that the effect of a health intervention (e.g., a vaccine) is
modified by spatially heterogeneously distributed complexes of variables (i.e.,
effect modifiers). It will show that a spatial perspective is necessary because
of spatial bias in existing methodologies. It will also show how a spatial
perspective can be used to develop new methodologies for something that has
until now been impossible to measure (i.e., herd immunity). Understanding human-
environment interaction from a spatial perspective is one of the core concepts
of geography and this project will expand this theoretical area. It will
specifically build on existing medical geographic disease ecology theory and
place it within modern scientific frameworks such as biocomplexity. It will also
serve as a methodological case study that describes how geographical methods can
be used in vaccine trials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;