* 0323953
* Quasi-Linear Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Pierre Kabamba, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 08/31/2008
* USD 319,976.00

NSF Grant No. 0323953&lt;br/&gt;QUASI-LINEAR CONTROL&lt;br/&gt;PI: P. T.
Kabamba, Co-PI: S. M. Meerkov&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides funding for the
development of theory and techniques for design of controllers
in&lt;br/&gt;feedback systems with linear plants and nonlinear sensors and
actuators. This type of systems, referred&lt;br/&gt;to as linear plant,
nonlinear instrumentation (LPNI) systems, often appear in aerospace,
automotive&lt;br/&gt;and other applications, where plants can be linearized but
the instrumentation is fundamentally&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear due to cost, power,
weight and other physical constraints. Within this project, all
main&lt;br/&gt;problems of control, i.e., disturbance rejection, reference
tacking, conservation laws, etc., will be&lt;br/&gt;addressed. The approach is
based on the method of stochastic linearization, whereby the
nonlinearities&lt;br/&gt;of the instrumentation are replaced by static gains,
calculated as functions of the variance of the&lt;br/&gt;signals at their
inputs. Unlike local (i.e., Jacobian) linearization, this method is semi-global
in the&lt;br/&gt;sense that it approximates the original system in arbitrarily
large domains, defined by the signals&lt;br/&gt;at the inputs of the
nonlinearities. The set of techniques, to be derived using this approach,
is&lt;br/&gt;envisioned as extensions of corresponding linear control tools,
augmented by nonlinear relationships&lt;br/&gt;that account for instrumentation
nonlinearities. This set of tools is referred to as quasi-linear
control&lt;br/&gt;theory (QLCT).&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
work will lead to improvements in design of controllers for a
wide&lt;br/&gt;range of practical LPNI. Today, such controllers are often
designed using linear theory and then&lt;br/&gt;time-consuming and expensive
validations and incremental improvements, based on simulations,
are&lt;br/&gt;carried out. QLCT will, to a large extent, eliminate the necessity
of extensive simulations, since&lt;br/&gt;the optimal controllers will be
designed directly taking into account instrumentation
nonlinearities.&lt;br/&gt;Initial application of these techniques for design of
air-to-fuel ratio controllers at Ford Motor Co. is&lt;br/&gt;planned.