* 0323804
* A Stress Wave-Induced Direct Pattern Transfer Procedure for Efficient Manufacturing ICs and MEMS Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Vijay Gupta, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 06/30/2007
* USD 299,974.00

Previously, a laser spallation experiment was developed to measure adhesion of
thin films. In the experiment, a Nd:YAG laser pulse is converted into a
compressive stress wave on the backside of the substrate that has a test film
deposited on its front surface. This stress wave reflects into a tensile wave
from the film's free surface and pries off the interface. An extension of this
technique, which is the subject of the proposed work, is to separate individual
lines, squares, and circular thin film patches deposited on a Si or a glass or
for that matter on any mother substrate using the laser-generated stress-waves,
and catch the separated features or "legos" on a target substrate kept in close
vicinity of the separating structures. Combination with already matured
alignment technology can allow development of MEMS structures and Integrated-
Circuits (ICs) geometries in an efficient way. Structures and substructures of
any material can be created on any engineering substrate, including flexible
plastics and tapes. Besides understanding the basics of separation and
reattachment mechanisms for individual features, we will construct three basic
building blocks used in a typical MEMS and IC device-a beam bridge, a membrane
diaphragm, and an IC circuit on a flexible substrate. These constructs will
involve materials as diverse as metals, polymers, and ceramics. The
miniaturization of electrical circuits and systems continues to fuel a
technological revolution responsible for a $200B IC industry, which has
fundamentally changed the world economy and the way our society lives and works.
For example, many products created by the IC industry enable the inexpensive
production of extremely useful and popular electronic systems (e.g., personal
computers, computer networks, instrumentation, cell phones, sophisticated
electronic appliances etc). By allowing major expansion of the product base by
helping construction of microsystems on flexible plastics, and allowing
development of newer microsystems that involve heterogeneous material (metals,
polymers, ceramics, semiconductors, and now even biological cells) integration
on the same device, the proposed research will lead to low cost of production by
integration of ICs and MEMS, expansion of their current application base, and
solve complicated heterogeneous materials integration issues as needed in the
development of BioMEMS and other advanced sensors. To facilitate the
dissemination of the research results to industry, a 1-day annual Industrial
Colloquium will be held with presentations of this research and presentations
from industry participants on technology directions and needs. Undergraduate and
graduate students will have the opportunity to interact with industry
representatives and present their results at this colloquium.

