* 0323831
* "Mending the Net" Helping Alaska Natives to Achieve in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics(STEM)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Lewis Pack, Ilisagvik College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 04/30/2007
* USD 1,119,155.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ilisagvik College of Barrow, Alaska is the lead
college in the Consortium for Alaska Native &lt;br/&gt;Higher Education, Inc.
(CANHE), a group of six developing tribally-controlled colleges which
&lt;br/&gt;were established because Alaska Natives have not achieved
proportionate success in higher &lt;br/&gt;education despite years of effort by
mainstream institutions. Alaska Natives are particularly &lt;br/&gt;poorly
represented in STEM programs and in related professions. Research resulting from
a &lt;br/&gt;TCUP planning grant in 2002 that clarified the extent of the
problem, and lessons learned from &lt;br/&gt;the Alaska Rural Systemic
Initiative, form the basis for CANHE.s .Strategic Plan for Tribal
&lt;br/&gt;Colleges in Alaska.. CANHE institutions will implement the plan,
which includes special efforts &lt;br/&gt;in STEM fields, including this
.Mending the Net. project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project.s intellectual
merit has two fronts. First, there are new certificate and degree
&lt;br/&gt;programs which incorporate STEM field learning into training that
meets the needs of natural &lt;br/&gt;resource development industries. That this
learning, for three of the four CANHE institutions, &lt;br/&gt;explicitly blends
indigenous knowledge with western science to gain a two-perspectives
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the natural environment, makes the project
interesting. That the training &lt;br/&gt;qualifies Alaska Natives for needed
employment in economically viable technical industries, &lt;br/&gt;makes the
project both practical and critical. Second, the project uses regional
differences as a &lt;br/&gt;strength. The .one size fits all. approach of most
colleges and universities fails to employ &lt;br/&gt;different instructional
techniques pertaining to STEM fields appropriate to each region.
&lt;br/&gt;.Mending the Net. introduces placed-based STEM programs. Ilisagvik
College, for instance, &lt;br/&gt;applies local people.s knowledge of the Arctic
in an applied science program leading to &lt;br/&gt;employment in land
management and wildlife biology. The Interior Athabascan Tribal College
&lt;br/&gt;program, on the other hand, includes Native knowledge of the boreal
forestry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project.s broadest impacts include that
because the grant recipient and other CANHE &lt;br/&gt;members are tribally-
controlled institutions, almost all students involved are Native
&lt;br/&gt;American/Alaska Natives . vastly underrepresented ion STEM fields.
CANHE is a statewide &lt;br/&gt;organization with connecting networks to
Alaska.s 100,000+ Native peoples. Two of the &lt;br/&gt;programs coordinate
closely with school districts and will develop program templates for
&lt;br/&gt;CANHE-district collaborations in other regions. A third program
partners with the University of &lt;br/&gt;Alaska and includes faculty
development trainings that can be replicated throughout the UA &lt;br/&gt;System
by the three UA Affiliate Members of CANHE. On the industry side, the Bristol
Bay &lt;br/&gt;Native Association program expands the infrastructure for web-
based course delivery to villages &lt;br/&gt;in preparation for internships and
possible employment with VECO, Inc., a primary contractor &lt;br/&gt;on the
Trans-Alaska Pipeline. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Some project results, like new
academic programs and their curricula, will be available on CDs &lt;br/&gt;and
the web. Others, like .best practices. in STEM teaching and learning for Native
students, &lt;br/&gt;will be shared through conference presentations of Native
and other educators. Yet other results, &lt;br/&gt;like the availability of
STEM-trained Native interns in wildlife biology, forestry and fisheries,
&lt;br/&gt;will be widely publicized, and discussed at industry-related
conferences and in the halls of &lt;br/&gt;collaborating organizations like the
Barrow Arctic Science Consortium.