* 0323859
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:  Non-Circular Mesoporous Carbon Fibers for the Absorption of Toxins
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Danny Edie, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 07/31/2007
* USD 29,757.00

0323859 Edie

This award supports continuation of cooperative activities that provide an
international dimension to the ongoing research at the Center for Advanced
Engineering Fibers and Films at Clemson University, an Engineering Research
Center funded by NSF. The US principal investigator is the Center Director,
Professor Dan Edie. The collaborating partner is Professor Seung Ryu, who
directs a research group at the University Industry Joint Institute for New
Materials at Chungnam National University in Taejon, Korea. This group is the
leading carbon materials research group in Korea and is highly regarded
internationally. The US center has a longstanding reputation as the leading
carbon fiber research group in the U.S. Their successful prior collaboration
resulted in practical methods for producing mesopore-containing activated carbon
fibers. These hold great promise in industrial adsorption processes. The
collaborating groups now will create mesopore fiber filters of different pore
sizes and with metallic inclusions of different particle size, then test and
compare the new class of activated fibers in critical consumer and defense
applications. This research will require many steps, beginning with production
of the pitch precursor (a Korean specialty), and the diverse expertise and
resources of the two groups will enable them to share the responsibilities for
this work in a highly efficient way. Some of the research steps will be carried
out in parallel for the educational value to the participating students in the
two groups.

The broader impacts of this research project are industrial, environmental and
educational. Activated carbon fibers have high adsorption rates, are easy to
synthesize and have a wide variety of uses. However those currently in use
contain almost entirely micropores (less than 2 nm in diameter) which makes them
useless for trapping large molecular chemicals such as pesticides or nitrates
and sulfates. Furthermore, their density can lead to becoming plugged up
quickly, making frequent replacement necessary. This collaborative research
involves a new class of filters with larger, interconnecting "mesopores" (2 to
50 nm in diameter) that offer a variety of improved characteristics for wider
applications. These include removing residual chlorine from water, pesticides
and other toxins from air, and reducing the escape into the environment of
various contaminants from industrial processes. Finally, the joint project will
provide international research experience in Korea to five US undergraduate and
graduate students from Clemson University, while continuing to benefit all the
researchers and students at the US Center through extended visits by Korean
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.

