* 0323325
* US-India Workshop:  Tissue Engineering and Stem Cell Technologies, Trivandrum, India, February 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Robert Nerem, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

Description: This award provides support for American participation at the US-
India Workshop: Tissue Engineering and Stem Cell Technologies, Trivandrum,
India, February 2004. US PI Robert Nerem, Director, Georgia Tech/Emory Center
for the Engineering of Living Tissues, Atlanta and Prabha Nair, Sree Chitra
Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences &amp; Technology, Trivandrum are co-
organizers of the workshop. &lt;br/&gt;Participants from the US will meet with
others from tissue engineering centers in India, Singapore and Japan to discuss
the latest developments in tissue engineering and establish collaborative ties.
The objectives are: 1) to bring together experts in the field of tissue
engineering to provide a review and assessment of the state-of-the-art, 2)
identify key areas needing intensified research, 3) assess how US-India
collaborations would significantly impact the field of tissue engineering, 4)
discuss mechanism to initiate and sustain research collaborations, and 5)
provide a unique educational experience for resident undergraduate, graduate and
medical students, exposing them to the challenges and opportunities that the
field presents. &lt;br/&gt;Scope: Significant challenges exist in tissue
engineering, where cooperation, partnership, and exchange will accelerate the
advancement of this field. From the United States, 12-15 leaders and key people
in the field will participate in the two-day workshop. There will be a large
representation of Indian participants from different scientific backgrounds that
include students, junior researchers, and women scientists. This activity will
be supported by the Government of India Department of Science &amp; Technology
(DST) under the NSF/DST joint program. &lt;br/&gt;