* 0323171
* Sheldon Jackson College TCUP Planning Grant
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Jaclyn Schnurr, Sheldon Jackson College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2004
* USD 49,797.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Title: Sheldon Jackson College TCUP planning
grant &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this planning grant is to assess
Sheldon Jackson College.s (SJC.s) &lt;br/&gt;current STEM curriculum and
infrastructure and to develop an institutional action plan to &lt;br/&gt;be used
as the basis for a full TCUP implementation grant to be submitted February 2005.
&lt;br/&gt;SJC is a 4-year liberal arts college, accredited by the Northwest
Association of Schools &lt;br/&gt;and Colleges and Universities, offering
associate and bachelor degrees in Business &lt;br/&gt;Administration, Elementary
Education, Human Services, Outdoor Leadership, &lt;br/&gt;Individualized
Studies, Secondary Education and Environmental Science. SJC is
&lt;br/&gt;committed to its founding mission to serve the needs of all students,
with an emphasis on &lt;br/&gt;Alaska Natives and students from rural
communities. SJC needs to evaluate its current &lt;br/&gt;STEM program to
determine the effectiveness of its STEM instructional program in
&lt;br/&gt;preparing students for success throughout their education and
careers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SJC requires 12 months and 2 phases for STEM
program assessment: &lt;br/&gt;* Phase 1 (October 1, 2003 . June 1, 2004):
assessment and evaluation of &lt;br/&gt;current STEM infrastructure and
offerings. &lt;br/&gt;* Phase 2 (June 1, 2004 . October 1, 2004): creation of an
institutional plan &lt;br/&gt;to increase enrollment and retention in STEM
programs and development &lt;br/&gt;of full TCUP proposal. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;At the end of the 12 months SJC will have conducted an assessment of
its current &lt;br/&gt;STEM course offerings, evaluated the effectiveness of
current teaching practices, &lt;br/&gt;developed an institutional plan to
increase and retain students in STEM courses, written a &lt;br/&gt;full TCUP
implementation grant, and created an assessment system to further evaluate
&lt;br/&gt;STEM course effectiveness for SJC.s unique student body. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;