* 0323672
* Collaborative Research-ITR-Higher Order Partial Differential Equations: Theory, Computational Tools, and Applications in Image Processing, Computer Graphics, Biology, and Fluids
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Anette Hosoi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 350,000.00

This project seeks to develop a comprehensive research and education program in
the area of computational methods and simulations of physical systems described
by high order Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). The program will unify
algorithmic, visualization, theoretical, and experimental efforts as well as
address applications in areas of science and technology, including computer
graphics, image processing, biology, and fluids. Intellectual merit of the
proposed activity This project advances knowledge in the area of high order
PDEs, with particular emphasis on curved surface data, and produces enabling
technology to address fundamental problems in biology, image processing,
computer graphics, and fluids in general. The novel science is in the
computational techniques, experimental research, and diverse applications
addressed by a multi-disciplinary team. This project brings together the five
fields of computer science, applied mathematics, mechanical engineering,
physics, and electrical and computer engineering. Broader impacts of the
proposed activity With the increasing interest in high order PDEs, the
computational tools and experience resulting from this project impact beyond the
particular applications in this proposal. Students will receive unusually broad
interdisciplinary training and the workshop planned further brings experts from
different fields together. New public domain software incorporating the
developed algorithms enables researchers from different fields using higher
order PDEs to perform state-of-the-art numerical simulations and graphics
rendering of their application of interest. Educational initiatives of this
research program include: (1) new interdisciplinary training of graduate
students and postdocs through co-mentoring by PIs in different fields; (2) new
interdisciplinary courses in computer graphics, numerical analysis, and
modeling/simulation of physical phenomena described by higher order PDEs; (3) a
workshop bringing together for the first time diverse scientific researchers
using high order PDEs.

