* 0324748
* Dissertation Improvement: A Paleoethnobotanical Study of a Classic Hohokam Site
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Gayle Fritz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2005
* USD 8,605.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Gayle Fritz, Karla Hansen-Speer will analyze data
gathered from the prehistoric Hohokam site of Marana in southern Arizona. The
Hohokam were farmers who flourished in the Sonoran Desert between A.D. 200 and
A.D.1450. The center of a prehistoric community, the Marana Mound site contains
numerous walled residential areas and public spaces that facilitated community-
wide interaction, with specialized agricultural fields nearby. It provides an
excellent opportunity to examine aspects of the economy and social organization
of an early Classic Hohokam community, as well as the impact that community had
upon the surrounding landscape.

The Hohokam people of the Classic Period (A.D. 1150-1450) lived in densely
populated communities. The fate of their desert settlements was inextricably
tied to the environment. While the environment imposed limitations, the Hohokam
also manipulated it through agricultural practices. Discussions concerning the
Hohokam acquisition of food in a desert environment often revolve around land
use and agricultural technology. Systematic syntheses of Hohokam plant remains,
however, have rarely been attempted. Such a study is needed to investigate the
sometimes sweeping or speculative claims made about farming as the basis for
models of economic and social organization.

Because the Hohokam were farmers, much of their culture revolved around plants.
Understanding the role of various types of plants, therefore, will illuminate
elements of Hohokam society. To survive in an uncertain environment, people
devise ways to manage risk. A portion of this research will look at a
hypothesized strategy of risk management wherein the community spread risk by
circulating crops among sites. To understand the role and movement of food at
the Marana Mound site and within the larger community, one must examine the
variability of plant remains across space. The project will use intra- and
inter-site comparisons of plant material to study the economic and social
dynamics of the site. This will provide a much needed synthesis of material that
should clarify the role of plants in the early Classic period: was this a time
of intensification, diversification, or stability in the use of plant resources?
The research will then examine the question of how the Hohokam affected their
environment and the plant resources available to them. This study aims to
address these issues through the analysis of charred plant remains such as seeds
from households, cooking fires, and trash heaps throughout the site.

In addition to answering questions of interest to social scientists, this
research has a broader impact by providing insight into human interactions with
the environment. At a time when we, as a modern society, struggle with issues of
conservation of the environment, the proposed research can help us to understand
how a large, sedentary population affected the desert setting in which they
lived, and how they prospered in a demanding environment. Lessons from the past
about sustainability of resources may give us insight into environmental
dilemmas of the modern world. This research is particularly pertinent to arid
regions where agricultural resources must be carefully allocated.

