* 0324212
* Collaborative Interdisciplinary Research Community/Maricopa Engineering Transition Scholars (CIRC/METS)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Doris Roman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

The project provides support to 29 community college transfer students in the
departments of Bioengineering, Chemical and Materials Engineering, Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Computer Science and Computer Systems Engineering,
Electrical Engineering, Industrial Engineering, and Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering. Unique features of the project include leveraging and building on a
cooperative effort between the College of Engineering and Applied Science (CEAS)
and the Maricopa County Community College District (MCCCD). This project builds
on a number of existing programs such as Academic Enrichment to teach study
skills, a Bridge Program for assisting the transition of students, Inclusive
Learning Communities to provide continuous academic mentoring and career
mentoring, and Research Orientation Workshops (ROW) concentrating on research
and graduate school, as well as an optional research experience. The project
aims at recruiting and retaining high quality students with financial need who,
without this support, might not be able to continue their education on a full
time basis. The program serves transfer students with at least 30 hours, but
also includes some sophomore transfers with special needs. Women and
underrepresented minority students, including Native American students, are
targeted by this project.