* 0324679
* Computational Sampled-Data Nonlinear Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Andrew Teel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2006
* USD 210,000.00

While researchers have made major breakthroughs in controlling nonlinear
continuous time systems over the last two decades, more recently the research
has started to focus on methods for controlling continuous time systems based on
discrete time models and over digital networks, because of the need to control
increas- ingly complex systems and because of the increasing computer power
typically available. The proposed work aims to use previously developed
nonlinear continuous time control methods as a springboard to develop new, high
performance control algorithms for general nonlinear systems based on discrete-
time models. The focus will be on developing algorithms that are robust,
adaptive, and don't require full measurement of the system state. Applications
of these results will include the development of optimal treatment schedules for
HIV patients, leading to a non-progressive state where treatment is no longer
needed. Other applica- tions will include control and calibration of automotive
engines where state constraints, which are easy to incorporate into certain
optimization-based control strategies but which often lead to non-robust control
algorithms, play an important role. The proposed work also aims to give new,
improved stability conditions for networked nonlinear control systems,
especially those using protocols that don't necessarily guarantee transmission
to every node of the communication network within a fixed amount of time. It is
expected that these new stability conditions for networked control systems will
give insight into the development of novel communication protocols which will,
in turn, make networked control systems more successful and prevalent. Broader
impact: The work in this proposal has the potential for broad impact via the
role that control plays as an enabling technology. As suggested above, the ideas
that we will investigate may help lead the way to efficient drug treatment
schedules for HIV patients leading to a non-progressive state, thereby
eliminating the need for further drug therapy. In general, it should make it
more feasible to rely on optimization-based automation algorithms for a wide
range of engineering tasks that impact all of society. The proposal will support
graduate students who will present their findings at national and regional
conferences. The results will be made available, promptly, on the web and will
be immediately incorporated into graduate courses at the proposing institution.
The work will help to further shape UCSB's Center for Control Engineering and
Computation, which is one of the leading programs in control education in the
nation. It will strengthen interactions with international partners, e.g., in
Australia, France and Italy, will foster novel collaborative efforts with
theoretical biologists at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle,
and will further collaborative efforts with researchers at Ford Motor Company.