* 0324002
* Program for Attracting and Retaining Scholars in Computer and Mathematical Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* James Wilkes, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 04/30/2008
* USD 136,162.00

This proposal furthers the same goals as the current program by starting another
cohort in the CSEMS scholarship program by offering up to ten $3125 scholarships
annually up to four years starting in the 2004-2005 academic year. The new
program is similar to the current program with improvements and changes based on
experience with the current program. Applicants are recruited with assistance
from the admissions office and high school counselors with targeted recruiting
in local high schools. Faculties in their respective departments recruit upper
level candidates. The selection criteria of scholars are based on financial need
and typical measures of academic potential like SAT scores and GPA. In addition,
applicants submit letters of recommendation, a short essay describing career
goals, and participate in a personal interview on campus. Once a part of the
program, CSEMS scholars are given opportunities to participate in activities and
support services designed to help them succeed like student organizations, study
groups, departmental receptions, faculty mentoring, and tutoring services.
During their university career, CSEMS scholars are encouraged to participate in
cooperative education or internship opportunities. Finally, through the Computer
Science Industry Advisory Board and Appalachian State University's Career
Development Center, scholars are positioned to take advantage of a variety of
employment opportunities in the high technology workforce.