* 0324519
* Use of High-Performance Fiber Reinforced Cement Composites to Increase the Displacement Capacity of Structural Walls
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Gustavo Parra-Montesinos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 07/31/2006
* USD 199,751.00

Structural walls are widely used as lateral load resisting elements in low- and
medium-rise structures located in seismic zones; moreover, they are often
considered a primary retrofit remedy for existing structures that do not meet
current code requirements. The main focus of the proposed research is to develop
a new design for reinforced concrete (RC) structural walls through the use of
high-performance fiber reinforced cement composites (HPFRCCs). These materials
offer a tensile strain-hardening response, and high compression strain capacity.
In this project, an experimental study will be first conducted to understand the
shear and flexural behavior of structural walls constructed with HPFRCC
materials under displacement reversals. This experimental phase will include the
testing of several squat and slender HPFRCC structural walls reinforced with
either polyethylene (Spectra) or steel fibers. Emphasis will be placed on
studying the effect of variables such as material post-cracking strength and
strain capacity, wall aspect ratio, shear stress level and reinforcement
detailing on the behavior of HPFRCC structural walls. Analytical studies will be
aimed at developing models to predict the shear and flexural behavior of both
squat and slender HPFRCC walls under displacement reversals. For this purpose,
existing theories developed to predict the response of reinforced concrete
members will be modified to account for the superior tension and compression
behavior of HPFRCC materials. Simplified models will also be developed to
estimate the shear strength vs. displacement relationship and displacement
limits corresponding to various performance levels in HPFRCC structural walls.
The use of strut-and-tie models, with strength factors developed for struts and
ties from material and wall tests, will be explored to predict the shear
strength of HPFRCC walls. Finally, provisions for reinforcement detailing
requirements will be developed for seismic-resistant HPFRCC
walls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;