* 0324217
* Engineering Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Han Lim, Highline Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The project serves to create the Engineering Scholars Program (ESP). This
program provides support for academically talented, financially needy students,
enabling them to enter a university to pursue a Bachelor of Science (B.S.)
Degree in engineering, following completion of an Associate of Science (A.S.)
degree in engineering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ESP has three main objectives:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To establish and promote a strong scholarship program,
the ESP awards scholarships to financially disadvantaged, academically talented
students, including those from underrepresented groups, enrolled in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;To help these scholars be successful, educational opportunities and
student support programs have been designed to increase retention. Cohort
courses and activities have been designed to connect the scholars with their
peers, the institution and the engineering community. &lt;br/&gt;To strengthen
partnerships, there is assistance from area school districts, institutions of
higher education and employers in the high technology industry to support
students in their pursuit of a B.S. degree. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The strength
of the program is the management team's interdepartmental and campus-wide
collaboration. A wide web of academic and student support systems exist in this
project, with ten departments committing customized programming for the
scholars. The ESP Advisory Committee is a subcommittee of the existing
Engineering Advisory Committee. The role of these external partners is to
connect the scholars to the engineering community and assist their transition to
four-year institutions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
activity is the integration of the math, engineering and physics curriculum.
Faculty are expanding their pedagogical understanding - math faculty can see the
application of their subject, while the engineering and physics faculty can
learn how to use math more effectively in their courses. It becomes an
interrelated approach to teaching and learning, benefiting the student and
faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESP has broad impact. Highline serves a large
financially disadvantaged population that is very diverse (44 percent students
of color) and predominantly female (62 percent), while maintaining strong
retention and transfer performance rates. ESP broadens the participation rates
of underrepresented groups by providing financial, academic and support service
assistance. Dissemination of the results is through the Washington Council of
Engineering and Related Technology Education and with the Washington Team of the
National Collaboration for Engineering Education to improve student learning and
create additional opportunities for scholars. &lt;br/&gt;