* 0324380
* Dynamic Game Theoretic Models for Urban Freight Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Warren Powell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2007
* USD 477,613.00

PROJECT SUMMARY: DYNAMIC GAME THEORETIC MODELS FOR URBAN FREIGHT SYSTEMS The
explicit consideration of freight transportation in the transportation planning
and management processes is important for many reasons. On the positive side, an
efficient freight transportation system is a sine equa non condition for
economic competitiveness. On the negative side, there is a wealth of evidence
indicating freight activity produces significant negative externalities that
disproportionately affect disadvantaged communities. These negativity
externalities are compounded by the combined pressures of economic
globalization, user expectations and community concerns. As a consequence, the
freight transportation systems of the 21st Century will have to cover a larger
geographic area, be responsive to user needs and expectations, reduce the
externalities produced, and do all of this in a context in which providing
additional freight infrastructure will become more difficult and expensive.
Simply put, the urban freight transportation system will have to do more with
less. This immense challenge adds pressure to agencies that have to balance the
conflicting objectives of multiple stakeholders. The complexity of freight
movements and the lack of appropriate freight modeling methodologies only serve
to heighten the challenge. Prior efforts to model urban freight systems have not
considered the full impacts of information technologies. An example is current
anecdotal evidence suggesting that the Internet and the e-commerce facilitated
by it have increased the magnitude of truck-trips and changed their nature, with
as yet un-quantified changes in social costs. That those net effects cannot be
addressed within existing theories is a principal motivation for the proposed
research to create a new family of urban freight models. The new models
envisioned by the project team will directly treat the influence of the Internet
and e-commerce, are explicitly dynamic, and account for the gaming behaviors of
the multitudinous agents active on an urban freight network. This proposal
describes a research plan that may lead to the first comprehensive theory of
urban goods movements. The main research objective can be described as the
strategic and general tactical modeling of prices, consumption levels, trip
generation, capacity expansion, routes, schedules and designs for urban goods
networks. This will be accomplished by creating a family of models. The most
detailed and general models of this family will be dynamic stochastic
hierarchical network games wherein the freight rights-of-way are shared with
passenger traffic. The project team expects to show how urban goods movements
and decisions appropriate to a within-day time scale can be integrated with
network game-theoretic models involving day-to-day, week-to-week and year-to-
year time scales. This will: (a) provide a more realistic depiction of the flow
of both commodities and commercial vehicles, incorporating considerations of
trip chains and empty trips than have not been previously possible; (b) enhance
transportation modeling by adding realism to the freight supply-demand
equilibration process during its disequilibrium phase; (c) improve the
efficiency of carrier-specific traffic management; and (d) set the stage for a
future research to decrease network-wide congestion by co-ordination of carrier-
specific distributed traffic planning by embedding auctions in the dynamic game
theoretic models developed in this study.