* 0324742
* US-South Africa Cooperative Research: Intelligent Knowledge Acquisition and Service Delivery
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Harry Keeling, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 09/30/2009
* USD 37,338.00

This project links research conducted by the University of Western Cape's (UWC)
in South Africa with Howard University's efforts in "Intelligent Systems and
Knowledge Acquisition". The highlight of this effort is that each year an
investigator from Howard University and three graduate students from Howard
University will travel to UWC to conduct research with UWC faculty and students.
Their work will focus on the emerging intelligent-based internet computing -
"The Semantic Web" with its evolving languages and ontologies. According to
Fensel and Musen, "in a few years, it [the Web] will interweave one billion
people and penetrate not just computers but also other devices, including cars,
refrigerators, coffee machines, and even clothes." The new millennium has
ushered in the era of "intelligent knowledge engineering and management" (IKEM).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will have an immediate and long-range impact
on several existing and proposed courses at both universities. Existing courses
include Artificial Intelligence, Expert Systems, Computer Networks, Modeling and
Simulation, Multimedia Systems, Systems Management, Large Scale Systems, and Web
Services. Proposed courses include Advanced Intelligent Systems, and Human
Computer Interaction. Advances in the development of an IKEM system will promote
the utilization of digital libraries, semantic web services and real-time
knowledge manipulation. Linking IKEM system development and utilization will
provide a number of possibilities for extending this initial effort. &lt;br/&gt;