* 0324115
* Scholarships for Students in Mathematics, Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Kathleen Cargill, College of Saint Scholastica
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 07/31/2008
* USD 206,252.00

The College of St. Scholastica (CSS) seeks to increase the number of students
graduating in CSEMS fields and to better prepare these graduates for their
careers. The program targets talented but financially disadvantaged youth with a
special emphasis on women, minorities, and people with disabilities. The
projects objectives are: &lt;br/&gt;1) to increase the number of well-educated
and skilled employees in technical areas of national need by encouraging
exploration of graduate level study and/or improving professional development
and job seeking skills. Students are receiving guidance and support as they
consider the next step in their careers. Activities include: mentoring,
tutoring, internships, and summer research opportunities. Workshops are being
provided that address such topics as graduate school exploration,
professionalism, resume preparation, and research skills. As a result of these
activities, 100% of CSEMS program graduates are either enrolling in graduate
school or finding employment. &lt;br/&gt;2) To improve educational opportunities
for students pursuing a bachelor's degree in computer science, engineering, or
mathematics. The program is designed to support 15 participants during each year
of the four-year project period. Program applicants are required to have a GPA
of 3.00 or greater and must be formally accepted into one the following
programs: Computer Science, Engineering, or Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;3) Increase
retention rates and degree attainment among CSEMS program participants.
Activities&lt;br/&gt;related to this objective include faculty mentoring,
tutoring, and individual counseling sessions. At least 90% of the program
participants will attain a bachelor's degree in a CSEMS discipline.&lt;br/&gt;4)
Strengthen the partnership between CSS and related employers in the fields of
computer science, engineering, and mathematics. By coordinating with local
businesses and state agencies, at least ten new internship/research
opportunities are being established.&lt;br/&gt;5) Maintain strong student
support programs at CSS. Over the past two years of program operation, the Co-
PI's have integrated the CSEMS objectives with the College's pre-existing
student support programs. Formative and summative evaluation ensure the strength
of these services.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is advancing
knowledge and understanding in the CSEMS fields by diversifying the pool of
young graduates and ensuring that they are well-prepared for the next step in
their careers. The qualifications of the Co-PI's are reflected in the 100%
retention rate of CSEMS participants over the past two years. The combination of
activities and services represents a unique and comprehensive program that is
necessary to meet the needs of the target population. Participants have access
to a wide range of lab equipment, services, technology, and mentors. Broader
Impacts: The project is designed to encourage active learning by promoting
research and internship opportunities. CSS has a long history of providing
educational opportunities for underserved populations; these efforts are
supported by the College's Student Diversity Advocate, the Minority Recruiter,
and the Ojibwe Coordinator, who are all actively involved in this project. The
CSEMS project fits into the College's effort to increase both undergraduate
student research and internship opportunities and is having a broad impact by
matching the needs of the high technology workplace with well-prepared but
traditionally underserved youth.&lt;br/&gt;