* 0324181
* Enlightened Missions: Jesuit Scientific Culture in Late Imperial China
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Florence Hsia, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2006
* USD 91,273.00

The past two decades have witnessed a remarkable resurgence of scholarly
interest in the phenomenon of "Jesuit science". What has attracted contemporary
historians and sociologists of science to the scientific activities undertaken
by the members of a Catholic religious order that was founded in the sixteenth
century for the salvation of souls? Thanks to its organizational complexity, the
global breadth and longevity of its schools and missions, and the richness of
its historical record, the Society of Jesus presents a case study of great
potential for rethinking the interplay between social values (especially
religious beliefs), and scientific knowledge and practice. Of particular
interest in this regard is the Jesuit mission in late imperial China
(seventeenth-eighteenth centuries). Its significant scientific component has
been studied extensively by scholars interested in how Jesuit expertise with
natural phenomena became bound up with goals of religious conversion, and in how
scientific knowledge and practice were transmitted from early modern Europe to
late imperial China. Current scholarship on Jesuit science treats the Society of
Jesus as a monolithic institution, which apparently enjoyed a level of
organizational efficiency, cohesion, and ideological discipline that few, if
any, scientific communities possess. The methodology underlying this scholarship
takes for granted the top-down influence of corporate "policies" on participants
in specific social institutions. Yet Jesuit missionaries in late imperial China
did not propagate a homogenous program of scientific work in China; nor did they
speak with a unified voice in evaluating the history of Chinese science. The
proposed project establishes a new analytical framework for understanding the
culture of French Jesuit science in late imperial China, one focused on issues
of scientific identity, genres of scientific writing, and histories of non-
Western science written from European perspectives. Perched precariously on the
frontlines of the early modern European encounter with the non-European world,
Jesuit missionaries made use of their scientific expertise to appeal to many
audiences, from Chinese and Manchu colleagues in the imperial Bureau of
Astronomy, and to the ruling emperor, to fellow Jesuits, ecclesiastical
superiors, and members of early modern European scientific societies (the Royal
Society of London, the Paris Academie Royale des Sciences, and the Imperial
Academy of Sciences in St. Petersburg). Jesuit scientific practitioners in China
pursued a correspondingly wide range of interests, from observations of lunar
eclipses, magnetic variation, and Jupiter's occultations of its moons, to an
imperially-sponsored map of the Celestial Empire and some of the earliest
sustained studies of the Chinese scientific tradition by European scholars. The
varied and sometimes inconsistent ways in which Jesuit missionaries approached
these topics only make sense when evaluated in light of the unique cultural
context occupied by these brokers between East and West. The project will
contribute significantly to how historians of early modern European science
understand the import of the Jesuit case, as well as to how historians of early
modern Europe understand the role played by Catholic savant culture in the
European Enlightenment. More broadly, the project's reevaluation of the Jesuit
episode in late imperial China provides a model for a historically sensitive and
pedagogically effective approach to analyzing cross-cultural scientific
circulation, the social significance of scientific activity, and the
complexities involved in appraising the relationship between science and
religion.