* 0324664
* Development of Cast Modular Components for Steel Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2012
* Robert Fleischman, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2012
* USD 347,483.00

Development of Cast Modular Components for Steel Construction, CMS proposal
0324664&lt;br/&gt;PI: Fleischman, Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
initiative is proposed to improve the reliability and economics of steel
construction in the &lt;br/&gt;United States through the use of modular cast
components. The initiative represents a unified effort between the American
Institute of Steel Construction (AISC), the Steel Founder's Society of America
(SFSA) and researchers at the University of Arizona (UA). A task group, Steel
Founders / Steel Construction (SF/SC), has been organized to spearhead this
effort. In addition to the AISC and SFSA staff listed above as co-PIs, the SF/SC
is comprised of SFSA foundry members, AISC fabricator members, and practicing
structural design engineers. SF/SC has been meeting since early 2002 to initiate
discussion on areas of common interest. The activity will involve identifying
structural steel applications where modular construction can: (1) improve
economy and/or reliability of a component; (2) eliminate difficult or costly
fabrication and/or difficult or dangerous erection; and, (3) permit the use of
steel construction in situations previously unexplored for practical reasons.
Cast modular components will be conceived, including more efficient
details/sections and altogether new forms, with an emphasis on economy,
constructability, and meeting architectural need. Alpha prototypes for these
forms will be developed through extensive parametric studies used to evaluate
geometry, material or develop special features. These parametric studies will be
analytical in nature: structural performance will be evaluated through finite
element solid modeling while castability will be evaluated through
solidification modeling. Optimal shapes will be obtained through an iterative
procedure involving electronic exchange of solid model data between the
structural analysis team at UA and the casting analysis team at SFSA. Once
designs have been optimized, the SFSA team will cast full-scale physical
prototypes. Using the appropriate surrounding steel members, the AISC team will
fabricate the prototypes into structural assemblages. These steps also allow the
SFSA and AISC teams to evaluate manufacturing issues related to the ease,
integrity and economy of the casting and fabrication processes. The prototypes
will be tested in the full-scale reaction frame at the UA Integrated Computation
and Experimentation Laboratory (ICEL). These verification tests will be used to
qualify a detail or identify further challenges in structural performance to be
addressed in a beta prototype. This approach to the development of cast modular
forms has been used with great success by the PI in his NSF CAREER Research.
Following successful verification testing of a prototype, the AISC team will
identify appropriate implementation sites and the erection issues will be
evaluated. The team's strong presence in the construction rich Chicago-land area
will facilitate this final step in the proof of concept. Each development
process will conclude with a comprehensive economic analysis;
prequalification/codification, and outreach/marketing efforts by the SF/SC.
Industry involvement will involve both the parent organizations AISC and SFSA
and several of their industry members. AISC, SFSA and their members will
contribute time and cost sharing including: in-kind funds, donations of material
and labor costs associated with the creation of specimens for the experimental
program; engineering in terms of conception and development of the prototypes;
expertise in performing comprehensive economic evaluations and feasibility
studies; technology transfer activities including qualification, code
development, marketing and outreach. The monetary value of the first two items
alone: in-kind funds (estimated @ $6K/yr per industry organization) and donation
of material and labor for specimens (also $6K/yr per ind. org.) will not be less
than $72,000 for the 3-year duration of the project. The significant engineering
efforts associated with this activity will place the industry contribution at
$168,000. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The project will advance knowledge
within the field of steel construction in better understanding force flow
between components; and across fields by exchange of approaches, knowledge base,
and technology. The project explores a creative approach to building,
manufacturing and design of steel structures. To accomplish these goals, the
project will advance the state-of-the-art in integrating manufacturing with
analytical simulation, and this integration will be accomplished between
academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will directly
impact two key domestic industries: the steel construction industry and the
steel casting industry, and develop partnerships among them. Industry interest
is evidenced by the participation of the two representative institutes, AISC and
SFSA, including the formation of a joint industry committee and financial
support as indicated above. The project results, when realized, will result in
new efficient, safer and economical connection designs and move the steel
construction industry toward modular construction. The project will support 2
graduate students, who will be educated through research and interactions with
industry practitioners. Research results will be disseminated directly to
industry practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;