* 0324829
* 2003 Interior of the Earth Gordon Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Lars Stixrude, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2004
* USD 23,000.00

EAR-0324829&lt;br/&gt;Stixrude&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research
Conference on the Interior of the Earth, to be held June 8-13, 2003 at
Mount&lt;br/&gt;Holyoke College in South Hadley, Massachusetts, will address
major unresolved problems at the&lt;br/&gt;frontiers of our understanding of the
dynamics, composition, structure, and evolution of the earth's&lt;br/&gt;crust,
lithosphere, and upper mantle and their connections to surface observations and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;Jerry Mitrovica (University of Toronto) and Lars Stixrude
(PI) are the Chair and Vice-Chair,&lt;br/&gt;respectively for the 2003 meeting.
The meeting will bring together researchers from a wide variety&lt;br/&gt;of
backgrounds, perspectives, disciplines, types of institutions, career stages,
and demographics.&lt;br/&gt;The program, including all speakers and discussion
leaders has been confirmed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the fourth Gordon
Research Conference on the Earth's Interior. The previous three
have&lt;br/&gt;been remarkably successful as documented by evaluations required
by the GRC organization.&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Research Conferences provide a unique
setting for the exchange of scientific ideas in&lt;br/&gt;which the
opportunities for formal and informal discussion are optimized. The conferences
are&lt;br/&gt;administered through a central office in Rhode Island, which takes
no overhead; the conference&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure leaves the conference
organizers free to focus on the content of the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The requested funds would be used to encourage and support the
participation&lt;br/&gt;of young scientists who might not otherwise be able to
attend including graduate students and post-doctoral&lt;br/&gt;fellows. The
conference is a wonderful educational opportunity for this group, not
only&lt;br/&gt;for the formal presentations, but for the chances to interact
informally with leaders in the field, and&lt;br/&gt;to present their own work in
the form of posters. NSF support of previous conferences on
the&lt;br/&gt;Interior of the Earth have helped tremendously to facility a
diverse group of attendees.