* 0324501
* Dynamic Planning and control Methodology (DPM) for Large-Scale Concurrent Design and Construction Projects
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Liang Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2007
* USD 397,521.00

Project Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The concurrent design and construction method has
been widely used in the construction industry in recent years because of its
potential to shorten project delivery time. The application of this method,
however, leads to increased levels of uncertainty and complexity in project
execution. This can be attributed to the highly dynamic nature of this method,
which among other things requires construction to start prior to the completion
of design and which inevitably leads to iterative quality improvement actions
and change cycles. These frequent iterative cycles create dynamic and
significant impacts on project performance that are hard to quantify and model
using available planning theories. In order to address these serious and urgent
challenges, a Dynamic Planning and control Methodology (DPM) will be developed
to facilitate the development of robust and dynamic construction plans for
large-scale concurrent design and construction projects. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to provide project managers with insight into the
dynamics of concurrent design and construction processes by identifying and
quantifying the impact of the iterative cycles of errors and changes, and
developing a comprehensive quality and change management framework. This
framework will be utilized to develop dynamic buffering strategies for reducing
sensitivity to iterative cycles of errors and changes. Finally, a comprehensive
agent-based dynamic project model is being implemented in order to enhance
learning in the design and construction industry, and to extend the
applicability of simulation methodologies to overall project management. These
developments in DPM are expected to benefit the entire life cycle of concurrent
design and construction projects by reducing costs, avoiding delays, increasing
quality, eliminating counterproductive disputes, and improving project
management in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To broaden research impacts and
enhance dissemination of the research results, the project team plans to
integrate educational strategies that provide a well-grounded balance between
theory and practice. A laboratory-based problem-driven collaborative learning
studio, a comprehensive two semester's Master of Engineering project, and field-
based internships are being developed to provide students and practitioners with
the ability to contextualize and utilize DPM research findings in a real-world
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;