* 0324396
* Molecular Simulation of Disordered Materials Under Stress
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,11/30/2003
* Daniel Lacks, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2003
* USD 106,000.00

This project will address the dynamics and properties of disordered systems
under stress using simulations and the energy landscape framework. Many
important materials are disordered. Liquids and glasses are disordered on a
molecular level. Soft-matter systems, such as colloids and foams, are disordered
on a larger length scale. The dynamics and properties of disordered materials
are universal in many ways, because the effects of many local optima for
particle packing dominate the dynamics.

Disordered materials are often subjected to stresses. Stress can cause the
material to deform, to fracture, or to flow, depending on the nature of the
stress and the conditions of the material. Additionally, nanoscale structure can
act effectively as a stress on the system, and alter the dynamics and properties
relative to the bulk. The goal of this project is to elucidate the dynamics of
disordered materials under stress, and how these dynamics determine the
properties of materials under stress.

The novelty of this project is the application of the energy landscape formalism
to disordered systems under stress. The energy landscape formalism has emerged
as a powerful framework to address the dynamics of disordered systems. The PI's
recent work has shown that strain leads to distortions of the energy landscape,
including the disappearance of energy minima. The consequences of these
landscape distortions depend on the timescale over which these landscape
distortions occur relative to the timescale for thermally activated relaxations.
If these timescales are comparable, the landscape distortions significantly
alter the system dynamics, which in turn significantly alters the system
properties. This timescale regime is relevant for non-Newtonian flow and
fracture processes.

The project will consist of non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations along
with calculations that map out the potential energy landscape. The specific
phenomena that will be addressed include (a) relationships between the dynamics
of driven and thermal systems; (b) dynamical heterogeneities in driven systems;
(c) avalanche events in stressed systems; (d) shear-induced alignment and its
effect on properties in anisotropic systems; (e) effects of stress on aging; (f)
fracture propagation; and (g) effects of nanoscale confinement on dynamics.

A broader impact of the research is an improved understanding of non-Newtonian
flow, fracture, and nanostructured materials. Another broader impact is the
training of new scientists, particularly the mentoring of undergraduate student
researchers. %%% This project will address the dynamics and properties of
disordered systems under stress using simulations and the energy landscape
framework. Many important materials are disordered. Liquids and glasses are
disordered on a molecular level. Soft-matter systems, such as colloids and
foams, are disordered on a larger length scale. The dynamics and properties of
disordered materials are universal in many ways, because the effects of many
local optima for particle packing dominate the dynamics.

A broader impact of the research is an improved understanding of non-Newtonian
flow, fracture, and nanostructured materials. Another broader impact is the
training of new scientists, particularly the mentoring of undergraduate student
researchers. ***