* 0324511
* Collaborative Research:    Experimental Imaging-finite Element Modeling of Strain Localization in Granular Soils
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Amy Rechenmacher, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 06/30/2005
* USD 130,090.00

Strain localization is a ubiquitous feature of granular materials undergoing
nonhomogeneous deformation. Localized deformation typically is followed by a
reduction in the overall strength, and thus can have a significant impact on
material and structural behavior. Because shear bands are quite often observed
in soils, it is of considerable interest and importance to the geotechnical
community to be able to capture the full effects of strain localization in
predictive models for analysis and design. Of key relevance are the ability to
predict when a shear band forms, how this narrow zone of discontinuity is
oriented within the material, and how the propagation of the shear band
influences the post-localization constitutive response. Currently, even the most
advanced and well-calibrated numerical models cannot predict the onset of
localization, as the mechanisms governing localized deformation still are not
properly understood.

The development of more accurate mathematical models of soil behavior thus
requires a more fundamental understanding of the localization phenomena; in
particular, the important factors responsible for the inception and development
of localized deformation. The objective of this research is to combine state-of-
the-art geotechnical experimental techniques with advanced finite element
modeling to obtain a more thorough understanding of the strain localization
process in sands. A meso-scale modeling approach will be used, which will treat
specimen response as a structural response and will incorporate the measured
spatial density variation and other imperfections (natural and imposed) to
analyze the specimen response as a boundary-value problem. Experimentally, the
technique of X-Ray Computed Tomography (CT), widely used in medical
applications, will be used to capture meso-scale density variations in plane
strain specimens of sand. Digital Image processing techniques will aid in
transferring of the CT results as input into the finite element models. Finally,
Digital Image Correlation (DIC) will be used to track local, in-plane
displacements throughout deformation. The modeling will consider effects of both
strong and weak imperfections, both imposed and naturally occurring. By
capturing all of these imperfections, the potential of existing strain
localization models for application to practical boundary-value problems can,
finally, truly be assessed.

This NSF award will enable identification of important factors that contribute
to the initiation of strain localization in sands, yielding tremendous insight
as to why persistent shear bands form where they form in granular materials in
general. That the Geomechanics and Geotechnical Systems Division of NSF
contributed to sponsoring the 6th International Workshop on Bifurcations and
Instabilities in Geomechanics (IWBI) in 2002 highlights the need for engineering
input in this active research area. Recognition of the fundamental deficiencies
of the standard FE method and development of techniques to circumvent these
difficulties have immense implications to how geotechnical engineers analyze
boundary-value problems in practice, particularly in the regime of instability
and softening. Furthermore, the use of advanced scanning and data imaging
techniques available in other fields, such as those used in medical and
materials sciences, will put the field of geotechnical engineering at parity
with current technology. The proposed partnership between numerical and
experimental research will ignite a more thorough approach to investigating the
localization phenomenon.

The second PI is a recent member of the faculty at JHU, and the proposed
research will help her to develop a strong research group in advanced
geotechnical experimentation that can provide mentoring to women and minorities.
Currently the first PI supports two underrepresented graduate students (Black
and Hispanic) while the second PI supports two undergraduates, one of whom is a
woman, in her research group. Both schools have been very conducive to
departmental support of undergraduate involvement in research, and to support of
underrepresented students. Through research exchange programs with local high
schools, the laboratory and simulation components of the proposed research will
serve as ideal avenues to engage high school students in geotechnical
engineering and the research process in general. The union of numerical and
experimental research will offer Stanford University and Johns Hopkins
University graduate students a more multifaceted approach to graduate education.

