* 0324678
* Materials Camp Student Support 2003
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2003
* Thomas Stoebe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 11/30/2003
* USD 12,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to provide for participant support for high school
students attending the&lt;br/&gt;Materials Camp program during summer 2003.
These camps are similar to the Materials&lt;br/&gt;Camp program funded in 2002
by NSF Engineering Division. The program provides&lt;br/&gt;hands-on learning in
materials science and technology for high school students from&lt;br/&gt;across
the U.S. In 2003 two Materials Camp programs are planned, each for 30
students.&lt;br/&gt;The two programs are to be held as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;Materials Camp West, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
July 7 - 13, 2003&lt;br/&gt;Materials Camp East, Materials Park, OH, August 11 -
17, 2003&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum of the camps includes engineering applications
of metals, ceramics,&lt;br/&gt;polymers, composites and biomaterials. Students
experience learning using both set&lt;br/&gt;laboratory experiments and a team
project in which they explore structure-property-&lt;br/&gt;processing-
applications relationships in materials as related to engineering
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Everyday materials systems are the foundation of the program,
building to more&lt;br/&gt;advanced applications. Professional society
volunteers work with each team of five&lt;br/&gt;students to ensure real
learning and motivation. The camp concludes with project&lt;br/&gt;presentations
by the students to a professional audience.&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcome of
this project are a set of 60 students who are more&lt;br/&gt;knowledgeable of
engineering and engineering applications, with specific experience
in&lt;br/&gt;the area of materials. Our evaluation of previous camps is very
positive in convincing&lt;br/&gt;students to consider and enroll in engineering
in college. Thus our expectation is that we&lt;br/&gt;will be able to focus
students on the advantages of engineering studies and thus
increase&lt;br/&gt;engineering enrollments, not just among the students who
attend but among their peers as&lt;br/&gt;well.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this proposal relates to the knowledge that these student
will&lt;br/&gt;learn. The students who attend the camp are generally the better
students in a high&lt;br/&gt;school. Most of them initially indicate that they
are not interested in science or&lt;br/&gt;engineering, but rather other areas
from art to social science to medicine. Using the&lt;br/&gt;focused, hands-on
approach of the camp program, our experience shows that
the&lt;br/&gt;intellectual content of the camp excites them, thus broadening
their thinking as to a career&lt;br/&gt;and future study.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the program provides these bright students with
specific&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the potential of careers in engineering,
provides a potential new set of&lt;br/&gt;students for science and enginering
study, thus increasing the pool of U.S. students&lt;br/&gt;interested in science
and engineering. It also serves to broaden student understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;the field of materials, and demonstrates the centrality of
materials to engineering and&lt;br/&gt;science.