* 0324436
* Granular Damping Analysis and Design for Structural Vibration Suppression
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Jiong Tang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2008
* USD 251,558.00

The objective of this GOALI project is to develop a systematic methodology for
the analysis and design of a vibration suppression technology damping
augmentation using granular materials. Such damping mechanism has unique
advantage for harsh environment applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced
computational and experimental techniques will be developed to analyze/design
granular damping, which include: (a) In order to efficiently and accurately
characterize the granular damping mechanisms, a new Molecular Dynamics based
simulation which is specifically tailored for granular damping analysis will be
developed. (b) In order to further increase the computatuional efficiency and
provide an effective analysis/design tool for complicated structures in
practical applications, a novel approach will be taken. This approach involves a
highly efficient improved Monte Carlo algorithm that can significantly reduce
computational cost as compared molecular dynamics simulation. This new method
can prevent the occurrence of unrealistically high granular volume density at
certain regions and can directly calculate the impact/friction forces that the
granules act onto the enclosure/structure. (c) A systematic theory for contact
mechanics model identification, computational complexity reduction, and damper-
structure interaction analysis will be established. Using these algorithms, we
will have the ability to analyze granular damping for arbitrary multi DOF
systems under various loading conditions. We will carry out a series of
experimental investigations including benchmark case studies on laboratory plate
structures and real blade damping analysis to be performed at
GE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular damping can suppress vibration under extreme
temperatures. The outcome of this research will benefit engine and propulsion,
aircraft, and space industries. The algorithms developed and knowledge gained
can be further utilized in various scientific resear4ch and industrial
applications involving granularly analysis. The collaborative nature of this
research will allow involved students to understand real-world engineering
problems, and will bring industrial perspective to the university. This project
will have a long-term impact on education through the planned curriculum
development at both undergraduate and graduate levels, as well as in community
education programs&lt;br/&gt;