* 0324539
* Dynamic Similarity or Size Proportionality? Adaptations of a Polar Copepod.
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Jeannette Yen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/2004
* USD 50,339.00

This project explores the feasibility of applying fluid physical analyses to
evaluate the importance of viscous forces over compensatory temperature
adaptations in a polar copepod. The water of the Southern Ocean is 20 Celsius
colder and nearly twice as viscous as subtropical seas, and the increased
viscosity has significant implications for swimming zooplankton. In each of
these warm and cold aquatic environments have evolved abundant carnivorous
copepods in the family Euchaetidae. In this exploratory study, two species from
the extremes of the natural temperature range (0 and 23C) will be compared to
test two alternate hypotheses concerning how Antarctic plankton adapt to the low
temperature-high viscosity realm of the Antarctic and to evaluate the importance
of viscous forces in the evolution of plankton. How do stronger viscous forces
and lower temperature affect the behavior of the Antarctic species? If the
Antarctic congener is dynamically similar to its tropical relative, it will
operate at the same Reynolds number (Re) as its tropical congener.
Alternatively, if the adaptations of the Antarctic congener are proportional to
size, they should occupy a higher Re regime, which suggests that the allometry
of various processes is not constrained by having to occupy a transitional fluid
regime. The experiments are designed with clearly defined outcomes regarding a
number of copepod characteristics, such as swimming speed, propulsive force, and
size of the sensory field. These characteristics determine not only how copepods
relate to the physical world, but also structure their biological interactions.
The results of this study will provide insights on major evolutionary forces
affecting plankton and provide a means to evaluate the importance of the fluid
physical conditions relative to compensatory measures for temperature. Fluid
physical, biomechanical, and neurophysiological techniques have not been
previously applied to these polar plankton. However, these approaches, if
productive and feasible, will provide ways to explore the sensory ecology of
polar plankton and the role of small-scale biological-physical-chemical
interactions in a polar environment. Experimental evidence validating the
importance of viscous effects will also justify further research using
latitudinal comparisons of other congeners along a temperature gradient in the
world ocean.