* 0324033
* Karl Jordan and International Organization in Entomology 1910-1955: Ordering Natural and Disciplinary Diversity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Jane Maienschein, Arizona State University
* Fellowship Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 84,000.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES 0328634&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, undertaken as a post-doctorate by Kristin Johnson under the sponsorship
of Jane Maienschein, will examine the entomologist Karl Jordan's work as an
internationalist during the first half of the twentieth century. Based on his
experiences with the unorganized state of entomology as a discipline at the turn
of the century and with the disruptive effects of nationalism in science, Karl
Jordan founded the first International Congress of Entomology in 1910. He guided
the congresses over the course of the next four decades, leading the recovery of
both entomological friendships and meetings after the first and second world
wars. His persistence was inspired not only by his firm belief in the congresses
as important to the success of entomology, but the internationalist belief that
scientists could lead the way toward peace and unity in all human affairs. But
as Jordan brought entomologists together at international congresses, the
diverse range of priorities, methods, and traditions present among natural
history work became apparent. And entomologists from nations involved in tense
political confrontations with each other often found it more than difficult to
leave their feelings as members of nations outside the walls of the congress
venues. It has been one of the fundamental tenets of science that the search for
knowledge about the natural world is a task beyond politics and creed, and
science has indeed been the source of interaction, exchange, and friendships
between nationals for centuries. But examinations by historians of science of
the impact of nationalism and world politics on science have demonstrated the
falsity behind assumptions of scientific purity. Historical studies of
internationalism and the effect of the world wars and the cold war on
scientists. International networks have primarily focused on the physical
sciences. This project will examine the ways in which the life sciences are
different by looking closely at the contributions of Karl Jordan to the
internationalization of science. Jordan hoped that his colleagues would not only
improve the state of entomology by these occasional international meetings, but
also, as scientists involved in the search for truth, show the rest of the world
how to put differences aside in favor of cooperation. An analysis of the
historical context of Jordan and his colleagues' successes and failures in these
endeavors will provide a valuable study of the constant interplay between
science and society, and how the cultural, social, and political context in
which participants live influences the history of scientific disciplines. The
project will take place at Arizona State University, where co-PI Kristin Johnson
will work with the growing community of historians, philosophers, and
sociologists of science directed by Jane Maienschein, who will take
responsibility as PI for providing institutional support and a lively
intellectual community for this project. Under Maienschein's leadership, Arizona
State University is currently reorganizing the Life Sciences into a School of
Life Sciences. The new School will house the Human Dimensions of Biology,
including a new Center for Biology and Society also directed by Maienschein.
That Center will include growing History and Philosophy of Science, Biology and
Society, Bioethics, and Law programs. The HPS community consists of ten Ph.D.
trained scholars pursuing research the life sciences or closely related fields.
In addition, ASU has great strengths in the natural historical and field
sciences and in systematics, with rich insect collections and related research
programs. It is an ideal place for this study, which will result in at least two
papers on international science and a full-length biography of Karl Jordan as an
international biologist. &lt;br/&gt;