* 0324459
* Collaborative Research : Surface and Actuation Kinetics of Stimulus-Responsive Hydrogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* John Dolbow, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 226,609.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A collaborative effort between researchers at Duke
University and Washington University is supported to investigate the surface and
actuation kinetics of stimulus responsive hydrogels (SRHs). These materials are
polymer gels that exhibit a large change in volume and surface physiochemical
properties during a reversible phase transition. SRHs have the potential to
overcome some of the fundamental limitations of micro-actuation and sensing
devices that currently use electromagnetic or piezoelectric actuators. The
overall characteristics of SRHs point toward devices that are biocompatible,
operate with minimal power input, and provide a range of motion that is
difficult to achieve with existing servomechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will combine experiment, theory, and computation with the goal of
advancing technologies based on these multifunctional materials. Experiments to
be conducted at Duke will include: 1) optical measurements of volume
displacement changes in SRHs using a novel optical-mechanical setup; 2)
tribological measurements of SRHs using a parallel-disk rheometer; and 3) fine-
grained, spatially resolved force adhesion and friction force maps using
colloidal probe microscopy. In conjunction with these efforts, researchers at
Washington University will develop physically consistent bulk and interfacial
constitutive models. Finally, numerical simulations of some of the experiments
will be conducted at both institutions to correlate material parameters and gain
predictive capabilities for rational design with SRHs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;