* 0324740
* What Difference Does it Make?  Citizen-Scientist Collaborations and  the Quest for Environmental Solutions to æthe 'Breast Cancer Epidemic'
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Maren Klawiter, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 11/30/2004
* USD 25,000.00

Beginning in the 1980s and accelerating during the nineties, the social contract
between science, the citizenry, and the state that was put into place during the
Cold War era (Kleinman 2000) began to unravel, the frayed ends tugged and pulled
by a variety of new social actors.the environmental and environmental justice
movements, the consumer rights movement, AIDS activism, breast cancer activism,
and a host of other new social movements. Not content with their role as mere
cheerleaders or naysayers, nor with their confinement to the sidelines of
science, these new social movements claimed a new set of entitlements and
positioned themselves as legitimate stakeholders in the arenas of scientific
research and policy-making. Deeply enmeshed within these practices, a .new breed
of lay-experts. (Epstein 2000) and.citizen-scientists. (Schneider 2000) emerged
as both cause and consequence. One of the most interesting and important arenas
in which these processes have been unfolding is the U.S. breast cancer movement.
When the breast cancer movement burst onto the national political scene in the
early 1990s, it was the National Breast Cancer Coalition and its biomedical
research agenda that captured the politicians' and the public's attention.
Outside the biomedical parameters of the debate set by the NBCC, however, the
environmental wing of the breast cancer movement flourished in three major
geographical settings: Long Island, New York; Massachusetts; and the San
Francisco Bay Area. In the San Francisco Bay Area, the synthesis of
environmental justice and breast cancer activism produced a slew of new
campaigns, organizations, and coalitions (Klawiter 1999a). Some of these groups
and organizations deliberately sought alliances with the scientific research
community; others deliberately eschewed such alliances. Marin United Against
Breast Cancer (not their real name), the focus of this proposal, adopted the
former strategy. Marin United Against Breast Cancer (MUABC) was formed in 1995,
in response to a report published by the Northern California Cancer Center
indicating that women in the San Francisco Bay Area had the highest rate of
breast cancer in the world, and that women in Marin had the highest rate of
breast cancer in the San Francisco Bay Area (Northern California Cancer Center
1994). The first months of MUABC's meetings were conducted in each other's
living rooms and had the feel of an environmental consciousness-raising group.
By the year 2000, MUABC had become a savvy participant in scientific research,
collaborating, consulting, and partnering with university epidemiologists and
government scientists on a number of funded research projects. But how exactly
did this happen? How, for example, did the ambition to discover the
environmental causes of breast cancer and "end the epidemic" get translated into
a series of publicly-funded scientific studies? What was the process of
translation? This is a story, on the one hand, about the "democratization of
science" by activists (Kleinman 2000), but it is also, at the same time, a story
about the disciplining and domestication of activism by science. Exploring and
explaining these dual tendencies represents the main task and the intellectual
merit of the research project here proposed. The P.I. for this project possesses
an original set of in-depth ethnographic data on Marin United Against Breast
Cancer, gathered over a period of three years (between 1995 and 1998), and based
on extensive participant-observation, supplemented by interviews, minutes from
meetings, and other documents related to the organization's development. In
short, the P.I. has a wealth of data that remains largely untouched and
unanalyzed. The P.I. proposes that funding for this project be used to: gather
additional information and conduct a series of follow-up interviews with key
figures in the scientific research projects undertaken by Marin United Against
Breast Cancer; explore the feasibility of a larger study of citizen-scientist
collaborations; integrate the new material with earlier ethnographic data and
conduct a preliminary analysis of the entire set of data; present preliminary
findings at the annual meeting of the 4S. Broader Impacts: The social and
practical implications of this work are also significant: (a) for women, who are
under-represented in the field of science and technology and who are also,
obviously, the group most at risk of developing breast cancer; (b) for other
groups of people with illnesses and disabilities that they believe may be
related to involuntary exposures to environmental toxins (e.g., Vietnam veterans
exposed to Agent Orange, veterans of the Persian Gulf War who developed Gulf War
Illness, parents of children with asthma, people with Chemical Sensitivity
Disorder, etc.). Many of these groups are beginning to enter (or have already
entered) the domain of scientific research and policy-making. What are the
pitfalls? What are the possibilities? What can they learn from the experiences
of other groups? In the background of these important social issues, but in many
ways foregrounding these questions, there remains the larger, and largely
unanswered, question: What is the relationship between democracy and science?
How is it changing? And what should it be?

