* 0324844
* ITR: Collaborative Research: Dependable End-User Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/15/2003,12/31/2009
* Susan Wiedenbeck, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2009
* USD 254,400.00

ABSTRACT 0324844 Susan Wiedenbeck Drexel University

There has been considerable work in empowering end users to be able to write
their own programs, and as a result, users are indeed doing so. In fact, the
number of end-user programmers in the United States is expected to reach 55
million by 2005, as compared to only 2.75 million professional programmers. The
programming systems used by these end users include spreadsheet systems, web
authoring tools, and graphical languages for demonstrating the desired behavior
of educational simulations. Using such systems, end users create software, in
forms such as educational simulations, spreadsheets, and dynamic e-business web
applications. Unfortunately, however, errors are pervasive in end-user software,
and the resulting impact is sometimes enormous. When the software end users
create is not dependable, there can be serious consequences for the people whose
retirement funds, credit histories, e-business revenues, and even health and
safety rely on decisions made based on that software. To address this problem,
we propose a fundamental paradigm shift to a new way of thinking about the way
end users create software. Our intent is to address the following research
question: Is it possible to bring the bene.ts of rigorous software engineering
methodologies to end users? We do not propose to transform end users into
engineers. Rather, our plan is to enable systems to create software to
collaborate with those users, in a software development paradigm that combines
traditionally separate functions - blending speci.cation, design,
implementation, component integration, debugging, testing, and maintenance into
tightly integrated, highly interactive environments. These environments will
employ new, incremental, feedback devices supported by analysis and inferential
reasoning to help the user reason about the dependability of their software as
they work with it, in a manner that respects the user's problem-solving
directions to an extent unprecedented in existing software development
environments.