* 0324899
* ITR Collaborative Research:     Perceptual Optimization for Data Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Colin Ware, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 316,658.00

Much of human intelligence can be broadly characterized as the ability to
identify patterns and the visual system is the most sophisticated pattern
finding mechanism that we have. Of all of our Perceptual systems, vision
dominates. It is estimated to engage 50% of the cortex and 70% of all our
sensory receptors are visual, but is only just becoming possible to display as
much information as the human visual system is capable of absorbing.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has the following five elements: a) A display
that supports real-time animation at the limit of the resolution of the human
visual system, b) The development and evaluation of perceptually near-optimal
solutions through the development of human-in-the-loop optimization techniques,
c) A set of experiments that will measure the efficiency of different ways of
displaying common information structures, including paths in graphs, aspects of
flow patterns, and the shapes of overlapping surfaces, d) The development of
algorithms that support the mapping between data attributes and visual display
primitives in a flexible adaptive or tunable process, e) The application of the
techniques to visualization problems in three areas: flow visualization,
overlaying surface visualization and large network visualization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research will be to
firmly establish information psychophysics and define the field as an
intellectual endeavor thereby combining existing techniques into a cohesive
discipline. The high- resolution display will enable researchers to work at the
limits of human perceptual capability endowing the results with long-term
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research will
include design guidelines, immediately useable design solutions, as well as
algorithms and information display theory. Material contributions will be made
in the following areas: flow visualization, network visualization, and
overlapping surface visualization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;