* 0324444
* Characterization of Complex Soil Stratigraphies by VisCPT and Adaptive Remeshing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Roman Hryciw, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2008
* USD 198,169.00

State-of-the-art geotechnical and geoenvironmental site characterization now
ubiquitously employs direct-push technologies. The cone penetration test (CPT)
and its variants, the piezo-cone (uCPT) and seismic-cone (SCPT), lead the
direct-push technologies in providing both the most comprehensive assessment of
site stratigraphy and determination of the engineering (mechanical and
geohydrologic) soil properties. However, if the soil deposits are complex, the
CPT often fails in providing accurate stratigraphic information and yields
unreliable properties. These complexities may include unusual site stress
history (geomorphology) and thin layering of strata. The present research effort
utilizes two recently developed technologies to create procedures for
comprehensively assessing site stratigraphy and for determining the soil
properties of even thin soil layers such as sand seams and clay lenses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first tool is "adaptive remeshing" in finite element
modeling. Large penetration of soil by stiffer foreign objects such as a steel
cone penetrometer creates large displacements and strains in the softer
material. Therefore, a finite element mesh becomes very compressed and distorted
leading to numerical instability. However, by adaptively remeshing the soil,
penetrations on the order of meters can be simulated. The present research will
therefore utilize this tool to study the response of soils to the CPT.
Penetration across interfaces between dissimilar soils as well as through thin
strata will be simulated to gain an understanding of the typical CPT signature
in such conditions. Both normally consolidated and overconsolidated stress
states will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extrapolation of the adaptive
remeshing results to field conditions and specifically the determination of
engineering properties of thin strata will require knowledge of the actual
thicknesses and locations of these layers in-situ. For this, a recently
developed "vision cone penetrometer" (VisCPT) will be utilized. Previous
research has resulted in development of this augmentation to the conventional
CPT, which allows for continuous image recording of the soil column. Even layers
as thin as 0.5 cm are easily detected by the VisCPT thereby providing the
missing information from the conventional CPT. Once a layer thickness is
established, the soil properties can be predicted by the results of the finite
element studies with adaptive remeshing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the study include extensive interdisciplinary research, immediate
technology transfer to industry and redesign of undergraduate laboratory
experience to include VisCPT technology. Improvements to site characterization
will lead to safer and more cost effective civil engineering construction. With
more precise subsurface information, the construction industry would be able to
reduce the typically high factors of safety that are presently needed to protect
against unexpected conditions.&lt;br/&gt;