* 0324045
* The Role of Riboswitches in Bacillus Information Control
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Ronald Breaker, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2004
* USD 74,711.00

EIA-0324045&lt;br/&gt;Ronald Breaker&lt;br/&gt;Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Role of Riboswitches in Bacillus Information
Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Riboswitches are a new-found form of genetic
control systems wherein access to biological information is controlled by
metabolite-binding messenger RNAs. This research will initiate our comprehensive
efforts to establish the importance of riboswitches to metabolic control in
Bacillus subtilis, which is a model organism for gram positive bacteria.
Specifically, the scope of riboswitch-based genetic control networks that
maintain metabolic stasis is being determined. Furthermore, whether riboswitches
are indispensable regulatory components is being determined. It is possible that
riboswitches are the most fundamental of genetic control elements in certain
bacteria, which, if true, would prove that structured RNA molecules have the
capability to control information access in sophisticated genetic networks.
&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the basic understanding of riboswitch regulatory
networks will establish a foundation upon which several important issues may be
addressed. It is hypothesized that riboswitches are an ancient form of genetic
control, and this speculation can be supported if riboswitches are deeply
involved in fundamental and indispensable metabolic regulation. This potential
for complex molecular sensing/switching could be harnessed through engineering
novel switches for biosensor and molecular computing applications. Most
significantly, riboswitches could make excellent targets for novel antibiotic
development, wherein metabolite analogs could be used to selectively down-
regulate the metabolism of pathogenic or&lt;br/&gt;