* 0324763
* NSF/CONACyT:  Collaborative Research: US-Mexico Virtual Laboratory for Electronics Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Jesus Villalobos, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2006
* USD 35,000.00

This grant is a one year NSF/CONACyT collaborative research award to design,
develop and form a network of US and Mexican universities working on research
and educational projects in the area of electronics manufacturing. The objective
is to advance scientific and engineering knowledge through joint research
efforts of investigators from the United States and Mexico having complementary
talents and interests taking advantage of Network infrastructures. The
collaborating universities are: Arizona State University, Texas A&amp;M
University, and Universidad de Guadalajara). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emphasis will
be on the establishment of a MANufacturing NETwork (MANET). It is expected that
the proposed network will serve as a model to be extended later to other
universities in both the United States and Mexico. It is also envisioned that
the formation of MANET can be a catalyst for development of an integrated
electronics manufacturing industry in the Southwest US and Northern Mexico, with
consequent economic benefits to both countries. Once the network is well
established in manufacturing research projects, it will be natural to extend it
to other technological areas and industries. The project activities include: (1)
access to laboratory equipment and student support to implement remote
connection among the universities (TAMU), and (2) provide access to 2D and 3D
flexible inspection systems and student support to implement the remote
connection among the universities (ASU).&lt;br/&gt;