* 0324313
* Core Support for the Board on Infrastructure &amp; the Constructed Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Richard Little, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/2004
* USD 55,000.00

This award represents continued partial support of the Board on Infrastructure
and the Constructed Environment (BICE). The National Research Council, through
its Division of Engineering and Physical Sciences, established the BICE in 1994
to investigate questions of technology, science, and public policy applied to
urban systems and services; above ground and underground construction; the
relationship between the constructed and natural environments, and their
interaction with human activities; the effects of natural hazards on constructed
facilities; and related issues of planning, design, construction management,
surety, and use of the built environment. The BICE brings together in an
independent forum expertise from a wide range of scientific, engineering, and
social science disciplines to address problems and issues of infrastructure and
the build environment. The BICE provides a unique structure to respond to
specific requests from government, or to act on its own initiative with public
or private sector support. In pursuit of its goals, BICE plans to conduct on-
going strategic planning for studies, workshops, symposia, and information
dissemination activities dealing with a variety of infrastructure issues. In the
past, the BICE has coordinated activities with the Institute for Civil
Infrastructure (ICIS), established by NSF at the Wagner Graduate School at New
York University and currently collaborates with the NRC Disasters Roundtable.
During the coming year, BICE will continue to explore themes focused on extreme
events, complex systems, and critical infrastructure
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;