* 0324214
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Richard Mercer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 443,608.00

This CSEMS scholarship program at the University of Arizona is a partnership
between five colleges and is intended to increase student graduation rates while
improving academic performance. The PIs are working to enhance the academic
environment for CSEMS scholars as they complete an undergraduate or graduate
degree in Computer Science, Engineering, or Mathematics. The project provides
approximately 44 scholarships that range from one to four years. Students are
recruited through departmental listservs, graduate admissions committees, the
financial aid office, and outreach programs. Students are connected to the
career/advising/mentoring services of the university and the support structures
designed specifically for CSEMS scholars. Each PI works with a small group of
recipients in their field to ensure students are making academic progress and to
discuss career options. Support structures include the Career Services Office,
Financial Aid, the Graduate College, GRE workshops, centralized point of
contact, and a Web site designed and maintained specifically for the needs of
CSEMS scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on participation of
underrepresented groups in counseling and mentoring sessions as well as
recruitment efforts such as a minority graduate student mailing list, and
outreach programs into high schools and community colleges. To advance discovery
and understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning, all
investigators encourage students to join the respective professional societies
and to participate at professional meetings and if possible will fund students
to attend. Students are notified of career fairs on campus, internship
opportunities in their fields, and government-sponsored internships. CSEMS
scholars may participate in teaching undergraduates in the Computer Science
section leader program (several have in the past). CSEMS scholars are encouraged
to consider graduate school and will be invited to participate in GRE workshops
that are funded by this grant. &lt;br/&gt;