* 0324548
* An Analytical Model for FRP Retrofit Sysytems Applied to Unreinforced Masonry Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* William McGinley, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 07/31/2006
* USD 258,567.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The general objective is to develop an analytical model for
unreinforced&lt;br/&gt;masonry (URM) building models subjected to quasi-static
lateral forces in combination with gravity&lt;br/&gt;loads. A case study of the
need for such research is presented by the 1994 Northridge earthquake during
which,&lt;br/&gt;a large number of unretrofitted URM buildings have been
damaged. Retrofitted URM buildings however,&lt;br/&gt;performed much better, and
the damage to these structures was less catastrophic. The research&lt;br/&gt;
will enhance the existing body of knowledge by developing simplified system-
based analytical&lt;br/&gt;tools for investigating the effectiveness of
composite materials in repairing and/or retrofitting
masonry&lt;br/&gt;buildings. Based on results from previous and proposed
experimental results, this research will permit a&lt;br/&gt;wide range of both
broad and specific investigations on the behavior of unreinforced and FRP-
reinforced&lt;br/&gt;masonry buildings as systems, and will compliment and
expand the current research data from&lt;br/&gt;experimental and analytical
studies on building components.&lt;br/&gt; To accomplish the project objectives,
the following&lt;br/&gt;tasks will be crried out: develop an analytical model
using commercially available computer software&lt;br/&gt;packages to analyze URM
building systems; conduct experimental investigations of selected
building&lt;br/&gt;systems to validate URM model accuracy; conduct small
component experimental investigations on key&lt;br/&gt;FRP-URM material
properties to generate missing data needed for the analytical model; expand
the&lt;br/&gt;analytical model to incorporate the new FRP-URM material
properties derived from small component&lt;br/&gt;tests; conduct experimental
investigations of selected building systems to validate FRP-URM
model&lt;br/&gt;accuracy; and calibrate the model based on the results of the
validation tests.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact resulting from the proposed
activity includes the involvement of freshmen&lt;br/&gt;engineering students to
use this project to assist them in the development of their critical thinking
and&lt;br/&gt;problem solving skills. Furthermore, Civil Engineering seniors
will participate in the project and will&lt;br/&gt;have an opportunity to
emphasize engineering systems, the impact of research on design and
technology,&lt;br/&gt;and the importance of multi-disciplinary design. In
addition, the participation of North Carolina A &amp; T&lt;br/&gt;State
University, a non-Ph.D. granting HBCU with a 90%+ student population that is
African American,&lt;br/&gt;will provide a unique opportunity for involvement of
under-represented students in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;