* 0324780
* MPS Internships in Public Science Education - MPS - IPSE:  Internships for bringing today's science to tomorrow's scientists
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Barbara Crawford, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 08/31/2007
* USD 611,011.00

This IPSE award (proposal was submitted in response to the MPS Internships in
Public Science Education, MPS-IPSE, solicitation, NSF-02-064) involves a
partnership between the Center for Nanoscale Science Materials Science and
Engineering Center (CNS-MRSEC) and The Franklin Institute (TFI) aimed at
delivering materials concepts demonstrated at museums to the home. The grant is
supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA). Support is
provided for 5 graduate students majoring in education disciplines, biology,
chemistry, materials science, or physics as interns. They will join an on-going
collaboration involving research scientists at CNS-MRSEC and exhibit development
personnel at TFI. This collaboration has already produced the Materials Matter
(MM) museum show, a 60-minute cart-based interactive exploration into the
"micro" mechanisms behind the unusual and surprising "macro" behavior of
materials. The interns will work within center research groups and with TFI
development staff to develop Material Discovery Projects (MDP) that compliment
demonstrations developed for MM and for future museum shows. A pamphlet will
include selected projects that can be done at home to further explore the
concepts demonstrated at the museum. In addition to instructions in how to carry
out the projects, the pamphlet will contain background information as well the
URL of a website which will provide further projects and information. This
pamphlet will be distributed at the museum show. To gain further experience in
presenting science to the public, the interns will offer workshops based on
their projects to help stimulate interest in materials in the center's target
demographics (females, minorities and K-12 students). Select MDPs produced by
the interns will be featured on a Penn State Public Broadcasting show, "What's
in the News." The show uses current events as a springboard for exploring social
studies, language arts, and the sciences, which is licensed to schools that
serve nearly 7 million students in the 4th to 7th grades nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IPSE project provides support for 5 graduate student
interns who will work with research scientists at the Center for Nanoscale
Science MRSEC and exhibit development personnel at The Franklin Institute (TFI).
The interns will develop Material Discovery Projects (MDPs) that compliment
demonstrations of materials properties at TFI. The MDPs will be suitable for
further home exploration of the museum demonstrations. Pamphlets including
several MDPs will be distributed to the museum visitors. They will also be
available on the CNS-MRSEC's website. In additional, several of the projects
will be featured in the Penn State Public Broadcasting show "What's in the
News," a program licensed to schools serving the 4th through 7th grades
nationwide. The interns will gain knowledge about the nature of science, as well
as experience in presenting science to the public through inquiry based
activities. The IPSE project is supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA).&lt;br/&gt;