* 0325227
* ITR/AP:      Collaborative Research:     Model Reduction of Dynamical Systems for Real-time Control
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Christoph Hoffmann, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 958,502.00

This project proposes to extend the methods we have developed for model
reduction of large-scale Linear Time Invariant (LTI) systems to a new regime of
problems that require adaptive models. In particular, we will consider large-
scale structured problems that are either time-varying, or which require
adaptive updating of the initial reduced models to obtain better approximation
properties.

Intellectual Merit The research proposed here will provide efficient and robust
methods for producing reduced order models of large state-space systems. This
activity is expected to have an impact on system theory of complex systems,
parallel numerical linear algebra for large-scale problems, and on efficient
implementation of these schemes on parallel and distributed platforms. Once the
theory and computational methods are developed, we expect that high quality
software will result and have applications in many areas of engineering. This
will enable the design of real time controllers for complex systems. This
project will also have an impact on the education of students in computational
science and engineering, both at the undergraduate and the graduate levels.

Broader Impact The proposed project leverages extensively the existing
intellectual and equipment infrastructure at Purdue, Rice, and Florida State
Universities, as well as the Catholic University of Louvain, Belgium. The
overall group of PI's and senior personnel bring extensive expertise and
experience in dynamical systems, model reduction, control theory, seismic design
and analysis of structures, numerical linear algebra, geometric modeling, data
analysis and visualization, and parallel computing. In fact, collectively, they
have had experience in designing and implementing numerical linear algebra
algorithms on most of the significant high-performance commercial architectures
and many of the experimental parallel architectures since the Illiac IV
(designed and built in the late 1960's!). The three groups complement one
another perfectly and are well-poised to successfully realize the goals of this
proposal.

