* 0325211
* ITR/EIA: Adapting Massively Multi-user Technologies for Collaborative Online Interactive Science Laboratories
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Gerald Meisner, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,005,998.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIA -0325211&lt;br/&gt;PI Gerald
Meisner&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of North Carolina at
Greensboro&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Adapting Massively Multi-User
Technologies for Collaborative Online Interactive Science
Laboratories&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITR medium award provides
support to develop a three dimensional virtual undergraduate science laboratory
environment named COURSELab. The environment is based on massively multiplayer
online gaming engines (MMOG) adapted to learning scenarios. COURSELab can be
used both as an online instructional tool and as a learning research tool. The
environment is a 3 dimensional world in which students meet and conduct
collaborative scientific investigations as they proceed through a series of
learning modules. The project leverages research and development outcomes from
prior NSF and DED funded projects on the development and dissemination of online
science resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The virtual world that is to be
developed is not merely a scientific instrument, it is as literally as possible
an actual place. Students in one of the COURSELab laboratories can see other
areas of the world and move to those areas to engage other students. The
COURSELab system development is to be highly scalable and cost effective,
extensible to many disciplines, modifiable and multipurpose, and capable of
reaching a broad group of diverse users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project lies in its innovative approach, the use of MMOG
technology applied to learning. The project has the potential to contribute to
the research base in human computer interaction as well as on MMOG technologies
and online learning environments. Collaboratively designing, conducting,
discussing, and interpreting experiments is a promising approach to blending
communities of learners into communities of practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts center around the highly scalable and cost effective design. The
environment can thus reach broad groups of users and increase the opportunities
for individuals to participate in scientific endeavors while simultaneously
overcoming many of the limitations imposed by traditional lecture settings using
online resources. This research should bring creative and engaging developments
from education, business, entertainment, and technological worlds together to
focus on providing access to quality laboratory investigations in a cost
effective and equitable manner and should provide guidance for future virtual
learning environment projects that use the multi-user
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;