* 0325371
* ITR:  Built-in Test for High Speed/RF Mixed-Signal Electronics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Jacob Abraham, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2006
* USD 285,231.00

PROJECT TITLE: ITR: Built-In Test of High Speed/RF Mixed Signal
Electronics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: 0325555&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
Georgia Inst. Technology, GA&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Abhijit
Chatterjee (lead PI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
0325371&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U. Texas, Austin, TX&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Jacob Abrahams (coPI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
0325426&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Auburn University, Alabama&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Adit D. Singh (coPI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
0325340&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Florida&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR:William R. Eisenstadt
(coPI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;In the recent past, there has
been a tremendous surge in the wired communications/wireless/high-speed IC
manufacturing sector. While the design community has pushed the design envelope
far into the future, the test barriers have not kept pace with the test
requirements of high speed, integrated wireless and wired communications
designs. Every IC that is manufactured, needs to be tested against its design
specifications before shipment to the customer. As the speeds of these ICs
increase, so do the requirements of the testers needed to test these ICs in
manufacturing production. High-speed testers above 2 GHz are prohibitively
expensive. Consequently, for speeds beyond a few GHz (2 - 25 GHz), built-in test
(BIT) of high-speed/RF systems is a very attractive solution. Built-in test
involves incorporation of test circuitry in the IC itself to facilitate the
manufacturing test process. In this way, many of the test functions are
performed "on-chip," alleviating the need for a high-speed (expensive) external
tester. Since test cost is projected to escalate to about 40% of the total
manufacturing cost of complex communications ICs in the near future, the use of
built-in test is expected to significantly impact the cost of the manufactured
ICs themselves and the ability of companies to compete in the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;The core concept behind the proposed built-in test
methodology is easy to follow. Instead of directly measuring the high-speed test
specifications of the IC-under-test, a new paradigm for BIT of high-speed/RF
circuits using alternate tests is proposed. Alternate tests are compact tests
that are much more simpler to run than the original specification tests but
contain as much information (or more) about the performance of the circuit-
under-test as the original tests themselves. Furthermore, it is possible to
design these tests so that pass-fail decisions can be made, based on analysis of
analog signals using analog circuitry. In this way, two problems are solved: (a)
that of being able to measure complex high-speed test specifications using
simple on-chip test resources and a low-cost external tester, and (b) that of
being able to analyze very high-speed signals (&gt; 2 Ghz) without the need to
digitize them (such digitizers are not available or are very expensive at these
frequencies). The proposed work is interdisciplinary and will involve the use of
concepts from computer algorithms, analog/RF circuit design, mathematics and
statistics and fundamental electrical engineering and device
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;