* 0325324
* Collaborative Research:     ITR:     Network Coding - From Theory to Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Michelle Effros, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2009
* USD 410,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0325324&lt;br/&gt;Michelle Effors&lt;br/&gt;California
Instit. Of Tech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network Coding --- From Theory to
Practice&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficient use of network resources is a
central objective in making information available in today's society. Despite an
enormous effort in understanding the modes in which networks can, do, and should
operate, a unified and concise theory of networking has remained elusive. Before
this backdrop, this research aims at developing and leveraging a combined view
of a number of traditionally separate, network-related issues. In this context,
the research team will investigate issues varying from fundamental questions
about the structure of networks employing network coding over an array of
specific network scenarios, network robustness, network information theoretic
aspects to questions involving practical aspects of networks.&lt;br/&gt;This
ambitious project is driven by the notion of "Network Coding", a recent
discovery that is central to this proposal. Not only is network coding a fresh
and sharp tool that has the potential to open up stagnant fundamental areas of
research, but due to its cross-cutting nature it naturally suggests a unified
treatment of previously segmented areas. In particular, the research addresses
the interplay of network coding in the context of network management, network
information theory, compression and channel codes in networks and distributed
scheduling and routing algorithms. The understanding of intrinsic fundamental
performance limits of networks across different tasks, holds the potential to
not only create a cornerstone in the theory of networks but also to build new
and robust bridges between previously unconnected
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;