* 0325703
* ITR Collaborative Proposal:  Aurora - Enabling Stream-Based Monitoring Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2008
* Michael Stonebraker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James French
* 09/30/2008
* USD 660,000.00

There is a host of existing and newly-emerging applications that require
sophisticated and timely processing of fast, high-volume data streams. Examples
of these applications include environmental monitoring, portfolio management,
asset tracking, and traffic management. These applications, often referred to as
monitoring applications, track data from numerous continuous data streams
(coming from such sources as sensor networks and stock feeds), filtering them
for signs of abnormal activity, and processing them in a timely fashion for
purposes of aggregation, reduction, and correlation.

Currently, monitoring applications are commonly implemented using custom,
application-specific code - there is no general-purpose software infrastructure
that can efficiently and effectively meet the processing and performance
requirements of these applications. The project will investigate the key issues
related to the design and architecture of general-purpose data-stream processing
systems by developing proper abstractions, mechanisms, policies, and protocols.
In particular, the project will develop novel stream-oriented languages, query
execution and optimization techniques, and resource allocation algorithms. The
project will also address the challenges and opportunities that arise in
distributed stream processing by addressing issues such as stream-oriented load
sharing, dynamic operator placement, and high availability. In both cases, the
algorithms will be driven by the Quality-of-Service expectations of the target
applications.

