* 0325937
* Collaborative Research: ITR: Interactive Software Systems for Expert-Assisted Image Analysis and Classification of Aquatic Particles
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2010
* Cynthia Pilskaln, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 10/31/2010
* USD 1,555,516.00

This project involves research on methodologies and algorithms for the automated
and semi-automated classification and counting of particles in the upper ocean.
The work will harness ideas from computer vision, machine learning, and image
analysis to extract features from several different types of optical instruments
used to study planktonic marine organisms and detritus, and then classify them
so that they can be automatically recognized, sorted and counted. The goal is to
develop systems that will automatically classify the majority of marine
particles and flag the unusual or difficult-to-recognize features for human
interpretation. Feature classification systems will be developed around three
different classes of instruments that yield images of three different types of
particles: epifluorescence microscopy (bacteria and nanoplankton), FlowCam
(phytoplankton including types responsible for harmful algal blooms), in situ
cameras (zooplankton and detritus). A variety of image classification methods
will be investigated including ones based on neural networks and support vector
machines. Reference images will be made from phytoplankton from the collection
of the Center for Culture of Marine Phytoplankton and from plankton in samples
taken from the Gulf of Maine. Images recorded in past expeditions and on at-sea
expeditions funded elsewhere will also be used. As part of the project, a
pattern recognition package will be added to the Phytopia educational multi-
media CD-ROM used in schools and colleges.