* 0325160
* ITR:  Enhancing Access to the Bibliome for Genomics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* William Hersh, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,297,277.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
enhance access to the "bibliome" (i.e., published scientific communications) by
improving information retrieval (IR) systems in the genomics domain. This will
be done by:&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing a publicly available resource of content and
tools that allows system developers and other researchers to evaluate retrieval
capabilities in the genomics domain&lt;br/&gt;2. Organizing the development and
use of this resource in the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC) Genomics
Track&lt;br/&gt;3. Carrying out a research program that analyzes the aggregated
results of the TREC Genomics Track experiments to synergistically enhance our
understanding of their findings &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We seek five years of
Information Technology Research (ITR) funding to develop this resource and carry
out research related to it. The project will operate under the philosophy that
has guided genomics work to many successes: all relevant data and tools will be
shared in an open and free public repository. Success in this project will be
measured by its level of contribution to operational IR systems for real-world
searchers in genomics as well as advances in IR that occur as a result of the
resources that are developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information technology (IT)
has revolutionized biological research. Biologists used to conduct their
research in a relatively limited information space. Many IT advances, however,
have changed the nature of their work. New data sources, such as genome
sequences and DNA microarray experiments, have increased the amount of raw data,
while the growth of research findings and subsequent knowledge have taxed the
ability of biologists, like other scientists, to keep up with progress in their
areas of interest. The tremendous growth in experimental data is accompanied by
an overwhelming rate of publications describing new findings. Keeping up with
the published literature is becoming a daunting task for researchers. Finding
all and only the required information for any specific research task, within the
immense body of literature is almost impossible, and advanced technology to
assist in sorting through it is an immediate need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this activity is that it will provide synergistic benefit
for both the biology and IR communities. By creating standardized yet realistic
information challenges, it will enable IR researchers to develop better tools
for biologists than they could have working alone. As with most TREC endeavors,
IR research itself will improve synergistically due to interaction among
researchers working on common tasks created in conjunction with real-world end
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also have broader impacts. The
project will advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching and
learning. Discovery and understanding will ensue from the more robust
experiments that can be used to evaluate systems emanating from this work, while
teaching and learning will improve since many of the participating research
groups are likely to work in academic settings where graduate and other students
can take part. The infrastructure for research and education will be enhanced by
the shared and public availability of the text retrieval resource produced by
this project, allowing IR systems developers and biologists to better understand
each other's work. It will also contribute tools to the growing
"cyberinfrastructure" deemed necessary for optimal usage of IT in the new
century. The increased collaboration across the disciplines should also lead to
new ideas and proposals for research. Coupling this project to the TREC Genomics
Track will allow broad dissemination of the work and lead to improved
understanding of the scientific and technological aspects of IR in the genomics
domain. And ultimately, society will benefit by the improvement of systems that
biological researchers and others can use to advance genomics research and
public understanding of it that leads to better diagnosis and treatment of
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;