* 0325639
* ITR:  Cross-Layer Design of Ad-Hoc Wireless Networks for Real-Time Media
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Andrea Goldsmith, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2008
* USD 749,991.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0325639&lt;br/&gt;Goldsmith, Andrea&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ad-hoc wireless network is a collection of
possibly mobile wireless nodes that self-configure to form a&lt;br/&gt;network
without the aid of any established infrastructure. The lack of infrastructure is
extremely compelling&lt;br/&gt;for applications where a communications
infrastructure is too expensive to deploy, cannot be deployed&lt;br/&gt;quickly,
or is simply not feasible. Such applications range from multi-hop wireless
broadband Internet&lt;br/&gt;access to sensor networks to building or highway
automation to voice, image, and video communication for&lt;br/&gt;emergency
response, a life-saving capability urgently needed by our society. The nature of
ad-hoc wireless&lt;br/&gt;networks makes support of delay-critical applications
such as voice and video quite challenging. In this&lt;br/&gt;project the
investigators study a new framework for ad-hoc wireless network design to
support such delay-&lt;br/&gt;critical applications. The framework includes
dynamic allocation of network resources to support media&lt;br/&gt;requirements,
protocols that are robust to variations and uncertainties in the network, and
adaptive media&lt;br/&gt;compression techniques that preserve end-to-end network
connectivity even when network conditions are&lt;br/&gt;poor. The results of the
project are expected to have a significant impact on the development of
future&lt;br/&gt;wireless networks and the enabling of critical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The framework being developed to support delay-critical
applications in ad-hoc wireless networks is based&lt;br/&gt;on cross-layer
design across the network protocol stack. The design incorporates adaptation
across multiple&lt;br/&gt;protocol layers, including the application, transport,
network, and link layers. Within this framework, the&lt;br/&gt;investigators
develop a suite of new techniques to balance network congestion and distortion
of real-time&lt;br/&gt;media streams by jointly optimizing error-resilient
source coding, packet scheduling, stream-based routing, link capacity
assignment, and adaptive link layer techniques. The optimization is carried out
dynamically by all nodes, based on link state communication, to continuously
adapt to changing link and trac conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The research project
systematically investigates these new ideas and ultimately demonstrates them in
a small&lt;br/&gt;testbed.