* 0325080
* Decision Making on Behalf of Another:  Principals, Agents, and Advance Directives
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Gretchen Chapman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2007
* USD 239,999.00

Many decisions are made on behalf of someone else. For example, family members
must sometimes make medical decisions on behalf of an incapacitated loved one.
The family member making the decisions (the agent) has to select the options she
thinks the patient (the principal) would make if the principal could decide for
himself. Economists have described this relationship in abstract terms as the
principal-agent problem, where the agent is the person making decisions and the
principal is the beneficiary of those decisions. In many situations, the
principal has the opportunity to communicate his preferences and objectives to
the agent. In surrogate health care decision making, for example, this
communication often comes in the form of an advance directive for health care.
Despite the recent popularity of advance directives, there is little evidence
that they improve the agent's accuracy in predicting what the principal would
have wanted. Such failures could result because (a) the principal may
incompletely specify his preferences, and (b) the agent may have limited
competence to interpret and apply the principal's objectives. The prediction
made in the current research is that when such conditions apply, the agent will
use one of several heuristics or short cut rules in order to make surrogate
decisions on the principal's behalf. Four such heuristics are explored in the
proposed studies. A question of major interest is whether use of these
heuristics increases or decreases the agreement between the principal's true
preferences and the surrogate decisions made by the
agent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seven experiments are proposed. Experiments 1 and 2
will examine principal competence, agent, and when advance directives increase
agreement between the agent's surrogate decisions and the decision the principal
would make on his own behalf. Experiments 3 - 6 examine four heuristics or
strategies hypothesized to be used by agents when they are uncertain as to the
principal's preferences. In the projection heuristic, the agent uses her own
preferences as a guide to the principal's preferences, sometimes resulting in
surrogate decisions that are more similar to the agent's own preferences than to
the principal's preferences. In the fiduciary heuristic, the agent is less
willing to take risks and more willing to wait for benefits when making
surrogate decisions than she would be in making decisions on his own behalf (or
than the surrogate would be in making decisions on his own behalf). In the
intervention heuristic, the agent role elicits a stronger preference for active
or aggressive intervention-like options than does the principal role (under the
assumption that principals appoint agents to "do something," rather then to do
nothing). In the status quo heuristic, the agent role is associated with a
strong preference to stick with the status quo. Finally, unlike Experiments 1 -
6, which will use convenience samples of lay people, Experiment 7 will use
elderly medical patients and their designated family member surrogates as the
principals and agents in the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
brings together basic research on the psychology of decision making and applied
health research. It has the potential to illuminate which heuristics help and
which ones hinder agents in representing the principal's preferences accurately.
The findings could improve the practice of writing advance directives and
promote patient autonomy by indicating how to make surrogate judgments more
accurate.&lt;br/&gt;