* 0325056
* ITR:     Data-Driven Autonomic Performance Modulation for Servers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Anand Sivasubramaniam, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2006
* USD 550,590.00

The commoditization of high performance computer systems has resulted in their
widespread deployment as servers in numerous environments. We find clusters
and/or Symmetric Multiprocessors (SMPs) being extensively used for commercial
services such as e-commerce and transaction processing, everyday file/web
service needs, and for long running scientific applications in academic/research
settings. While hardware and software procurement costs for their deployment
have dropped significantly, the total cost of ownership is in fact growing
because of the costs of involving a human in managing and tuning these systems.
It is a non-trivial task today to tune a system and service for each
environment/configuration. This proposal intends to develop a data-driven
feedback framework - called Cruise Control - to aid in the design and deployment
of such autonomic servers. There are several research questions to be
investigated in the development of this framework: What system and workload
events (data) should we monitor in the server that have a consequence on its
performance? How do we represent and store this data in a meaningful manner (and
compress them in the process) since it may be collected over several days and at
very fine resolution? Based on this historical data and currently evolving
conditions, how do we design a controller that can modulate the server execution
to avoid performance bottlenecks in a cost-effective manner? What system
mechanisms are needed within the underlying operating system and middleware
layer to provide the data collection and server modulation functionalities? How
do we structure and develop this complete infrastructure on commodity systems
without degrading the performance of the server?&lt;br/&gt;The Cruise Control
framework will provide system mechanisms for collecting the data and will
attempt to characterize them to compress their representation. and will develop
within the operating system mechanisms for effecting such performance modulation
will also be developed within the operating system. This general framework will
be implemented and validated experimentally for two different server
environments - a commercial database server and a high performance computing
server for scientific applications - on a cluster and a SMP hardware platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;