* 0325182
* Collaborative Research:    ITR/NGS:    Deja Vu:    Transparent Checkpointing and Migration of Parallel Codes Over Grid Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Nathan Stone, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 03/31/2009
* USD 260,250.00

&lt;br/&gt;A daunting challenge is the evolution from today's computational Grid
to a true cyberinfrastructure that seamlessly integrates resources ranging from
small clusters in academic laboratories to the largest national supercomputing
centers and provides ubiquitous access to high performance computing, research
instrumentation, data warehouses and visualization. Realization of this future
requires fundamental advances in transparent fault recovery mechanisms to mask
component failures endemic to any large-scale computational resource. While
previous generations of supercomputers engineered reliability into systems
hardware, today's high performance computing (HPC) environments are based on
clusters of COTS components, with no systemic solution for the reliability of
the resource as a whole. Engendering stability in ever growing networked
collections of cluster systems needs a software solution that provides reliable
access to computing resources through transparent, efficient, and automatic
checkpointing and recovery (CPR) mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
bring about this future through radically new approaches to longstanding
problems in CPR and process migration by building an integrated system called
Deja vu. Deja vu provides (a) a transparent parallel checkpointing and recovery
mechanism that recovers from any combination of systems failures without any
modification to parallel applications. (b) a novel post-compiler analysis system
that transparently captures application state, (c) a systems architecture that
seamlessly integrates user-initiated and system-initiated checkpoints in a
single framework enabling the effective use of a wide variety of domain specific
knowledge, (d) novel runtime mechanisms for transparent incremental
checkpointing, to efficiently capture the least amount of state required to
maintain global consistency, (e) a novel communications architecture that
enables transparent migration of existing MPI/PVM codes without source-code
modifications to either the application or the MPI/PVM libraries, (f)
recoverable IO subsystems that can be tailored to specific storage environments,
and (g) interfaces to and augmentation of the Globus Toolkit to effectively use
the CPR and migration capabilities provided by this research. The core CPR and
migration facilities of Deja vu will be surrounded by management, security, and
scheduling facilities that (a) integrate with local scheduling systems (e.g.,
OpenPBS) and accounting systems for site-specific accounting and refunding of
lost compute cycles and (b) extend the Globus security architecture with fine
grain rights and dynamically created user accounts that allow the fluid resource
control available under the Deja vu system to be fully exploited. The design
goal of this project is not just to implement "point" solutions, but an
integrated system that will constitute a fundamental component of both large-
scale computing facilities and Grid infrastructures. Our research team (VT, PSC,
ISR) has considerable experience in the design, development, deployment and
support of complete solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;