* 0325971
* ITR: Wireless Transit Access Points: Enabling a Scalable, Deployable, High Performance Wireless Internet
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,417,996.00

The PIs driving vision is to provide a high-performance, scalable and widely
deployed wireless Internet that facilitates services ranging from radically new
and unforeseen applications to true wireless "broadband" to residences and
public spaces at rates of 10s of Mb/sec. Unfortunately, today's wireless
networks such as cellular and WiFi hot-spots cannot achieve this vision due to
problems encountered on multiple fronts: (1) excessive costs of the wired
backhaul network, (2) poor performance scaling, and (3) excessive costs of
spectral license fees. We will design an architecture that is based on Transit
Access Points (TAPs), devices that form a wireless backbone mesh via high-
performance directional-antenna wireless links operating in the unlicensed band.

This multihop wireless mesh interconnects wireless TAPs with limited wired
Internet entry points and with wireless multihopping mobile users. To achieve
the objectives with this architecture, the PIs will use a combination of theory,
algorithm and protocol design, simulation, and implementation and testbed
experimentation to address the following fundamental research issues: (1)
development of scalable distributed opportunistic scheduling and media access
protocols, (2) development of coordinated multi-hop resource management
algorithms, (3) analysis of system capacity that incorporates the critical
effects of protocol overhead, and (4) deployment of a first-of-its-kind
neighborhood testbed.

