* 0325298
* ITR-M: Technologies for Dynamically Extensible Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Jonathan Turner, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Sajal Das
* 12/31/2008
* USD 2,100,000.00

This project seeks to create advanced hardware and software technologies for
supporting dynamically extensible networks. Extensible Network Services
Platforms (NSP) support the dynamic insertion of hardware and software plugins
that serve as network-resident assists to distributed applications. To enable
the greatest impact, extensible networks require sophisticated control
mechanisms to enable application developers to specify how application sessions
may be configured, while allowing the network the flexibility to map individual
sessions onto available resources and to accommodate individual user
preferences. This project will develop and demonstrate scalable, high
performance NSPs and will create a software Network Extension System (NES) to
automatically configure application sessions on demand. In addition to becoming
more flexible, networks must become more robust, in order to support advanced
mission-critical applications. It is no longer reasonable to assume that network
routers operate in a benign environment where users cooperate for the larger
social good. The growing challenges to the nation's cyber-infrastructure make it
necessary to design systems that can operate reliably and deliver excellent
performance, even in the presence of extreme traffic conditions. This project
will develop practical designs for managing system resources to ensure robust
network operation, even in the most demanding, high performance environments.