* 0325332
* Collaborative Research: ITR: Prototype, High-Performance, Threat-Adaptive, Space Storm Simulation and Forecast Model Supported by a Data Assimilative, Grid Computing Infrastructure
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* Tamas Gombosi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,800,000.00

This project involves research on how to improve space weather modeling by
incorporating data assimilation and on-demand grid computing capability. The aim
is to develop a first principles, physics-based model of the Sun-Earth system
with the capability of making complete space plasma simulations, from the Sun's
surface to the upper atmosphere of the Earth. The starting point will be an
existing coupled modeling system in which a model of the magnetosphere and solar
wind is coupled to a model of the inner magnetosphere and an upper atmosphere
model. Data assimilation will be based on a Kalman filter approach. Variability
in initial conditions that cannot be directly constrained by data will be
estimated from ensembles of runs, characterized by a statistical sub-space
identification technique, and then modeled by an empirical stochastic model. The
stochastic model will be combined with the deterministic model to produce a
hybrid model that will then be the basis of the main data assimilative model.
The modeling system will be implemented following Open Grid Services
Architecture design protocols so that it can be run on a distributed
computational grid. One of the goals is to develop an adaptive system that can
respond to significant events in the magnetosphere by incorporating additional
computational grid resources as required. If successful, this research could
lead to better tools for forecasting space weather. In addition, the project
includes partnerships with developers of educational tools for formal and
informal education to create teaching resources on the topic of space weather
for use in K-12 schools and science museums. The project also includes links
with teaching faculty at undergraduate institutions so that data and research
results can be integrated into courses on space physics.