* 0325147
* Block Island Workshop on Cooperative Control.  To be Held at the Spring House Hotel in Block Island, Rhode Island.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* A. Morse, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

The purpose of this proposal is to request funds from the National Science
Foundation in partial&lt;br/&gt;support of the forthcoming Block Island Workshop
on Cooperative Control which is scheduled to&lt;br/&gt;take place on June 10 and
11, 2003 at the Spring House Hotel on Block Island, Rhode Island.&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this workshop is to bring together a small number of
individuals from&lt;br/&gt;such fields as animal biology, robotics, automatic
control, communications and sensor networks,&lt;br/&gt;artificial intelligence,
dynamical systems, algorithms, etc. with interests in group coordination
and&lt;br/&gt;cooperative control not primarily to present their current work,
but rather to delineate common&lt;br/&gt;ground and to identify fundamental
unresolved problems in the rapidly evolving, cross-disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;field
of cooperative control of natural and man-made groups.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: In recent years, there has been a growing interest in understanding on
the one&lt;br/&gt;hand, how various animal aggregations such as fish schools,
bird ocks, deer herds, etc. coordinate&lt;br/&gt;their collective motions to
perform useful tasks and on the other, how groups of mobile
autonomous&lt;br/&gt;agents such as AUV schools, UAV ocks, etc., might be
instructed to cooperate in a similar man-ner.&lt;br/&gt;In ecology and
evolutionary biology, for example, it is of great interest to understand
how&lt;br/&gt;natural groupings coordinate themselves and move so awlessly,
often without an apparent leader&lt;br/&gt;or any form of centralized control.
What kinds of signaling must they use? What role if any,&lt;br/&gt;does the
physical medium, environmental context, currents, vortices, or other local
environmental&lt;br/&gt;disturbances play in this process? Are there universal
principles of coordinated group motion and&lt;br/&gt;if so what might they be?
Could such principles be used in a robotic context to help enable a
large&lt;br/&gt;group of autonomously functioning vehicles in the air, on land
or sea or underwater, to collectively&lt;br/&gt;accomplish, in a safe and
coordinated manner, useful tasks such as distributed, adaptive
scientific&lt;br/&gt;data gathering, search and rescue, and reconnaissance? In
broad terms, these are the questions to&lt;br/&gt;which this workshop is
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This workshop will advance discovery and
understanding while promoting&lt;br/&gt;teaching, training and learning by
including student participation at the workshop. The work-shop&lt;br/&gt;will
broaden participation of under-represented groups by encouraging such
individuals to&lt;br/&gt;actively participate in the workshop. Without question,
this highly interdisciplinary meeting&lt;br/&gt;will enhance infrastructure for
research and education by significantly increasing the potential
for&lt;br/&gt;cross-disciplinary research among participants and between parent
institutions. The workshop will&lt;br/&gt;broaden dissemination to enhance
scientific and technological understanding by means of a
published&lt;br/&gt;proceedings and well as by consequential presentations and
publications to a wide semi-technical&lt;br/&gt;community.