* 0325551
* ITR:  Superconducting Qubits and Qugates for Scalable Quantum Computing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Zhen Wang, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2010
* USD 3,236,000.00

This Information Technology Research (ITR) project brings together an
international team from the University of Kansas, SUNY at Stony Brook, and the
Kansai Advanced Research Center (KARC), Japan to focus on one of the more
promising approaches to solid-state qubits, viz. superconducting flux and charge
qubits based on Josephson junctions (JJs). The use of superconducting JJ devices
for qubit applications, such as quantum computation, requires resolution of a
number of major challenges: Optimizing superconducting materials parameters and
corresponding junction fabrication methods; Identification of suitable methods
for preparation and manipulation of coherent quantum states; Development of
measurement protocols; Design of qubit and quantum gates; finally, Development
of error-prevention/correction schemes specific to JJ systems. To this end, high
quality JJ qubits based on niobium, niobium nitride, and aluminum will be
fabricated and their coherence properties investigated in time and frequency
domains. Correlations between qubit decoherence and material properties and
fabrication methods will be systematically investigated. In addition, algorithms
will be developed to reduce and mitigate decoherence and gate errors. The
project involves international education and training for students from the
undergraduate to post-doctoral associate level. The participants receive
fundamental training in a range of cutting edge techniques in condensed matter
and low temperature physics. This prepares them for careers in academe, industry
and government; particularly in the emerging area of quantum information science
and technology, a field that contributes to national competitiveness and
homeland security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Information Technology Research
(ITR) project brings together an international team from the University of
Kansas, SUNY at Stony Brook, and the Kansai Advanced Research Center (KARC),
Japan to focus on several key problems confronting the quest for practical
quantum computers. This new class of computers depends upon controlling quantum
mechanical states in device elements, as opposed to the uncontrolled electron
states of motion in atoms and molecules. If this quantum control is achieved,
such computers are predicted to be able to solve a number of very important
problems that are virtually intractable for existing or projected classical
computers. One of these is the problem of factoring of very large numbers-a key
to cryptography. Beyond this, simply understanding and controlling a quantum
system is of great fundamental and almost immediate technological interest. An
enormous obstacle to the development of quantum computers is the requirement
that the computer be able to maintain the quantum mechanical coherence among all
its device elements throughout a calculation. Inevitable interactions of
macroscopic device elements with the external world, or environment, can rapidly
destroy this coherence and are, in fact, the major reason why quantum effects
are not observed in everyday experiences. This project will make use of the
highly coherent state of a superconducting material to form the basic element of
a quantum computer, a so-called, qubit. This approach will also permit the use
of integrated circuit technology to scale the computer to a useful size. A major
effort will be to investigate and solve the fabrication and design issues to
minimize decoherence. Students and post-docs will receive training in the state-
of-the-art fabrication and measurement technology, as well as the underlying
theory of decoherence in macroscopic systems-a field of rapidly emerging
importance known as "quantum information science". &lt;br/&gt;