* 0325269
* ITR: Encoding Rights, Permissions and Obligations: Privacy Policy Specification and Compliance
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2010
* Colin Potts, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2010
* USD 932,000.00

ABSTRACT 0325269 Ana Anton North Carolina State

Objectives: The objectives of the proposed work are to (a) develop a framework
and software tools that support policy and requirements specification, run-time
privacy enforcement and end-user privacy management, and (b) conduct surveys of
members of the public who use IT systems for information transactions to
investigate their perceptions of rights, permissions and obligations. Results:
There are three main expected results of this work. First, tools will be
produced to aid policy makers in determining the ramifications of policy changes
to ensure that, as policy evolves, conflicts and inconsistencies may be
prevented. Second, tools will be produced to aid organizations as they enforce
and verify policy compliance. Third, tools will be produced to empower end-users
to manage their own privacy. Intellectual Merit Claims: This work aims to bridge
two cultures of scholarship and research: technical specification and privacy
policy. Specifications of systems typically concentrate on system-level entities
(e.g. cookies), whereas policy discussions emphasize fundamental rights
discursively. This proposal will formulate a framework ontology of rights,
permissions and obligations (RPO) based on rigorous models of obligation and
action similar to those previously used by the Co-PI in research into
requirements specification, but informed also by the best current models from
formal jurisprudence. The proposed surveys of user views about RPOs concerning
personal information in the healthcare domain are informed by the PI's previous
work in methodologies of goal refinement in e-commerce and other applications of
IT and her survey research conducted under an existing NSF ITR grant and will
directly influence the construction of tools that support the specification and
compliance checking of policydriven IT systems. These tools in turn will
integrate the framework and survey results with an industry standard privacy
preferences platform, P3P, going beyond P3P to allow specification and
monitoring of privacy RPOs at a semantic level that users and IT professionals
share. The project team has a proven track record of successful research
collaboration on requirements and policy analysis that bridges the two cultures
identified. The proposed activity is creative in its foundational thinking and
promises to produce currently unavailable technology and survey results. The
project activities are distributed over the course of five years with proactive
management by the PI with workshops scheduled to help track progress and invite
external evaluation of project results. North Carolina State University and
Georgia Tech are well equipped and supported to conduct this work.