* 0325314
* ITR/NGS:     Collaborative Research:     DDDAS:     Data Dynamic Simulation for Disaster Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Jan Mandel, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2008
* USD 621,001.00

&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Collaborative Research: DDDAS:&lt;br/&gt;Data Dynamic Simulation
for Disaster Management&lt;br/&gt;Janice L. Coen, Craig C. Douglas, Leopoldo P.
Franca, Robert Kremens,&lt;br/&gt;Jan Mandel, Anatolii Puhalskii, Anthony
Vodacek, and Wei Zhao&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop advanced Information
Technology tools, mathematical models, and prototype infrastructure for disaster
modeling and management. The project will bring comprehensive information and
numerical prediction where it is needed, at the disaster command center, in real
time.&lt;br/&gt;The system will incorporate large volume of information from
data streams, e.g., as maps, sensor, surveyance, and weather data, and the
mathematical model will run on remote supercomputers. The model will be
controlled by dynamically available data, and the results visualized in
distributed devices, like laptops and palmtops connected to the Internet by
wireless ethernet and a broadband satellite link. Other sensors and airborne
imagers will also be networked wirelessly. The core of the envisioned modeling
system will be an existing computer model of wildland and weather around the
area, adn these models will be rewritten from scratch using modern software
engineering methodology as a data driven application, and enhanced by new
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;modeling techniques together with advanced
statistical&lt;br/&gt;techniques will be used to manage uncertainty. High-
performance middleware will be used to&lt;br/&gt;connect computational nodes,
sensor nodes, surveyance nodes, and visualization nodes into
a&lt;br/&gt;distributed information and modeling system. New network software
technologies will make&lt;br/&gt;the communication between the nodes secure and
provide quality of service guarantees. The&lt;br/&gt;system will be designed to
tolerate interruptions of communication, increased latencies, and
node&lt;br/&gt;disappearances.&lt;br/&gt;