* 0325057
* Integrated Study of Nanopowder Synthesis and Pollutant Control using Electrically-Assisted Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Stephen Tse, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 08/31/2007
* USD 332,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is fundamental understanding of
the mechanisms of particle formation, growth, and aggregation in combustion
systems subjected to external electric fields and utilization of that
understanding to define process conditions that enable both high-rate deposition
of non-agglomerated nanopowders and control of pollutant particulate emissions.
The ceramic nanopowders investigated Initially are silica (SiO2), titania
(TiO2), alumina (Al2O3) and zirconia (ZrO2) using highly volatile precursors.
The pollutant particulates investigated are soot and particulates containing
toxic metals such as lead (Pb) and chromium (Cr). The consolidated research
program deals with the effects of applying electric fields on formation of solid
particles in flames and addresses concurrently issues in both materials
synthesis and environmental engineering. Experiments are conducted in
aerodynamically simple flow fields, i.e. flat-flame stagnation-point (premixed)
and flat-flame counterflow (non-premixed), to characterize the effects of
electric field and of other controllable process parameters (including pressure)
on chemical composition, primary particle size, crystallinity, and degree of
agglomeration. The use of multiple precursors to produce doped, coated, or mixed
nanocyrstalline nanoparticlesis investigated. The characteristics of film
deposition in an electric field are examined with respect to composition,
morphology, deposition patterns, and sintering. Advanced laser diagnostics,
electron microscopy, and X-ray diffraction are utilized to model and analyze the
effects of flame structure (due to process inputs) on particle evolution. A
computational model incorporating detailed gas-phase chemical kinetics and
transport (including electric field effects) is developed along with models for
particle formation, growth, and aggregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the
processes that have been demonstrated for flame synthesis of nanopowders, the
approach of applying electric fields is one of the most promising in terms of
precise control of primary particle size, crystallinity, and aggregate size. The
same methodology can be used for the control of particulate emissions from
combustion systems used for power generation and incineration. The research and
experimental facility are incorporated into the new curriculum
on&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;nanomaterials science and engineering being offered as a
joint program between several departments and into the graduate curriculum on
advanced experimental methods. The involvement of underrepresented minorities
and women in engineering is increased by supporting undergraduate research as
part of the Douglass Project for Rutgers Women in
Math,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science, and Engineering. The training of students
(at high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels) for the high-technology
workforce is promoted by partnering with industry, state, and the Center for
Nanomaterials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;