* 0325020
* US-Bhutan Workshop:  Seismotectonics and its Relationship to Natural Hazards in the Bhutanese Himalaya
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Aaron Velasco, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 05/31/2004
* USD 6,900.00

0325020&lt;br/&gt;Miller &lt;br/&gt;This award supports a workshop on
seismotectonics and natural hazards in the Bhutanese Himalaya. US PI Kate Miller
and Aaron Velasco, both from the University of Texas at El Paso will hold a
workshop with scientists from the Geological Survey of Bhutan (GSB) in order to
identify common research priorities between GSB scientists and a number of
western scientists interested in collaborative research in this region. Bhutan
is located in mountain belts formed by episodes of continent-to-continent
collisions of the Indian subcontinent with Asia. A consequence of the continuous
motion is devastating great earthquakes, such as the one at Bhuj in 2001, which
was the most recent catastrophic event caused by the ongoing process of
continental collision. Bhutan is at high seismic risk and, only recently, have
highest level Government officials and scientists at the GSB come to recognize
its significance and the urgency for assistance in its evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This workshop follows a planning visit carried out
in May 2001 that led to the establishment of a temporary seismic network and GPS
monitoring site in Bhutan. This effort was a major breakthrough for geologic
studies in the region, which had previously been all but inaccessible to earth
scientists. The workshop will train Bhutanese scientists and engineers in
seismic hazard assessment from the perspective of earthquake monitoring and the
natural hazard consequences. For the Bhutanese, it will help in highlighting the
national need for a permanent seismic monitoring network; &lt;br/&gt;for the
U.S., the workshop will enable geoscientists to define research priorities that
link our fundamental interests in mountain forming processes to the hazards-
oriented priorities of the GSB. This activity is jointly funded with the
Continental Dynamics Program of the Directorate for Geosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;