* 0325690
* ITR: Dance, a Programming Language for the Control of Humanoid Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Paul Hudak, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 246,001.00

Robots are becoming increasingly common in, and important to, many commercial,
industrial, and military applications. This project focuses on humanoid robots,
which are becoming increasingly useful as they advance in sophistication,
because they can perform in environments engineered specifically for humans, and
because they make it easier for humans to interact with automation. This project
focuses specifically on how to program humanoid robots; i.e. how to program
their movements and interactions as easily and as effectively as possible. The
focus is not on developing new algorithms for robot movement or sensing. Rather,
once an algorithm is in hand, how does one program a robot to walk, wave its
arms, clap its hands, or pick up an object? How does one do so in a high-level
way that is devoid of unnecessary detail, yet is expressive enough to capture
all desirable movements and interactions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of this
effort is the design of a domain-specific language called "Dance" that is highly
abstract, easy to use, yet has enough expressive power to describe a wide range
of useful robot movements. Dance incorporates ideas from the PI's previous work
on domain-specific languages for computer music, computer animation, and
software-enabled control. For example, Dance uses declarative event-based
reactivity to give a robot the ability to respond to its environment (through
tactile, aural, and visual sensors), to its own body (such as interactions
between limbs), and to internal programmatic events (timers, remote messages,
user commands, and so on). Innovative language research makes behaviors the
objects of computation in Dance, which enables programs to abstract over
(aggregate) action sequences and evaluate interactions of such sequences. The
language is also amenable to formal reasoning based on a formal algebraic
semantics. It is possible to prove crucial run-time properties of Dance programs
based on the axioms of this algebra. The proposed work also includes a
programming environment called "Dance Studio" that has the ability to simulate
and thus visualize a running Dance program, enabling a programmer to dynamically
debug her programs prior to full robot deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dance
language research pioneers a control programming concept that is relevant for
many applications in which complex, aggregate system behaviors or maneuvers are
required, and in which such behaviors must be coordinated and assured. The
research is part of, and supports, a broader agenda at Yale to create "socially
adept" robots. Building a machine that can recognize social cues from a human
observer allows a more natural human-machine interaction style, creates
possibilities for machines to learn by directly observing untrained human
instructors, and expands on the growing capabilities of robotic systems. Such
social machines can be used as investigative tools to study many aspects of
human social development. For example, a robot that is capable of perceptually
identifying social cues can be used to provide a quantitative metric of social
response. This metric may be a useful diagnostic tool for social development
disorders such as autism. In fact research on the use of humanoid robots to
diagnose and treat autism is being conducted in the broader scope of Yale's
humanoid robotics program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;