* 0326415
* Collaborative Proposal:      Cross-Shelf Transport and Post-Bloom New Production Near the Pribilof Islands
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Stephan Zeeman, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2005
* USD 128,479.00

The proposed study will test the hypothesis that on-shelf flow of nutrient- and
zooplankton-rich slope water influences post-spring-bloom new production and
zooplankton populations in the vicinity of the Pribilof Islands, thereby
enhancing the region's ability to support juvenile fish and planktivorous
seabirds. The project will investigate on-shelf transport of slope water, which
supplies nutrients that sustain new primary production in summer, a season when
the availability of new production on the shelf is limited by stratification. A
second hypothesis is that this new production will be dominated by diatoms
rather than by flagellates, and a diatom-based food web will result in meso-
zooplankton with a greater energy content than meso-zooplankton in a flagellate-
based food web. These energy-rich zooplankton are expected to be of greater
value to juvenile fish and planktivorous seabirds than those that have fed upon
less lipid-rich phytoplankton. The project will also test these hypotheses
during July/August cruises in 2004 to 2007. During these cruises, the PIs will
compare production and its fate in an area on the middle shelf where summer-time
cross-shelf advection is weak (Mooring 2), on the middle shelf in an area of
episodic advection but little vertical mixing (Mooring 4) and at the Pribilof
Islands where there is both on-shelf transport and tidal mixing of nutrients
into the upper mixed layer. The project will measure along- and across-shelf
flows (Stabeno, PMEL), nutrient concentrations (Mordy, UW/PMEL), standing stocks
of phytoplankton (Zeeman, U. New England), new, regenerated and total production
(Zeeman, Sambrotto, Lamont-Doherty), the grazing rates of micro-zooplankton in
relation to phytoplankton standing stocks and production (Strom, Western
Washington University), zooplankton biomass and composition (Coyle, U. Alaska,
Fairbanks), lipid content, fatty-acid composition, and stable isotope signatures
of zooplankton, juvenile fish and seabirds (Napp, NMFS), and the foraging
distributions and food habits of marine birds (Hunt, U. California, Irvine). In
addition, the project will use satellite-tracked drifters and moorings to
measure currents. This proposal is the first in the Bering Sea to address the
effect of on-shelf fluxes of nutrient-rich slope water on post-spring-bloom new
production, and in turn, how this new production affects the abundance and
quality of prey for juvenile fish (i.e., age-0 walleye pollock) and
planktivorous seabirds. Post-bloom new production may be particularly important
for providing high quality prey at a time when juvenile fish are developing the
reserves to carry them through the winter and seabirds are feeding growing
young. The work focuses on a region of great economic and societal importance,
and examines the ecological processes that affect the productivity of Pribilof
Islands' waters and their ability to support juvenile fish, and the seabirds and
marine mammals that depend on them. The most abundant fish in the area are
juvenile walleye pollock, the target of the world's largest single-species
fishery. The information generated by the proposed research will be of value in
assessing the mechanisms whereby global climate change can affect the amount of
post- spring bloom new production and the nutritional quality of prey available
to upper trophic levels. The project will include undergraduate, graduate and
post-doctoral students in the field and in the laboratory for the analysis and
workup of the data and will strive to develop outreach programs with the school
systems on St Paul and St. George Islands. The work will be disseminated in the
refereed literature and through web sites.&lt;br/&gt;