* 0326851
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interrupting Inequality: The Effect of Antidiscrimination Law on Race/Gender Wage Gaps
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Holly McCammon, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 7,499.00

The proposed research assesses the effects of federal antidiscrimination
employment law on race- and gender-based wage inequality. Using Current
Population Survey data to measure annual, state-level wage gaps and using a
variety of governmental sources to construct measures of the law's coverage,
enforcement, and interpretation, this analysis will evaluate the law's impact on
race and gender wage gaps from 1972 through 2000. Pooled cross-sectional, time
series regression techniques will be utilized to assess these effects. By
including measures of variation in labor force, economic, and political factors
over time and across states, the analysis will identify the unique effect of the
law on race/gender wage gaps. Current stratification theory links race/gender
wage inequality to workers' attributes, employers' behaviors, and structural
characteristics of the workplace. The role of the law, however, has not been
systematically evaluated. Similarly, existing analyses of antidiscrimination law
are largely unconnected from stratification theory and are typically
atheoretical. As a result important theoretical questions-including questions
concerning the impact of the law on different race/gender groups and the impact
of different components of the law-have been unanswered and largely untheorized
by the existing empirical literature. The proposed study will draw on liberal
and critical theories of the law in order to develop a more complete
understanding of how the law impacts race and gender wage inequality. Thus, an
important intellectual merit of the proposed research is that it will synthesize
these separate literatures and forge a new theoretical understanding of the
relationship between the law and labor market inequality. In addition to these
intellectual contributions, the broader impacts of the proposed research are
that 1) it will lead to the development of a unique data set with original
measures of antidiscrimination law for use by future researchers and 2) it will
inform public debates and policy decisions about the utility of affirmative
action and other antidiscrimination measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;