* 0326059
* ITR: Computational Induction of Scientific Process Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Pat Langley, Institute for the Study of Learning and Expertise
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,650,000.00

This interdisciplinary, interinstitutional collaborative research effort
&lt;br/&gt;aims to develop a framework that unifies two separate but central
themes &lt;br/&gt;in information technology -- computational simulation of
models to explain &lt;br/&gt;important phenomena and computational induction of
knowledge from observed &lt;br/&gt;regularities in data. Unlike most previous
work in machine learning and &lt;br/&gt;data mining, the approach emphasizes
methods that generate knowledge in &lt;br/&gt;established scientific formalisms,
incorporate domain knowledge where &lt;br/&gt;possible, focus on causal and
explanatory models, address induction &lt;br/&gt;from observational time-series
data, and are embedded in a simulation&lt;br/&gt;environment which scientists
can use for model development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research revolves around
a new class of models that consist of&lt;br/&gt;interacting quantitative
processes and the problem of inducing such&lt;br/&gt;models from time-series
data. Computational challenges that will be&lt;br/&gt;addressed include reducing
overfitting and variance, inducing conditions &lt;br/&gt;on processes, handling
large, heterogeneous data sets with missing&lt;br/&gt;values, and scaling to
complex models. The resulting algorithms will be &lt;br/&gt;included in a
trainable simulation environment that lets users construct &lt;br/&gt;models
manually or induce them from data, then simulate their behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;Experimental evaluation will involve both Earth Science
observations&lt;br/&gt;from the Ross Sea and synthetic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The trainable simulation environment should let Earth
scientists search&lt;br/&gt;the space of candidate models systematically,
producing more accurate &lt;br/&gt;models in much less time. Moreover, the novel
computational methods&lt;br/&gt;should aid model construction in other fields
like systems biology and&lt;br/&gt;engineering. Both the environment and sample
models will be utilized&lt;br/&gt;in courses and accessible through a Web site.
More information is&lt;br/&gt;available at
http://www.isle.org/process.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;