* 0326052
* ITR:     Pattern Recognition for Ecological Science and Environmental Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Thomas Dietterich, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,748,000.00

Ecological science and environmental monitoring need inexpensive methods for
obtaining population counts of insects. Existing methods require identification
by human experts, which is too costly to support large-scale scientific and
environmental monitoring studies. This project is developing a
mechanical/computer device that can automatically separate, photograph, and
classify insects to produce insect population counts. This device is being
developed and tested on two important environmental problems: (a) water quality
monitoring in streams (by recognizing and counting stonefly larvae in stream
substrates) and (b) measurement and characterization of forest beetle
biodiversity (by recognizing and counting soil mesofauna).

Developing such a device raises two challenges for pattern recognition: (a)
develop methods that can recognize flexible 3-dimensional objects, and (b)
develop general-purpose methods that can be applied to new sets of insects
simply by retraining. To meet these challenges, the project is exploring two new
approaches to pattern recognition: (a) feature dictionaries (algorithms that
find and extract a large number of visual features from images), and (b)
relational appearance-based methods (algorithms that decompose the object into
its parts and learn what each part looks like under a wide variety of viewing
angles and lighting conditions).

This project has many potential impacts. A low-cost, efficient method for
monitoring insect populations in streams would revolutionize water quality
monitoring. An automated device for classifying and counting soil mesofauna
would reduce the amount of time required to obtain population counts 1000-fold.
This would allow a broad spectrum of biologists to employ biodiversity indicator
analysis on a wide scale for basic research and environmental monitoring.