* 0326483
* ITR: Advanced Imaging and Information Technology for Assessing the Ecological and Economic Impact of Brazilian Free-Tailed Bats on Agroecosystems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,496,305.00



Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity Millions of Brazilian free-tailed
bats (Tadarida brasiliensis) voraciously consume enormous quantities of insects
each summer night throughout the southwestern United States. These bats provide
an agricultural pest control service little understood by the scientific
community and policy makers. The proposed effort will evaluate the nationwide
ecological and economic impact of this species on both natural and agricultural
ecosystems. The project is innovative in its development of information
technology and unique in its complexity and scale. It requires the collaborative
efforts of computer scientists, applied mathematicians, meteorologists,
ecologists, and ecological economists. Proposed activities involve: 1. Sensing
Technologies.-Design, develop, deploy, and evaluate algorithms and systems for
thermal, ultrasonic, and radar sensing of millions of bats and insect pests.
Such algorithms and systems currently do not exist but are crucial for providing
a reliable census of the nationwide free-tailed bat populations and processes.
Computer vision techniques will be developed to analyze nightly emergence,
flight paths, and foraging behaviors of individuals and groups of bats. 2.
Computational Modeling.-Design, develop, solve, and validate computational
models of the agricultural-insects-bats system across temporal and spatial
scales. Processes at lower levels of organization, such as the individual bat
and its physiological functions, will be analyzed to solve problems posed at
higher ecological levels of organization from the population to the landscape.
Local population models for particular caves or bridges will be generalized to a
spatially explicit regional model for Texas, and then to a spatially explicit
landscape model that describes the nationwide impact of Brazilian free-tailed
bats on agricultural ecosystems. Currently, no complete individual or population
life-history models exist for free-tailed bats nor, indeed, for any bat species,
in spite of the fact bats are ubiquitous throughout the world and are
distinguished as the second largest order of mammals. 3. System Integration.-The
proposed models will be integrated using both conceptual and spatial
hierarchies. Results provided by the sensing technologies will be combined to
represent the processes of foraging and migration. The integration of these
outcomes as well as molecular tools (such as fecal DNA), entomological and
agricultural information, energetics, meteorological and toxicological
databases, will provide input parameters and validation data to computational
models of bat populations. The models will integrate the interdependencies of
dietary factors, energy consumption and allocation, weather patterns, effects of
toxicants, etc. on birth and mortality rates and population sizes of bats and
their prey.

Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed Activity The importance of natural
pest-control services becomes evident often only when they are degraded or
eliminated by human activity. The proposed research will provide realistic
estimates of the economic impact of Brazilian free-tailed bats. The proposed
techniques may generalize to other species and thus have a broad impact in the
fields of biology, ecology, ecological economics, and agriculture. The proposed
methods of image analysis may apply to other large-scale video tracking
applications, for instance, the analysis of group behavior of other bat species,
insects, herding mammals (e.g., seals, caribou), colonial seabirds, the analysis
of human crowd behavior, data mining of video of human motion, and video
surveillance for homeland security. An important impact of the proposed research
on society will be the development appropriate policy responses by federal,
state, or local authorities based on the fundamentally improved understanding of
the underlying biological and economic principles of natural pest control. The
proposed effort addresses the goals of the ITR Program in a number of ways. It
is multidisciplinary in nature, providing a new bridge between the fields of
computational sciences and ecology. This may lead to novel, unanticipated
insights and technologies in both fields. The proposed effort will train
students in biology and computer science to fully integrate information
technology and science. Graduate and undergraduate students from both
disciplines will learn to conduct joint field experiments, analyze data, and
work with computational models. The projects in computer science that are
inspired by questions in biology promise to have a special appeal to women, and
we expect that our project will encourage more women to explore the
computational aspects of biology.