* 0326730
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Politics of Union Decline: Business Political Mobilization and Restrictive Labor Legislation, 1938-1958
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Vincent Roscigno, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 6,100.00

Despite considerable social science research pertaining to the decline of the
American labor movement in the postwar era, relatively little is known about the
political struggles that helped shape U.S. labor policy and the geographic and
industrial patterns of unionization that have persisted over the last half
century. This research considers the surge of restrictive labor legislation that
spread across states between 1938 and 1958, including intensely contested Right-
to-Work laws that diminished labor's financial and organizational capacity. We
question how the labor movement, during a period of unparalleled growth and
numerical strength, suffered such a string of political defeats. We suggest that
anti-labor political activity, union response, and its unfolding across time and
space are best understood within a political process framework. Consequently,
analyses, which draw from state-level quantitative data over the period and in-
depth archival material from particular cases, consider how important dimensions
of employer and union strength, and the varying state structures these
contending groups face, may influence policy enactment. Event history methods
are first used in order to identify more general processes leading to
restrictive labor legislation across all states. Qualitative event structure
analysis (ESA) is then used to examine three specific anti-labor campaigns that
are representative of the range of mobilization, and successes and defeats,
during our period of interest. This comparative strategy will enable us to
systematically address the complex mechanisms and causal linkages through which
local actors attempt to alter policy. Coupled with the quantitative event
history modeling of anti-labor activity, these analyses will (1) improve our
understanding of an important and understudied period in American labor history,
(2) speak to and inform sociological conceptions of the state, and (3) extend
the substantial literature on new deal policy formation by considering the
political unraveling and retrenchment of the labor movement=s historic
legislative gains of that era. By systematically analyzing multiple policy
outcomes across varying temporal and sociopolitical contexts, we also address
the ability of social movement actors to influence the political process more
generally. This approach, and the understanding it will generate, will be
informative to existing social science perspectives on policy outcomes and
social movement processes. It will also serve the purposes of informing students
and a more general public about the history of, and political dynamics
associated with, labor unions in the U.S.