* 0326907
* Development of an an acoustic data storage tag for long range fish tracking in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2011
* H. Thomas Rossby, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2011
* USD 439,128.00

P.I. Fischer (URI) Proposal #: 0326907&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Development of
an acoustic data storage tag for long-range fish tracking in the
ocean&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt; The PIs propose to design,
fabricate, and test a fully functional acoustic Digital Storage Tag for long-
range tracking of fish such as salmon, shark and Atlantic cod. These animals
migrate over great distances in the course of their life cycles however, their
specific migration patterns are difficult to ascertain. Specifically, the PIs
propose to fabricate a DST that will listen for and record the exact arrival
times of signals emitted from moored sound sources. To obtain additional habitat
information, the tag will also periodically record pressure and temperature. The
devices, having a design lifetime of two years, would be attached to or
implanted in fish using techniques developed during studies using conventional
DSTs. The data will be retrieved from the fish upon capture. In case of an
implant, an external ribbon or marker would alert fishermen to the presence of
the tag. Acoustic detection ranges on the order of 100 to 1,000 km could be
obtained with a resolution of a few kilometers, depending upon the tracking
conditions (sound channel and water depth) for a given species. The PIs envision
the tags to consist of a small hydrophone that will also serve as the housing
for the miniature circuit board, timing crystal, pressure sensor, and battery.
Prior to deployment, the tag will be programmed from a host PC via a serial
communication interface. This work evolves from an earlier development of a
temperature-only DST. The PIs have already contacted external vendors to ensure
that there is an eventual transition from a prototype tag to a mass produced
device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;