* 0326249
* ITR:     Unified Graphical Models of Information Extraction and Data Mining with Application to Social Network Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2011
* David Jensen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 3,855,418.00

This project aims to improve our ability to data mine information
&lt;br/&gt;previously locked in unstructured natural language text. It focuses
on &lt;br/&gt;developing novel statistical models for information extraction and
data &lt;br/&gt;mining that have such tight integration that the boundaries
between &lt;br/&gt;them disappear---resulting in a powerful unified framework
for &lt;br/&gt;extraction and mining. Current information extraction methods
populate &lt;br/&gt;slots in a database by identifying relevant subsequences of
text, but &lt;br/&gt;they are usually unaware of the emerging patterns and
regularities in &lt;br/&gt;the database. Current data mining methods begin from
a populated &lt;br/&gt;database, and they are often unaware of where the data
came from, or &lt;br/&gt;its inherent uncertainties. The result is that the
accuracy of both &lt;br/&gt;suffers, and significant mining of complex text
sources is beyond &lt;br/&gt;reach. This project uses probabilistic graphical
models that make &lt;br/&gt;extraction and mining decisions in the same
probabilistic currency, &lt;br/&gt;with a common inference procedure. Such
models promise significant &lt;br/&gt;gains in accuracy and capability, as well
as an opportunity for deeper &lt;br/&gt;understanding of the role of high-level,
top-down patterns in natural &lt;br/&gt;language processing, and the role of
low-level, bottom-up language data &lt;br/&gt;in symbolic processing. The
project grounds this work in two &lt;br/&gt;real-world applications domains:
scientific research and government &lt;br/&gt;information. The extraction and
mining of large-scale databases in &lt;br/&gt;these domains will have broad
impacts by providing useful, &lt;br/&gt;constantly-updated Web resources, by
enabling insights into government &lt;br/&gt;efficiency and the flow of
scientific ideas, and by making databases, &lt;br/&gt;analyses and source code
publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;http://kdl.cs.umass.edu/projects/unified-
graphical-models.html&lt;br/&gt;