* 0326083
* SGER:  Heat Flux at Mount Wrangell Following the November 3, 2002 Denali Fault Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Carl Benson, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2004
* USD 20,925.00

EAR-0326083&lt;br/&gt;McNutt&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the
connection between large earthquakes and volcanic heat flux on Mt. Wrangell
Volcano, Alaska. Changes in heat flux have previously been observed at Mt.
Wrangell following large earthquakes in 1964 and 1979. The earthquake of 3
November 2002 on the Denali Fault, Mw = 7.9, may have had a similar or stronger
effect on heat flux because the shaking was more intense. The hypothesis to be
tested is that seismic shaking opens convective channels beneath the ice-filled
North Crater. This in turn allows glacier melt water to circulate more
efficiently, and deeply enough to increase heat flux to the base of the glacier
ice. This shows up as a change in the ice volume, which will be measured by
photogrammetry in summer 2003. Seismic behavior will also be monitored with
stations on the volcano's summit and flanks. In terms of broader impacts, this
proposal crosses three disciplines--volcanology, glaciology and seismology-and
seeks to establish a physical basis for interactions among these generally
separate lines of inquiry. Two UAF graduate students will be involved in the
data and interpretations, and public lectures will be given in the Glenallen and
Copper Center communities, as well as at the Wrangell-St. Elias National Park
visitor center. &lt;br/&gt;