* 0326027
* ITR:  Development of a Web-based Grid-Computing Environment for Research and Education in Computational Science and Engineering
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Charles Wight, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,200,000.00

Professors Thanh Truong, Thomas Cheatham, and Charles Wight of the University of
Utah and James Lewis of Brigham Young University are supported by the Division
of Chemistry under the Information Technology Research program. This team will
develop a web-based grid-computing environment (Computational Science and
Engineering Online) for both research and education. This web-based laboratory
without walls will be made available to the general public as well. This
facility will enable the use of chemistry and materials science software on
various high-performance computing platforms, and allow for distribution of the
results depending upon constraints determined by the user and the software
products. Applications include multi-scale modeling of complex reaction systems,
accurate modeling of biological and macromolecular systems, and material
property simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort seeks to construct a web-
based collaboratory that facilitates the selection, data input, and use of a
wide range of theoretical and computational methods for designing and
understanding molecules and materials. By its broad accessibility, the
Computational Science and Engineering Online laboratory will enhance research
productivity, facilitate multi-disciplinary research, and promote
interdisciplinary collaborations. Regular workshops combined with an educational
layer to the collaboratory will bring state-of-the-art research tools to both
undergraduate and graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;