* 0326968
* SGER: Biomechanics of Suction Feeding in Teleost Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Harry Dwyer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 02/28/2005
* USD 99,954.00

SGER: Biomechanics of suction feeding in teleost fishes Peter C. Wainwright,
Angela Cheer, and Harry A. Dwyer University of California, Davis

This research will investigate the mechanics of aquatic suction feeding, the
most widespread method of aquatic prey capture used by vertebrate animals.
Suction feeding is found in at least some members of every major group of
tetrapods, and is the principal prey capture mechanism used by teleost fishes.
The behavior involves the explosive expansion of the mouth and oral cavity to
accelerate water and prey into the mouth. The aim of this research is to use a
new method to visualize and measure the water flows generated by fishes during
suction feeding. The lack of existing data on suction feeding flows is due to
the considerable difficulty of visualizing and measuring water flow in
biological systems. These flows are the focus of this research proposal because
they exert forces on prey, transporting them to the predator and determine the
success of suction feeders. Understanding the spatial and temporal pattern of
water flow generated by suction feeders and how they exert forces on prey is the
key to understanding the mechanics of suction feeding and its broader biology.
Digital Particle Image Velocimetry (DPIV), a technology that permits the
visualization and quantification of water motion, will be developed as a tool
for studying suction feeding in experiments with a focal species, the bluegill
sunfish, Lepomis macrochirus. DPIV will be used in conjunction with measurements
of suction pressure and ultrasound of skull movements to address three issues.
First, what are the magnitudes of the forces exerted on prey during suction
feeding and what is the relative importance of drag and the acceleration
reaction in generating these forces? Preliminary calculations with a
computational fluid dynamics model indicate that acceleration reaction, a
previously ignored force that is generated by flows of changing velocity, may
outpace the more familiar drag forces. Demonstrating an important role for
acceleration reaction would greatly alter the picture of forces that are
experienced by prey, and may help to explain the explosive nature of suction
feeding, one of the fastest feeding behaviors seen among vertebrate animals.
Second, the quantitative relationship between suction pressure and the flow
velocities that are generated during prey capture will be determined. This
relationship will be used to test the widely held assumption that peak suction
flows are proportional to peak suction pressure. Third, the temporal and spatial
patterns of flow velocity during suction feeding will be measured. This will
establish the critical area and time-course of predator-prey interactions and
provide a benchmark for future comparative studies. This research represents a
novel application of DPIV technology in studies with live aquatic organisms that
has not previously been applied to feeding behavior. Developing this method
presents significant challenges associated with animal training and
visualization of flow close to moving jaw structures. The risk of attempting to
establish this new method for research on suction feeding is justified because
of the fundamental nature of flow data to understanding suction feeding
mechanics. Measuring the spatial and temporal pattern of flow velocity is a key
to inferring forces and hence suction feeding performance. This research project
will establish a new technology for studying suction feeding and will contribute
to a deeper understanding of a major step in vertebrate evolution. A greater
knowledge of suction feeding will broaden our insights into the relationship
between skull design and biomechanics in teleost fishes. Broader impacts of this
project include the application of unsteady flows in surgical suction devices.
This research will also provide training for a postdoctoral researcher who is
bridging engineering and biology disciplines.