* 0326776
* "Warm Times, Cold Times:-Quantitative Reconstructions of Near-Shore Environments Over the Last 2000 Years in Vestfirdir, NW Iceland:  Natural Changes and Human Responses
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2007
* William Patterson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 06/30/2007
* USD 312,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Andrews&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0327187&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better
understanding of future environmental change is a pressing need of human society
today and projections can be tested and evaluated by reconstructing the ranges
and rates of past changes. The goal of this project is to develop a quantitative
reconstruction of the marine climate Vestfirdir, north Iceland over the last
2000 years. Northern Iceland was chosen because of its sensitive location. This
small area encapsulates climatic changes throughout much of the North Atlantic
because it lies at the boundary between the Atlantic and Polar/Arctic realms,
which drive much of the change. In addition, this is ideal area for climate
reconstruction because it has 1) an extensive database of modern instrumental
climate data, 2) a 1,200 year historical documentary climate record, and 3) well
dated, high-resolution sediment cores containing an archive of natural climate
variability. The research will reconstruct seasonal and annual temperature
variations based on the stable isotopic composition of marine molluscs from
three marine cores in Vestfirdir. The isotope data will be calibrated against
the modern instrumental record and applied to molluscs in the cores. Seasonal to
annual temperature estimates will be achieved through analysis of 60
individuals, with life spans of two to ten years, that lived during modern
times, through the Settlement of Iceland (AD 871) and beyond the interval of
human impact to c. 2000 years ago. The use of the micromilled molluscs in marine
cores is the only way, at present to obtain seasonally- to-annually resolved
climate data from Iceland, beyond the instrumental and documentary record. The
short, but annually resolved records are placed within an environmental
framework through analysis of other traditional proxy records. Drawing on
earlier analyses of these cores, major environmental changes of the past are
identified. These include a prolonged "cold" interval between 70 and 400 yr B.P.
(ca. AD 1930 back to 1600), an interval with lower ?18O (CaCO3) (warmer) values
around AD 1000, and a cool interval centered at AD 670. The project will select
molluscs for analysis within these .warm. and .cold. intervals. In order to
study the human dimensions of these changes, emphasis will be placed on the
period from the Settlement of Iceland (c. AD 871) to the present. Isotope-based
temperature reconstructions will be used to evaluate historical records of
Icelandic sea-ice incidence and fisheries catches, with the main goals of: 1)
determining the role of oceanic variability in the productivity of Icelandic
fisheries; and 2) isolating periods when non-climatic factors might have played
a role in fisheries variations. The impact of the reconstructed marine climates
on biodiversity will be measured by changes in benthic foraminiferal
assemblages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt; This project
represents a multidisciplinary evaluation and analysis of the role of climate
change on the nearshore marine climate and its association with changes in
historical fisheries practices and catches. It represents an international
effort, with researchers from the USA and Canada and with co-operation from
several colleagues in Iceland. It also fosters collaboration between NSF and
Rannis (the Icelandic Science Foundation). Links with the archeological
community currently working on the zooarcheology of sites in northern Iceland
will be strengthened. This collaboration will enable analysis of stable isotopes
on fish otoliths found in the refuse from these sites and comparison of these
variations with the stable isotope data from the marine cores. The project will
educate both graduate and undergraduate students, and will be beneficial in the
training of young scientists in geochemical methods and micro- and macro
-paleontology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;