* 0326395
* The Dr. Dolittle Project: A Framework for Classification and Understanding of Animal Vocalizations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Peter Scheifele, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,248,000.00

The fundamental goal of this research is to develop a broadly useable framework
for pattern analysis and classification of animal vocalizations, by integrating
successful models and ideas from the field of speech processing and recognition
into bioacoustics. Current approaches to automated methods for analyzing and
classifying animal vocalizations are still significantly behind the capabilities
that exist in the field of human speech processing, and cross-fertilization with
other fields offers a tremendous opportunity for making advancements in this
area. The PI and his team plan to employ an innovative cross-disciplinary
strategy to develop a framework based on robust feature analysis and selection
and Hidden Markov Model classification, with additional expertise drawn from
such fields as psychology, biology, linguistics, machine learning, and signal
processing, for the purpose of making significant advancements to the current
state-of-the-art in bioacoustics algorithms and animal communications research.
The algorithms developed through this process will be applied to a wide range of
important tasks, including automatic vocalization classification and labeling,
individual identification, call type classification, behavioral-vocalization
correlations, stress analysis, language acquisition, and seismic infrasonic
communication. Species being targeted for study include domestic and
agricultural animals, marine mammals, and several endangered species. The
primary contribution of this work will be the development of well-founded models
and methods for improving our understanding of animal communication and
behavior. Experimental tasks of significance to a wide variety of research
problems within this field are also planned. In addition, many aspects of the
HMM classification framework, including hierarchical feature analysis and
selection, variable frame sizing, and learnable model topologies, offer the
potential for advances in machine learning as well as speech and signal
processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The development of an easily
adaptable framework for applying speech-processing techniques to animal
vocalizations will allow other researchers to create systems that pertain to the
specific species they are studying. This will speed the development effort of
these systems and allow those not familiar with speech and signal processing
techniques to incorporate advanced methods in their research. A primary
underlying motivation for such research is the preservation of endangered
species and the improvement of careand habitats for animals in captivity, and
this project has the potential for significant, long-term impact toward these
goals.&lt;br/&gt;