* 0326885
* The Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study (BATS)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 4,209,331.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0326885&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
extend the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study (BATS) program for five additional
years from August 1, 2003 to July 31, 2008. Long-term time series like BATS and
the Hawaiian Ocean Time-Series (HOT) are powerful tools for investigating ocean
biogeochemistry and its effects on the global carbon cycle. The seasonal,
interannual and longer-scale dynamics of carbon and other nutrient cycles in the
upper ocean control ecosystem productivity, the net exchange of carbon dioxide
between the atmosphere and the ocean, and the distribution of many elements in
the sea. Understanding the overall carbon cycle requires that we understand each
of its component processes. The focus of the BATS research effort is to improve
understanding of the time-varying components of the ocean carbon cycle and
related biogenic elements of interest (e.g., nitrogen, phosphorus), and
identifying the relevant physical, chemical and ecosystem properties responsible
for this variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open access at the BATS and HOT
stations to oligotrophic ocean gyres has allowed more than 100 scientists to
conduct small, single/few investigators, independent projects of their own
design in the context of a wider biogeochemical program and the rich historical
context of the two time-series datasets. Open data policies have allowed many
more to explore BATS and HOT datasets for both research and education (from K12
to graduate). The BATS site has become a focus for many other oceanographic
studies both US and international in scope, and a foci of numerous educational
programs. Many of the scientific questions asked at the time-series stations
have become even more relevant when considered on interannual to decadal time-
scales. These are the inherent time-scales of many of the natural modes of
climate variability and the time-scale of anthropogenic change. To address these
time-scales requires that we study the system consistently over such periods,
much as the data from Hydrostation S and the Keeling Mauna Loa atmospheric CO2
sampling have given us insights over the past four decades. The BATS and HOT
time-series have just opened the decadal window for the kinds of oceanographic
and biogeochemical questions at the heart of future ocean programs. Both BATS
and HOT are and will be a significant community asset that have broad value to
oceanography and beyond.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Among the many broader impacts of
BATS research will be the wealth of hydrographic and biogeochemical data
collected to provide a broad context for examining oceanographic paradigms and
hypotheses. In addition to the research conducted as part of the core program, a
wide range of ancillary projects have been and are supported by the presence of
the BATS program. The BATS program also has a synergistic existence with the
three other oceanographic time-series studies conducted near Bermuda
(Hydrostation S, Ocean Flux Program, Bermuda Testbed Mooring). Each time-series
provides connected, but not overlapping data that contributes to a sum greater
than the individual parts. BATS investigators will be very active in many
aspects of student education, training and public outreach. BATS data and
scientific understanding will continue to be incorporated into
undergraduate/graduate courses, several of which have laboratory components that
make use of the research facilities at the Bermuda Biological Station for
Research as well as day cruises on the R.V. Weatherbird II to the Hydrostation S
and BATS site. Training of students, technicians and researchers through hands-
on laboratory, cruise and data synthesis activities, will be an important
component of this research effort. This effort will also directly aid the U.S.
national effort to improve the understanding of the oceanic carbon cycle and its
impact on climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;