* 0326268
* Collaborative Research: The Cariaco Basin Oceanographic Time Series Program
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Kent Fanning, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2010
* USD 2,695,079.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0326268 / OCE-0326175 /
OCE-0326313&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project constitutes the continuation of
the Cariaco Basin Oceanographic Time Series Program (CARIACO). The research team
is composed of investigators from the University of South Florida, State
University of New York at Stony Brook, and the University of South Carolina at
Columbia in the United States and their Venezuelan colleagues at Fundacion La
Salle, Universidad Simon Bolivar, Universidad de Oriente, Centro de
Procesamiento de Imagenes, and CONICIT/FONACIT. CARIACO collects systematic
oceanographic measurements at 10'30' N, 64'40' W in order to understand the
relationships between changes in climate, hydrography, and sediment production
and accumulation in the Cariaco Basin. Cariaco is a 1,400-m deep depression on
the Venezuelan continental margin that is openly connected to the surface
Atlantic Ocean above a shallow (~140 m) sill. Because turnover of basin waters
is slow, decomposition of sinking material leads to permanent anoxia below about
275 m. An excellent sediment record that is widely used to study Holocene and
late Pleistocene changes in climate is preserved in this natural sediment trap.
In this context, the time series provides information on modern biogeochemical
processes that will serve as a basis for accurately interpreting this sediment
archive of climate change. Data collected under this program and results are
publicly available via an Internet server (http://imars.usf.edu) upon passing
quality control, within periods ranging from weeks to 24 months depending on the
difficulty of processing an observation. Data, samples, and bunk space on
cruises are also routinely made available upon
request.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuation of the CARIACO program is expected to
yield (1) a time series of variability in upwelling of Subtropical Underwater in
the Cariaco Basin, including lateral motion, and its impact on primary
productivity and vertical flux of particulate matter; (2) the first direct
calibration and concurrent cross-reference of various proxies of sea surface
temperature (and therefore of paleotemperature) of the Cariaco Basin; (3)
clarification of the relative importance of near-surface biological processes,
lateral transport, and chemoautotrophy as sources of particulates, (4) an
assessment of whether variability in particle flux is driven primarily by local
winds or by regional oceanographic processes at the scale of the Tropical
Atlantic, and (5) an evaluation of whether changes in nutrient availability or
limitation result in major ecosystem regime shifts. This program will fully
utilize available satellite observations and meteorological records for the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CARIACO is an IGBP-LOICZ (Land-Ocean Interactions
in the Coastal Zone) program with objectives that are relevant to the "U.S.
Carbon Cycle Science Plan" and the OCTET (Ocean Carbon Transport, Exchanges and
Transformations) planning initiatives. In this sense, the time series will help
elucidate the connection between ocean processes and phenomena like climate
change, which operates on a variety of time scales including those relevant to
society, and which many scientists think is intricately linked to the tropics.
CARIACO measurements may also for example help understand processes that affect
regional fisheries and catastrophic weather patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
important contribution is the infrastructure for third parties to establish
complementary or independent interdisciplinary process studies in the Cariaco
Basin. The impact of results from such studies combined with those from CARIACO
will be much larger than those possible from individual
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The time series program also has technology
transfer and human resource development impact in Latin America. The program
nurtures scientific cooperation with Venezuela, a country of strategic
importance to the United States. The program has been maintained through a
collaborative effort between the University of South Florida, University of
South Carolina, Stony Brook University, Fundacion La Salle, Universidad Simon
Bolivar, Universidad de Oriente, Centro de Procesamiento de Imagenes, and
CONICIT/FONACIT, with the latter five institutions located in Venezuela. This
has provided an opportunity for Venezuelan and other regional scientists to
participate in logistics planning, fieldwork, data analysis, and joint
publications within a large program, and to participate in a project that
addresses issues of both local and global relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program has significant educational impact on minority students in the U.S. and
on students and scientists in the Caribbean and Latin America. The Venezuelan
government considers CARIACO the most significant oceanographic research program
ever conducted in Venezuela.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;