* 0327716
* Research Starter Grant:  Cellular Biomechanics of Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Charles Wolgemuth, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2005
* USD 44,898.00

&lt;br/&gt;Many bacteria are cylindrical, although a simplistic view of the
bacterial cell, taking into account the turgor pressure within the cell, would
suggest that all bacterial should be roughly spherical in shape. How do rod-
shaped bacteria achieve and maintain their morphology? This question will be
addressed using physical analysis and mathematical modelling, taking into acount
what is known of bacterial biochemistry and organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cell wall is composed predominantly of a polymer mesh
of peptidoglycan that separates the inside of the cell from the outside of the
cell and provides structural rigidity. Directly inside the peptidoglycan is a
bilayer membrane. The cell maintains a turgor pressure such that the inside of
the cell is at a higher pressure than outside the cell. Therefore, a simple
picture of cell morphology would be that the peptidoglycan forms an elastic
layer that encloses this pressure difference, much like a balloon. This,
however, does not account for the cylindrical shape of the cell, as the pressure
difference would drive the peptidoglycan layer toward a more spherical form.
Recent experiments from another laboratory suggest that actin-like polymer
proteins located just inside the cell membrane may play a crucial role in
maintaining cylindrical form in some bacteria, such as Bacillus subtilis. Those
experiments also suggest a molecular mechanism that could drive the supercoiling
behavior that has been observed in macrofibers of B. subtilis and a number of
other filamentous cylindrical bacteria. This research project will explore the
connection between helical polymer proteins located at or near the cell membrane
and the elasticity of the cell wall in order to probe the role these proteins
play in maintaining cellular form, examine whether they could be the molecular
cause of supercoiling, and suggest further experiments to test these
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This is a Research Starter
Grant, awarded to an NSF Postdoctoral Fellow who has accepted a tenure-track
position at an eligible institution, as described in NSF 99-142. Dr. Wolgemuth
will actively integrate research and education and foster cross-disciplinary
training by recruiting a biology graduate student to work on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;