* 0327415
* Starter Grant: Genetic Differentiation of the Relict Herpetofauna of the Oases of Baja California
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Javier Rodriguez, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2008
* USD 50,000.00

The ability to obtain DNA sequence data and the development of rigorous
analytical methods of allele genealogies have permitted the study of population
structure within a phylogenetic framework. This phylogeographical approach has
proved useful in understanding the histories of species shaped by Pleistocene
climatic changes. The northwestern section of the peninsula of Baja California,
Mexico is relatively cool and moist, whereas the central portion is arid. The
rapid onset of desertification of central Baja California during the Pleistocene
(1.8 million to 11,000 years ago) left disjunct pockets of mesic refugia, where
previously transpeninsular, mesophilic species were able to remain. These humid
areas correspond to Baja California's system of approximately 50 oases, isolated
permanent or semipermanent bodies of springfed water. I will conduct a
comparative phylogeographic study of five species of amphibians and reptiles
found in those oases. The process of population differentiation is central to
the origin of biological diversity. Reliable estimates of the timing of
formation of the Baja California oases provide a general idea of when gene flow
between the populations presumably ceased. This allows to ask important
questions regarding differential rates of genetic differentiation between
isolated populations of the same species, and interspecific differences on these
rates.&lt;br/&gt;