* 0327124
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Globalization and the Transformation of Nationalism:  Spain in the European Union, 1977-2000
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Kathleen Schwartzman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 08/31/2005
* USD 5,782.00

This dissertation investigates the effects of European integration on
nationalist movements in Spain. Specifically, I am interested in how the Basque
autonomy movement, relative to others, has changed in response to Spain's
incorporation into the European Union. I will examine pro-autonomy and anti-
nationalist sentiment in Spain from Franquismo to the contemporary period. The
first stage of the dissertation will assess regional demands for autonomy in
response to shifts in political form at the national and supranational levels
through a descriptive analysis of protest events collected from Spanish
newspaper articles for the years 1977-2000. The second stage of this project
builds on the findings of the first by examining in further detail the effects
of political and economic integration on regional autonomy protest via a series
of regression analyses. Data for the second stage of this project includes
trade, legislative, and litigative statistics collected from regional Spanish
statistical agencies and the European Union. The third stage of the dissertation
will attempt to explain regional variations in response to European integration
through a comparative historical analysis. The broader impact of this
dissertation lies in its promise to contribute to our understanding of
globalization and nationalism in general. It also speaks to the changing
character of international and nationalist conflict by explaining how
nationalist and terrorist groups react to economic and political integration at
the global level, and how supranational organizations respond to their efforts.