* 0327470
* Interaction of baroclinic eddy fluxes with inhomogeneous background flow, boundary layers and topography
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Kendall Smith, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2006
* USD 290,014.00

An investigation of eddy flux statistics in increasingly realistic regimes will
be conducted. The proposed work will employ idealized simulation, analysis and
theoretical development using an isopycnal ocean model (HIM) to address, in
particular, the applicability of the potential vorticity flux theory based on
horizontally homogeneous (but vertically inhomogeneous) quasi-geostrophic
turbulence to more complex regimes. The studies will address the following
points: the model resolution necessary to achieve converged eddy statistics in
an idealized primitive equation model; interaction of adiabatic interior eddy
fluxes with surface fluxes and surface forcing; the effects of horizontal mean
flow inhomogeneities on eddy fluxes; and eddy flux statistics and dynamics in
the presence of topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful extension of the
flux theory to realistic regimes will pave the way toward a new parameterization
scheme that may lead to significant improvements in operational climate models,
and hence to improved understanding of the ocean component of climate. The
availability of government laboratory resources for this project benefits the
laboratory via potential improvements in its models, and benefits the larger
scientific community in generating unhampered fundamental research in ocean
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;