* 0327657
* SGER: Seismic Study of Deep Eclogitic-Granulitic Crust and Moho
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Scott Smithson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2004
* USD 17,936.00

Seismic Study of Deep Eclogitic Crust and Moho Scott Smithson University of
Wyoming

Abstract

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research proposal for a seismic data
acquisition program that has suddenly become possible because of a change in
schedule of a marine research vessel. The SGER proposal appears to be the only
way that we can respond to this opportunity in its time frame. One of the
classic eclogite localities is in the Bergen Arcs of western Norway where
eclogitization is related to fluid flow along shear zones in granulites. What is
the nature of continental crust beneath an eclogite terrain, where did the
eclogites come from, and how did they get there? These are the problems that we
proposal to clarify. We have an exciting "target-of-opportunity" to conduct
detailed marine-land seismic reflection/refraction profiling over this eclogite
locality in the Bergen Arcs of Norway. We have been developing this project over
the last two years in cooperation with Professor Rolf Mjelde of the University
of Bergen, based on his knowledge of the area and use of the University of
Bergen research vessel for the seismic profiling. Typical of marine research
vessels, this one has a full schedule, planned years in advance, so that 2004
seemed to be the first year to work our project into the schedule. Now on
occasion of activating a new research vessel, we have just learned that we have
7 days of ship time for this eclogite project in May of 2003. We propose a
program of combined marine-land recording firing marine airguns into 15-20 OBS's
and 15 Refteks with 3-component sensors that personnel from the University of
Wyoming will set up on land, generating a highly detailed, complete data set
with close trace spacing. The striking characteristics of this type of recording
are close trace spacing over long distances and spectacular S-waves from P-wave
conversion at the ocean bottom. These clear S-wave onsets provide additional
constraints in Vp/Vs and S-wave splitting. Combination of Vp, Vs, Vp/Vs and
imaging major faults, Moho, and larger eclogite bodies should provide new,
important seismic constraints on the distribution of eclogite in the deep crust,
provenance of the eclogitic thrust sheet, nature of the Moho, and possibly fluid
pathways