* 0327425
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Breaking the Brand:  The Social Regulation of Multinational Corporations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* David Angel, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2005
* USD 11,959.00

Corporate-stakeholder relations have been significantly reconfigured over the
past decade. There is a seeming disjuncture between the transnational
coordination of corporate activities and the national and sub-national authority
of most regulatory mechanisms. Interest has increased, however, in the rise of
new forms of informal or social regulation that span traditional regulatory
boundaries. Corporate campaigns have emerged as one example of this new breed of
informal, transnational governance mechanisms. Corporate campaigns are organized
by transnational networks of stakeholders, including consumers, workers,
environmental and human rights activists, and local communities, to address a
wide range of social and environmental issues. These campaigns target
corporations directly through shareholder resolutions, boycotts, demonstrations,
and direct negotiation with corporate managers. There are numerous case studies
documenting campaign successes, yet there has yet to be a systematic analysis of
corporate campaign dynamics and outcomes. This study asks the following specific
research questions: (1) What is the depth and breadth of change that corporate
campaigns are able to effect? (2) What factors contribute to the success or
failure of a corporate campaign? (3) What are the principal spatial and inter-
organizational dynamics that structure corporate campaign outcomes? This study
will address these questions through a comparative analysis of campaigns
targeted at U.S. multinational corporations over the past decade. The research
will consist of a statistical analysis of more than 200 campaigns and in-depth
interviews with stakeholders and corporate managers involved in a purposive
sample of ten campaigns. The findings will identify the types of corporate
changes elicited by these campaigns and will explore the paths of influence
through which these campaigns gain power over corporate decision makers. The
investigators expect to demonstrate that certain corporate spatial and
competitive strategies provide more opportunities for stakeholder engagement and
influence than others.

The proposed research examines the role of social regulation in shaping
corporate image-making and corporate social and environmental performance. This
research will bridge the literature on corporate globalization and competitive
strategies with the literature on stakeholder theory and the external control of
corporations. It will analyze the strategies and spaces used by campaigns to
engage and contest corporate decision makers. This research also will examine
the role that corporate structure and strategies play in creating opportunities
for stakeholder engagement and in influencing the perceived legitimacy of
stakeholder concerns. Finally, this research will identify the distribution of
the benefits of campaign outcomes amongst different stakeholder groups and
different places. This research has potential implications for the development
of national and international regulatory priorities by identifying stakeholders,
issues, and places that are not being served by current informal governance
processes. Moreover, this research will contribute to on-going debates about the
role of external stakeholders in corporate decision making and the distribution
of the costs and benefits of global economic activities. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.