* 0327293
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstructing Amazonian Ecological History: How Humans and Natural Events Influence the Vegetation Structure in the Peruvian Amazon Floodplain
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Miguel Pinedo-Vasquez, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Recent research in landscape ecology and human geography has identified the
history of land use, natural disturbance, and persistent environmental
conditions as the three primary determinants of vegetation structure in the
landscape. In temperate and tropical forests, past land use appears to determine
contemporary vegetation more effectively than do environmental factors. These
research results need to be tested in highly dynamic regions, yet no study has
focused on the persistence of the effects of land-use history in areas where
exposure to frequent disturbance might amplify or minimize human impacts. To
begin this avenue of investigation, this doctoral dissertation project will
reconstruct and analyze the impact of human land use and river history in the
seasonally flooded Muyuy-Panguana region of the Peruvian Amazon, where the
periodic disturbance conditions imposed by river erosion and deposition interact
with land uses. Because the study site has experienced a variety of land-use
histories linked to economic booms based on agricultural and extractive products
from the 1940s to the 1980s and has been physically transformed by the floods
and meanders of the Amazon, it consists of a patchwork of landscapes
representing an ideal laboratory for such studies. This project seeks to (1)
document the history of land-use and land-cover change using historical records,
oral histories, satellite images and air photographs, (2) sample contemporary
vegetation through floristic surveys of the site, and (3) reconstruct the
history of river dynamic through archival records and remote sensing images.
These methods will be used to explain the relationship between Muyuy-Panguana's
history and its present vegetation cover. Exploiting recent developments in
geographically indexed databases and multivariate analysis techniques, the
project's integrated analysis of qualitative and quantitative data should
determine a causal relationship between present forest structure and the
histories of the landscape.

The project will test models for conservation and landscape ecology in many
regions exposed to natural disturbance and changing land use, including the
Amazon floodplain. The anticipated results will have several broad impacts.
First, the remote sensing analysis needed for this research will produce maps
and geographic databases useful for further scientific research and conservation
planning in the Amazon region. Second, understanding the combined effects of
human and natural disturbance will address the resilience of tropical
environments. Finally, by integrating the intellectual perspectives and
participation of rural community members, the project will fulfill a social role
in Muyuy-Panguana and better inform local and international policy makers about
strategies for conservation and management of the Amazon forest. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.