* 0327245
* U.S.-Japan-Hong Kong Planning Visit: Long Term Collaborative Research Studying Fe Effects on Ecosystem Structure in the Subarctic Pacific
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Mark Wells, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 07/31/2005
* USD 16,417.00

0327245 Wells

This award supports a short-term U.S-Japan-Hong Kong Planning Visit in
preparation for a long-term collaborative research project studying Fe effects
on ecosystem structure in the Sub arctic Pacific. The collaborators are
Professor Mark Wells at the University of Maine and Professor Shigenobu Takeda
at the University of Tokyo in Japan and Professor Paul Harrison at the Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology. Virtually the entire Sub arctic Pacific to
the Aleutian Islands is a High Nitrate Low Chlorophyll (HNLC) region,
characterized by persistently elevated concentrations of macronutrients
throughout the year. Independent studies have demonstrated that a shortage of
the micronutrient iron is responsible for this condition. This finding is
important because by controlling the export of carbon from surface waters, iron
may influence atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations and thus global climate.
The researchers hope to plan a series of measurements that would be extremely
important for understanding the longer term and broader effect of the iron
enrichment. The measurements may also answer questions associated with the long-
term response of the plankton community, changes in the iron chemistry and the
fate of the carbon produced by the Fe enrichment. The collaborators have
complementary scientific expertise in the field. Understanding the effects of
iron inputs (natural or globally engineered) on ecosystem structure and carbon
export in these waters is essential to obtain a predictive understanding of how
changes in iron inputs may affect global climate. The exchange of ideas and data
with Japanese and Hong Kong experts in the field will enable U.S. participants
to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future international
collaborative projects.