* 0327288
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  International Law and Indigenous Land Claims in Eastern Nicaragua
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Michael Watts, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Since the end of the Contra war in 1990, maps have played a powerful role in the
formulation of indigenous and black land claims in the Atlantic Coast region of
eastern Nicaragua. While the maps have empowered legal recognition of land
rights, they have also created a new set of political problems, particularly
where claims made by different ethnic groups overlap. Though analysis of the
basis for establishing rights to land has been linked to the ability to document
"customary use" in the area claimed, this doctoral dissertation research project
will examine the political and economic factors that figure prominently as
traditions in the formulation of land claims. This research will develop a
comparative study of two instances of overlapping land claims to analyze the
interplay between identity, territory, and control over resources. The first
case examines the Nicaraguan government's efforts to demarcate and title lands
claimed by the indigenous Mayagna community of Awas Tingni. Miskito residents of
Tasba Raya who were relocated to the region in the 1960s by a state agrarian
reform project also claim portions of this area. Awas Tingni land rights were
the subject of recent precedent-setting decision by the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights ordering the Nicaraguan government to demarcate and title lands
claimed by the community. With funding from the World Bank, the government is
using this case to test of procedures included in a recently approved land
demarcation and titling law. The second case involves overlapping land claims by
Miskito residents of Tasbapaunie and Afro-indigenous Garifuna groups residing in
the vicinity of Pearl Lagoon, both of which produced maps of their claims as
part of a World Bank commissioned land rights study. Both groups are using their
maps to develop petitions for recognition of their claims under the new law for
demarcation and titling indigenous and black lands. Miskito groups have
increasingly argued that their status as indigenous peoples should give their
claims priority over Garifuna claims in spite of the fact that the Miskito
themselves are often referred to as an Afro-indigenous group. The research
involves three components: (1) documentation and analysis of oral history
relating to the identity and land use of each group, (2) in-depth interviews
with people who have participated in mapping claims, and (3) analysis of the
similarities and differences between colonial maps depicting the region in
ethnic terms and contemporary maps of land claims. This information will be
synthesized through an analysis of peoples' everyday patterns of resource use
and social relations in comparison with what the maps show and how the claims
they depict are institutionalized, situating an analysis of the region's
changing geography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will look at how
indigenous identity is constructed through political mobilization linking
racialized dispossession with international human rights. The research will
apply spatial analytics to questions of race and the politics of identity,
building on existing debates in human geography. In particular, it will analyze
how maps are used to create rights-bearing subjects, linking social and spatial
categories in a manner legible within the frameworks of international and
national law. It will also critically examine how, when normatively applied,
such constructed understandings of identity both empower and constrain
protection of the very rights they were intended to safeguard. This research has
implications for conservation and development policy involving indigenous
peoples, international human rights law, and implementation of land reform
legislation in Nicaragua. It will also contribute to the literature in political
ecology on the links between identity and resources as well as to the
development of participatory mapping techniques and critical cartography. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;