* 0327608
* SENSORS: SOLID STATE INTEGRATED PLATFORM FOR SENSING ARRAYS
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* James Meindl, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2006
* USD 299,950.00

ABSTRACT The first objective of this proposal is to fabricate from silicon a
test platform chip (GT03) that will be used for testing of new organic
semiconductors for chemical sensing and for organic electronics. With this chip
it will be possible to compare directly the electronic performance parameters of
the new materials with those of silicon, as the "gold standard". This chip will
be particularly useful in the search for the elusive "semiconductor field-
effect" in organic semiconductors. In order to achieve a broad impact in the
engineering and scientific community the bare chip will be made available to
interested research groups developing organic field-effect transistors and gas
sensors. A uniform testing protocol will be developed that will allow comparison
of properties of these materials prepared in different laboratories. It will
expand the range of selective materials proposed for chemical sensing. The
platform is particularly suitable for organic semiconductors that can be
deposited by either solvent casting or by sublimation.

The chemical sensing and electronic chips in sensing arrays that were previously
fabricated separately will be combined in one chip in order to by-pass the low-
yield and expensive flip-chip bonding step needed for the two separate chips.
The resulting array will have CMOS electronic circuitry integrated on the same
chip. It will be the smallest, fully integrated, low power sensing platform for
gas sensing that could be incorporated into an existing portable electronics,
e.g. cell phones, pagers PDA's, in order to create a dynamically distributed
array of arrays, i.e. superarrays. The expression "dynamically distributed"
implies that the location of the individual arrays in space is not predetermined
and that it is continuously changing as the person carrying this enhanced
personal electronics moves around. The intellectual merit of this new technology
is that it enables the realization of the new, stochastic paradigm of chemical
information acquisition. Recognizing that highly specialized fabrication
facility, such as exists at the Georgia Tech, may not be available to most
research groups working in chemical sensing field we are proposing to make the
new sensing platform available to interested sensing groups in academia. Making
the chips generally available would have a broad impact on the chemical sensing
field. The interested groups should contact the PI (404 894 4828) or by e-mail:
jiri.Janata@chemistry.gatech.edu.

