* 0327177
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Knowledge Flow and Value Creation:  Integrating Structural Embeddedness and Knowledge Embeddedness in Alliance Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Susan Cohen, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2004
* USD 7,500.00

Scholars are just beginning to examine the relationship between firms' alliance
connections and their innovation outcomes and have reported intriguing yet
conflicting results. To further understanding in this area, I investigate how
characteristics of firms' alliance partners and the structure of alliance
networks jointly affect their capabilities to innovate. Firms are 'structurally
embedded' in inter-organizational networks, and these patterns of inter-firm
relations inform us about the knowledge exchange through a network, and hence
indicate specific organizational informational advantages due to firms' network
positions. However, structural approaches ignore firm heterogeneity in knowledge
possession. This study introduces the concept of 'knowledge embeddedness' to
address the fact that members of a network may possess very different types of
expertise. Knowledge embeddedness describes the relationships between a focal
firm's knowledge and its partners' knowledge, as well as the distribution of
expertise among the members of a network. I seek to integrate these two
perspectives in my thesis by proposing that network structure influences the
pattern of knowledge flow and exchange, while knowledge relations among firms
affect the content of exchange. I examine the relationships between structural
embeddedness, knowledge embeddedness, and firms' innovativeness in the
pharmaceutical industry. The pharmaceutical industry has undergone fast
technology advancement over the decades and product innovation is critical for
firms' steady growth. Nevertheless due to the complexity of technology involved,
firms often find that they lack necessary knowledge and resources, and hence
seek alliance partners to cooperate in product development. I used primary
business designation to identify a population of 228 firms in pharmaceutical
preparation industry (SIC2834) as listed by COMPUSTAT during the period from
1990 to 2000. The alliance activities of these firms will be gathered from a
variety of sources: Recombination Capital, SEC filings, and a list of industrial
newspapers and journals (such as Drug Store News, Healthcare Financial
Management, Health Industry Today, Pharmaceutical Executive, Pharmaceutical
Technology, R &amp; D Focus Drug News). I will collect patent data from USPTO,
the official U.S. patent database containing the searchable full-text patent
records. This study will contribute to existing research by developing an
integrated explanation of how network relations and partner knowledge
characteristics jointly affect innovation performance, and by investigating
whether certain network positions or partner attributes enhance both the rate of
innovation and the value of a firm's innovations. By identifying the unique and
joint contributions of structural and knowledge relationships among firms to
innovation outcomes, the study will enable managers and policy makers to more
efficiently and effectively allocate resources to research and development
initiatives. Moreover, the study has broad implications for our understanding of
how knowledge and information travel through networks of organizations. This is
important for predicting how networks influence such outcomes as the diffusion
and adoption of novel organizational forms, management practices, and new
technologies, outcomes that have wide-reaching implications for economic growth
and social welfare. The results will also be used to develop teaching materials
for courses on managing alliance networks and innovation.