* 0327185
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Globalization Grounded: Land disputes and agrarian reform in Guatemala
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Jeffrey Goodwin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2004
* USD 7,427.00

Guatemala currently faces a critical juncture. After a civil war that left
200,000 civilians dead-ended, there was guarded optimism that the peace accords
reached between the military and the guerrillas would address this country's
legacy of poverty and violence. But old problems soon re-emerged. Currently,
there are over 1,000 land disputes in Guatemala - many of them violent. This
study explores the spectrum and outcomes of peasant resistance in Guatemala in
the context of democratization and development. Utilizing a range of qualitative
research methods including in-depth interviews, participant observation and
archival investigation, this project seeks to better understand if and how land
reform can facilitate the inclusion of rural subjects into the democratic
polity. Further, it explores whether peasant mobilization for land reform is
obsolete as the twentieth century begins, with the increasing prominence of
commercial agriculture and the growing centrality of information as the
commodity that drives economic growth. This project will contribute to
sociological knowledge by bridging the sociological literature on social
movements, democratic transitions and development. Key tensions include the
conundrum posed by Barrington Moore: that democratization is often premised on
the "disappearance" of peasant protest. On the contrary, this dissertation
pursues the converse hypothesis: that peasant protest actually facilitates
democratization. In the sociology of development literature, a similar paradox
presents itself when discussions of globalization arise. Most scholars agree
that rural subjects are increasingly marginalized as globalization processes
intensify. This project explores the possibility that peasants can harness some
of the energy created by globalization and engage in the global economy in ways
that preserve a peasant identity. The broader impact of this project is the
collaboration it will facilitate between less-integrated rural actors and urban
researchers on both a national and international scale. Further, it will
contribute to policy discussions about governance in post-conflict eras and
states. Finally, it will shed light on questions of state reconstruction
relevant to the Latin American region and perhaps other parts of the world.