* 0327347
* Molecular Distributions and D/H Ratios of Marine Archaea Lipids: Evaluating their Potential as Paleosalinity Proxies
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Katherine Freeman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2007
* USD 376,820.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327347&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Archaea
constitute a significant portion of pelagic marine microbiota, with members of
the Euryarchaeota and Crenarchaeota abundant and widespread in the world's
oceans. The membranes of these organisms are composed of ether-linked isoprenoid
lipids, which are relatively recalcitrant and therefore well preserved in
sedimentary records. Recent investigations of these compounds reveal important
environmental information is recorded by their structures and their relative
abundances, including surface-water temperatures. Lipid membranes comprise the
interface between cellular life and its physical environment, and it is likely
that other environmental properties, especially salinity, are associated with
changes in the properties of membrane structures. Further, these structures are
potentially useful recorders of the hydrogen isotopic composition of water in
their growth environment, providing an independent measure of
salinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On this project, researchers at the Pennsylvania
State University will evaluate H isotopic fractionation between waters and
lipids, as well as lipid structures and their distributions in order to
determine relationships between these properties and those of waters in the
growth environment. They will survey lipids extracted from suspended particulate
matter collected at multiple depths and times from oceanic and coastal waters.
They will collect samples from the Chincoteague Bay, a relatively pristine
estuary, with waters that range spatially and seasonally from fresh to marine
and will also employ samples collected during scheduled cruises to the Black
Sea, the Mediterranean and to waters near Bermuda. They have previously
collected and archived samples from hypersaline basins in a salt-manufacturing
site on the coast of Sicily. The samples studied will range from fresh to
hypersaline conditions. Field studies will be complemented by controlled
experiments using selected Archaea taxa, grown under a range of temperatures and
salinities and using isotopically constrained substrates. The utility of this
dual-property approach will be evaluated by analysis of lipids in ODP samples
associated with the late-Miocene Messinian Salinity Crisis. A supporting MS
thesis project will be developed to investigate the lipid record associated with
the marine incursion event in the Black Sea using sediment records from the past
8,000 years&lt;br/&gt;