* 0327810
* International Workshop on Historical Preservation of Structures with Fiber Reinforced Polymer Composites;  June 10-11, 2004;  Leece Italy
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Antonio Nanni, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 06/30/2004
* USD 25,765.00

Abstract

This International Workshop on "Historical preservation of structures with FRP
composites" to be held in Lecce, Italy, on June 10-11, 2004, following the First
International Conference on Innovative Materials and Technology for Construction
and Restoration (IMTCR-04). In the last two decades, advanced composites (fiber-
reinforced polymer or FRP) have gained considerable worldwide interest and
growing acceptance in the construction industry. The historical preservation of
structures is one of the most appealing applications of FRP composites in the
construction field. However, this application presents some critical issues
still not sufficiently investigated: long-term durability of FRP-repaired
structures; compatibility of the FRP system with the parent material; minimal
invasiveness and reversibility of the upgrade; optimal material selection. All
the aforementioned issues, of paramount importance for intervention on
structures of architectural/historical interest, are also relevant when dealing
with any other category of structure, when looking at long-term performance and
global cost-benefit balance. Each of these issues requires an interdisciplinary
effort between researchers with material-oriented and structural-oriented
backgrounds and experts of architectural restoration. The primary objectives of
the workshop are to review the advances in research on the topic of the
workshop; provide to researchers with material-oriented and structural-oriented
backgrounds and to experts of architectural restoration the opportunity to
interact and develop a cooperation network; identify the gaps of knowledge on
the sub-topics of the workshop (long-term durability, compatibility, minimal
invasiveness and reversibility, and optimal material selection); identify major
barriers to the effective utilization of advanced composites for historical
preservation; renew the human network of experts in the field and integrate new
entrants; prioritize and document the needs for effective research policies and
programs.

