* 0327955
* GOALI:  Rheological Investigation of Polymer Melts in Equibiaxial Elongational Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* David Venerus, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 12/31/2007
* USD 293,614.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0327955 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: DAVID C. VENERUS INSTITUTION:
ILLINOIS INST. OF TECH.

GOALI: RHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF POLYMER MELTS UN EQUIBIAXIAL ELONGATIONAL
FLOWS

This collaborative study, funded through the GOALI program, involves an academic
institution and two companies: a major instrument manufacturer (TA Instruments),
and a major producer of polymer resin (BPAmoco Chemical Company). The results of
this study will significantly deepen our understanding of polymer melt flow
behavior and have a direct impact on both the engineering and science of this
important class of materials. A modified lubricated squeezing flow technique,
for which a U.S. Patent was issued to the principal investigator of this
project, will be further developed to enable a quantitative rheological study of
molten polymers in equibiaxial elongational flows. The new technique will be
capable of performing constant strain rate and constant stress tests over a
range of parameters that equal or exceed those of any currently available device
or technique for equibiaxial elongational flow rheological measurements. The new
technique will be used to study the rheological behavior of a series of
polyethylene and polypropylene melts in constant strain rate stress growth and
constant stress creep flows. The polymers considered include resins synthesized
using both conventional and metallocene catalysts allowing for a systematic
study of branching structure and molecular weight distribution on rheological
behavior. The equibiaxial elongational flow data will be complemented by data
from shear and uniaxial elongational flows. These new data will provide
previously unavailable insight to the importance of molecular structure and flow
type that will benefit several aspects of polymer materials development ranging
from synthesis to plastics manufacturing. The unique educational experience and
training acquired by students in this collaborative project involving academia
and industry greatly enhances their ability to make significant contributions as
future engineers or educators.