* 0327318
* VERtical Transport in the Global Ocean (VERTIGO)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* David Siegel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 99,998.00

In this study, researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Virginia
Institute of Marine Science, University of California - Santa Cruz, University
of California - Santa Barbara, University of Tasmania, and NIWA-Australia will
work collaboratively to answer a difficult question in marine biogeochemistry:
What controls the efficiency of particle transport between the surface and deep
ocean? More specifically, what is the fate of sinking particles leaving the
upper ocean and what factors influence remineralization length scales for
different sinking particle classes? Knowing the efficiency of particle transport
is important for an accurate assessment of the ocean carbon sink. Globally, the
magnitude and efficiency of the biological pump will in part modulate levels of
atmospheric carbon dioxide.

The research team intends to test two basic hypotheses about remineralization
control, namely: (1) particle source characteristics are the dominant control on
the efficiency of particle transport; and/or that (2) mid-water processing,
either by zooplankton or bacteria, controls transport efficiency. To do so, they
will conduct process studies at sea focused on particle flux and composition
changes in the upper 500-1000m of the ocean. The basic approach is to examine
changes in particle composition and flux with depth within a given source region
using a combination of approaches, many of which are new to the field. These
include neutrally buoyant sediment traps, particle pumps, settling columns and
respiration chambers, along with the development of new biological and
geochemical tools for an integrated biogeochemical assessment of the biological
pump. Two sites will be studied extensively on three-week process study cruises:
the Hawaii Ocean Time-series site (HOT) and a new moored time-series site in the
subarctic NW Pacific (Japanese site K2; 47oN 160oE). There are strong contrasts
between these sites in rates of production, export, particle composition and
expected remineralization length scales.

Evidence for variability in the flux vs. depth relationship of sinking particles
is not in dispute, but the controls on particle transport efficiency through the
twilight zone remain poorly understood. A lack of reliable flux and particle
characterization data within the twilight zone has hampered our ability to make
progress in this area, and no single approach is likely to resolve these issues.
The proposed study will apply quantitative modeling to determine the net effects
of the individual particle processes on the effective transport of carbon and
other elements and to place the shipboard observations in the context of spatial
and temporal variations in these processes

Besides the obvious contributions to the study of the oceanic and planetary
carbon cycles, there are broader outcomes and impacts forthcoming from this
project. Graduate and undergraduate students will be included in all aspects of
the research, and the involvement of non-US PIs will encourage exchange of
students and post-docs between labs in different countries. In addition, the
component groups will continue to maintain science web sites designed for both
public and scientific exchange where the broader and specific goals and outcomes
of this work can be communicated.

This project is supported cooperatively by the NSF Chemical Oceanography and
Biological Oceanography Programs.