* 0327550
* Forces/Interactions and Fields: Toward a Metaphysics of the Actual World
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Jessica Wilson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Fellowship Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 12/31/2004
* USD 73,117.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES 0327550&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Kane, University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;"Forces/Interactions and Fields: Toward a Metaphysics of the
Actual World"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metaphysical debates often proceed with
little attention to contemporary scientific concepts, hypotheses and
methodology. The co-PI's past research into physicalism and emergentism shows
that philosophers cannot always afford this neglect, for viably formulating
these metaphysical theses requires appeal, first, to the notion of a fundamental
force or interaction; and second, (insofar as fundamental forces/interactions
are standardly taken to be systems of interacting fields) to the notion of a
field. More generally, our best-confirmed scientific theories are field
theories; yet with few exceptions (including Sunny Auyang, Tian Cao, and Paul
Teller) philosophers have not engaged the task of working out the
presuppositions and entailments of a field metaphysics, and metaphysical debates
commonly presuppose the sort of atomistic metaphysics associated with Democritus
and Hume.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to give the co-PI the scientific
understanding necessary to help correct this neglect. The first component
consists in studying advanced physics at the University of Michigan, under the
committed guidance of Gordon Kane, an eminent physicist working on super-
symmetric extensions of quantum field theory. The course of study will consist
in auditing several graduate courses in modern physics, supplemented by directed
study of additional texts on gauge theories and quantum field theory, coupled
with weekly meetings with Kane addressing the technical and conceptual
foundations of contemporary physics.&lt;br/&gt;The second component of the
proposal consists in applying physics training to projects in fundamental
ontology (especially as pertaining to a field metaphysics), and disseminating
the results in metaphysics and philosophy of science journals. Relevant papers
include "The Particular Nature of the Quantum Field" and "The Reality of Non-
field Particulars on a Field Metaphysics". More broadly, the co-PI will explore
the impact of the concepts of force/interaction and field on metaphysical
debates concerning causality, laws and modality. Since these debates tend to
proceed under the atomistic principle that there are no necessary (ontological
or causal) connections in nature (which principle is undermined from the
perspective of a scientifically-informed field metaphysics), the proposed
research is of considerable potential impact. The proposal also strikes a
triple-blow for gender equality in three of the most male-dominated areas of the
academy: physics, foundational metaphysics, and philosophy of
physics.&lt;br/&gt;