* 0327527
* CMG: A Graph-Based Approach for Generating Pore Networks to Represent the Uncertainty of the Subsurface's Pore Structure
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Markus Hilpert, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 331,038.00

Predicting flow and transport processes in the subsurface is of major interest
in the geosciences. Quantitative predictions may be derived by simulating pore
networks, i.e., graph-based representations of porous media. The most crucial
part of this concept is to represent the uncertainty of the pore structure of
the subsurface, that is, to find pore networks, which adequately represent the
topological and metric characteristics of a porous medium. Thinning is commonly
used to obtain pore networks from digital images of porous media. However, it
typically yields ambiguous partitions of the porous medium into pores and
grains. This proposal develops a dual approach for subdividing (an image of) a
pore space into pores and defining a corresponding pore network. The pore
network and the grain matrix will be derived from digital images of porous media
and be represented by a dual pair of cellular complexes, which uniquely
determine the pores, the grains, and the formation of pores and pore throats by
grains. The networks will be used to analyze the uncertainty in pore structure
of subsurface systems and to simulate multiphase flow.

Groundwater is abused with pollution sources ranging from leaking sewers,
landfills, small workshops and garages, to large industrial plants. Evaluating
the contamination that occurs from such sources, assessing the risk to human and
ecological health, and planning cleanup strategies can all be facilitated by the
use of mathematical models. These models describe how fluids flow and
contaminants are transported and react in such systems. A key problem in
modeling subsurface systems is their very complex pore geometry. This research
will develop a novel and mathematically rigorous approach for representing these
complex pore geometries by pore networks (in the simplest case: spheres
connected by tubes) that adequately and uniquely represent the connectivity and
geometry of the original soils. This new approach relates the topology
(connectivity) of the pore space to the topology of the solid phase by using
advanced concepts from mathematical graph theory. The resulting networks will
answer many questions that are concerned with the fate and transport of
hazardous chemicals and liquids in the subsurface.