* 0327181
* Collaborative Research: A Parameterization of Near-Shore Ocean Chemical Dynamics for Global Ocean Circulation/Carbon Cycle Models
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* David Archer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 244,272.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327181 /
OCE-0327120&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On this project, researchers at the University
of Chicago and the University of New Hampshire will develop a parameterization
of the shallow water carbon cycle for inclusion into global-scale ocean carbon
cycle models (henceforth referred to as GCMs). GCMs are, by necessity, too
coarsely gridded to resolve the physics and biochemistry of shallow waters and
therefore suffer in their treatment of processes like the burial of organic
carbon, denitrification, and CaCO3 compensation. As a result, they fail to
incorporate the effect of the ocean margins on the global ocean carbon cycle and
climate. Numerous regional studies have examined the role of the continental
shelves in the export of carbon, iron, and as a sink for nitrogen. It therefore
seems timely, to synthesize the data from such field studies, examine the
sensitivity of sediment-water fluxes and across-shelf biogeochemical transport
to various parameters, and build a parameterization that will capture the
contribution of the ocean margins in the global ocean carbon cycle over glacial-
interglacial time scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step, this project
will focus on building such a parameterization based on two regions that have
been extensively studied, but differ in their characteristics: The eastern US
continental shelf and the western US coasts of Oregon and California. It will
act in response to parameters like the width and depth of continental shelves,
changes in wind stress and open ocean circulation, and continental runoff, while
using the Muds model to estimate the sediment-water fluxes. The sensitivity of
coastal biogeochemical fluxes to these parameters will be tested with a high
resolution coastal ocean circulation model configured to these sites, before
generalizing to other regions. The parameterization will then be coupled to a
GCM at every coastal grid point, providing the chemical fluxes to and from
coastal waters and sediments. The full model (GCM + coastal submodel) will be
used to assess the effect of shallow waters on the carbon cycle over glacial
cycles while responding to glacial / interglacial sea level change. It will also
be used to make future assessments of the shallow water CaCO3 dissolution
response to fossil fuel CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;