* 0328329
* Collaborative Research:    Lagrangian Statistics and Acceleration in Turbulent Shear Flows:    Simulation and Modeling
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Stephen Pope, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 11/30/2006
* USD 244,481.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0328329, CTS-0328314 PROPOSAL TYPE: INVESTIGATOR INITIATED
(COLLABORATIVE) PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: STEPHEN B. POPE, PUI-KUEN YEUNG
INSTITUTION: CORNELL UNIVERSITY, GEORGIA INST. TECH.

LAGRANGIAN STATISTICS AND ACCELERATION IN TURBULENT SHEAR FLOWS: SIMULATION AND
MODELING This research is focused on the systematic use of direct numerical
simulations (DNS) to study the statistical properties of Lagrangian fluid
particle motion in turbulent shear flows, and the development of new stochastic
models based on the fluid particle acceleration. Turbulent fluid flows are
prevalent in several engineering disciplines as well as in oceanography and
atmospheric sciences. A Lagrangian viewpoint is essential in describing several
phenomena, such as turbulent dispersion, and also in turbulence modeling using
the probability density function method, which has proven particularly
successful for turbulent combustion. Despite recent progress in the field there
is still a lack of knowledge concerning important effects of anisotropy and
inhomogeneity, which are generally present in applications. New and
comprehensive Lagrangian statistics covering a substantial Reynolds-number range
are to be extracted from DNS of canonical flows. Success of the new simulations
will contribute to the resolution of many scaling issues and hence enable the
rigorous development of a new class of stochastic models for the acceleration,
with tensor coefficients appropriate to anisotropic and inhomogeneous flows.
This work is expected to lead to significant advances in turbulence modeling
applicable in diverse contexts such as: droplet coalescence in atmospheric
clouds; modeling of turbulent flame behavior in the design of improved
combustion devices; and fluid-mechanical models of (small) marine organism
behavior which has implications for the oceanic food chain and fishery
management. At least two jointly supervised PhD students will work on this
project using very large-scale scientific computing platforms. This training,
together with the knowledge they accumulate in the research process, will
prepare them well for future careers in academia or industry.

*co-funded jointly by the Fluid Dynamics & Hydraulics, and Combustion & Plasma
Systems programs