* 0328381
* TAUP 2003, Eighth International Workshop on Topics in Astroparticle and Underground Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Wick Haxton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard  N. Boyd
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The funds request from the NSF in support of the
international&lt;br/&gt;conference Topics in Astrophysical and Underground
Physics will&lt;br/&gt;be used to support local and/or travel expenses for two
groups&lt;br/&gt;of participants. The first are young researchers,
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students and postdoctoral research associates, who lack
adequate&lt;br/&gt;resources to otherwise attend. TAUP is an excellent meeting
&lt;br/&gt;for young researchers because of the opportunities to
speak&lt;br/&gt;in afternoon workshops and to participate in the poster
session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second are participants wanting to participate
in the &lt;br/&gt;afternoon workshop on outreach and education. Several key
&lt;br/&gt;people -- a public school teacher active in FermiLab
outreach,&lt;br/&gt;an outreach specialist for a major science center -- will
be&lt;br/&gt;able to attend only if we can support their travel. The
outreach&lt;br/&gt;workshop is new to TAUP, suggested by Sandro Bettini,
Director&lt;br/&gt;of Gran Sasso and the chair of the TAUP2001 organizing
committee.&lt;br/&gt;Its purpose is to bring together outreach specialists from
&lt;br/&gt;international underground laboratories (as well as other
&lt;br/&gt;laboratories) to discuss how outreach programs can be
coordinated&lt;br/&gt;and enhanced. The TAUP workshop is being organized by
Roberta&lt;br/&gt;Antolini (Gran Sasso director of outreach), Len Bugel
(involved&lt;br/&gt;with FermiLab outreach to public schools), and Evalyn
Gates&lt;br/&gt;(with the Adler Planetarium). Bettini will also address
this&lt;br/&gt;topic in his plenary talk. There is keen US interest in
this&lt;br/&gt;topic because of outreach plans for the proposed
NUSEL.&lt;br/&gt;