* 0328282
* Fire-Mediated Changes in the Arctic System: Interactions of Changing Climate and Human Activities
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* T. Scott Rupp, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,347,857.00

Perhaps the most urgent challenge facing humanity is to understand the factors
determining the limits to resilience of regional systems that are changing
directionally in biophysical and social drivers. This research program will
document the changing role of fire, particularly as affected by human
activities, on the Arctic Climate System and its human residents. The research
will focus on Alaska and Yukon Territory, a large regional system in which fire
is the dominant disturbance mechanism. The proposed research has intellectual
merit at several levels: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. It will assess the changing
role of human activities in the fire regime of the Alaska- Yukon region as this
is determined by changes in the effects of people on fire (ignition and
suppression) and the effects of fire on people, including economics (e.g.,
wages, property risk) and ecosystem services (e.g., game, berries, firewood,
timber, climate feedbacks). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. It will evaluate the
consequences of climate- and human-induced changes in fire regime on land-
surface properties that are important to climate. This is a critical link
between research on human dimensions and research on climate feedbacks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. It will document the past and plausible future changes
in climate feedbacks in the Alaska-Yukon region that result from climate warming
and from climate- and human- induced changes in fire regime. It will compare the
contribution to atmospheric heating that comes from (a) trace-gas fluxes vs.
water/energy exchange and (b) arctic vs. boreal landscapes. This is the first
comparison of the role of human activities within and outside the Arctic on the
Arctic Climate System. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research has broad
implications for assessment of both the short- and long-term consequences of the
current policy of fire suppression near communities and roads. Fire management
in North America is currently struggling with issues related to the wildland-
urban interface. This modeling effort is one of the first to explicitly
represent suppression in a dynamic landscape fire succession model and will
provide a management tool for assessing the consequences of different fire
management strategies (i.e., reactive versus preventative) for present and
future fire regimes. Because of the importance of fire-fighting wages in the
economy of rural communities, this has implications for the sustainability of
subsistence activities. It will also assess the overall climate feedbacks caused
by human activities outside northern regions (global warming) as compared to
effects resulting from human interactions with the fire regime of northern
regions. Because fire-induced changes in vegetation may be one of the few large
negative feedbacks to high-latitude warming, fire management provides a
potential tool to mitigate this warming. The utility of this mitigation strategy
depends, however, on the net effects of fire on climate and on human welfare.
This study is the first attempt to assess the potential impacts of such a
radical regional-scale effort to reduce high-latitude climate warming. This
research enhances interdisciplinary research by integrating natural and social
sciences and including local residents in our research team. These are important
steps in effective inclusion of human-dimensions research in Arctic System
Science. &lt;br/&gt;