* 0328173
* SGER:  Invasion and Establishment Dynamics of West Nile Virus in the Rio Grande Valley of New Mexico, Colorado and Texas.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Gregory Glass, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2006
* USD 49,999.00

This SGER project will sample mosquito populations and West Nile Virus
establishment along a nearly 800 km north-south gradient of the Rio Grande
valley in Texas, New Mexico, and Colorado. Intensive sampling in the summer of
2002 showed no infected mosquitoes, and it is predicted that WNV will become
established in the Rio Grande region during the summer of 2003. The goals of
this project are to (1) document the initial establishment patterns of West Nile
Virus (WNV) in the Rio Grande Basin mosquito populations, (2) determine the rate
and directions of spread of WNV subsequent to initial establishment events, (3)
ascertain the predominant environmental factors (including climate dynamics,
avian host population abundances and distributions, habitat classes, and human
land use patterns) that drive the population dynamics of both mosquitoes and WNV
occurrence, and (4) apply the field data to parameterize both GIS and
mathematical dispersal models in an attempt to develop predictive capabilities
for the continued expansion of WNV. The intellectual merit for this project lies
in the potential to describe in detail the first colonization of an avian- and
mosquito-borne virus into a large riverine ecosystem (the Rio Grande), and
develop a mathematical understanding of its subsequent spread. The broader
applications of the project results include predictive models for forecasting
annual distributions and intensities of WNV in the Rio Grande and potentially
other rivers of the Southwest, as well as an understanding for other future
introductions of mosquito-borne diseases (e.g., dengue fever or Rift Valley
fever) into North America.