* 0328659
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Community Identities in the Chimu Empire
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Terence D'Altroy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Terence D'Altroy, Scott Kremkau will analyze data
gathered during his archaeological excavations and survey work at several Chimu
settlements in the Chaman Valley on the North Coast of Peru. Excepting the
Inkas, the Chimu empire was the largest native polity in pre?Columbian South
America. Beginning in the 13th century, the Chimu conquered most of the Northern
and Central coasts of Peru, and ruled over an ethically and geographically
diverse empire. However, much of the archaeological research on the North Coast
of Peru has focused on earlier civilizations, and only a relatively small number
of Chimu sites have been excavated, most of which are large political centers
such as the capital of Chan Chan. This project will examine the Chimu conquest
of the Chaman valley and what effect it had on the people who were conquered.
Specifically, it will look at how conquered groups collaborated with, resisted,
or remained unaffected by the intrusion of the Chimu by examining communities
that were inhabited before, during, and after the Chimu conquest.

This approach is adopted here because historical, archaeological, and
ethnographic studies all show that the community is a pivotal setting within
which positions of power, status, and identity are negotiated and different
social networks become intermeshed. Communities are both physical groups of
people defined by social identities and ideas manifested in subtle ways. Thus a
community of people can be understood and viewed from many different
perspectives based on the differing experiences and beliefs of the people who
compose it. Using artifacts, architecture and settlement patterns, this project
will investigate how existing social identities and social networks changed
following the conquest of the valley by the Chimu. The main question examined in
this project is whether these communities maintained their existing identities
and social networks, adopted the identities of the foreign invaders, or created
new ones by blending both the traditional and the new. To address this issue,
the project will examine communities that were socially and politically
stratified, but ethnically homogeneous. While the historical record describes
several kinds of communities on the North Coast, often organized by craft
specialization, this project will focus on communities of farmers, which made up
the majority of the population in the region during this period.

This project will gather and analyze a significant corpus of empirical data, in
addition to addressing significant theoretical and historical issues. The goal
is to contribute both to future research on the prehistory of the same time and
place and to broader, more comparative studies. The project also has a central
educational mission, as its personnel include Peruvian and American students and
archaeologists, and it contains plans for broader community development and the
dissemination of information. Educational displays will be incorporated into
existing museum components in the towns of Chepen and San Jose de Moro created
by the Proyecto Arqueologico San Jose de Moro since 1999. These displays are
designed to help promote the archaeological resources of the area for tourism
and to teach local people the value of archaeological remains in an effort to
deter looting and site destruction through agricultural development.