* 0328832
* CRUI: Assessing Environmental Life Histories of Freshwater Fish: Applications of Otolith Microchemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Robyn Hannigan, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 11/30/2007
* USD 723,665.00

This interdisciplinary investigation will foster a better understanding of the
variations in trace element concentrations in fish ear stones (otoliths) and
study the utilization of these variations in reconstucting environmental life
histories of freshwater fish. A central goal is to develop this technique for
use in freshwater fisheries studies by testing the ability of otolith
microchemistry to record small variations in water chemistry within a watershed.
This research is made possible by recent developments in analytical chemistry.
Specifically, the development of laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma mass
spectroscopy (LA-ICP-MS) makes possible an interdisciplinary collaboration that
brings together complementary expertise in field ecology, trace element
geochemistry and analytical chemistry. The otoliths of fish are key indicators
of fish life history as the layers of the otolith record the chemistry of the
water in which the fish lived at the time of otolith deposition. With these
layers deposited daily we can use the chemical variations in the otoliths to
chemically fingerprint the nursery habitats. The distribution of a suite of
elements and isotopes in otoliths (including Ba, Sr, Mg, Ca, the rare earths,
Pb, d18O, d13C, and 87Sr) will be studied to determine elemental and isotopic
variation within a population of brown trout, Salmo trutta, in the Little Red
River watershed of central Arkansas. The major thrust of this project is to
develop the technique of using otolith microchemistry to reconstruct
environmental life histories of fresh water fish. This study will provide a
better understanding of otolith microchemistry which could be applied to a wide
range of concerns that may be biological, anthropological or environmental in
nature. The project will also train students in these various cross-disciplinary
studies.