* 0328635
* Societal Differences in Innovation Systems: Small vs Large-Scale Apparel Supply Chains
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Peter Doeringer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 06/30/2007
* USD 99,982.00

This project studies innovation, and its diffusion, within small-scale apparel
supply chains. Trends to large-scale mass production technologies dominate the
large apparel manufacturers. However, as production by large-scale supply chains
continues to move offshore, there is growing evidence that the future of the
industry in industrialized countries may lie with smaller-scale supply chains
serving quick response markets for very short-cycle fashion products. Innovation
in the small supplier sector, long marginal to the apparel industries of most
industrialized countries, is opening new sources of productivity and new market
niches that are very difficult for offshore suppliers to enter.

Unlike supply chains driven by large firms, there are major societal differences
in small-scale supply chains. These researchers have identified several
different supply chain models in the United States and Europe -- a global jobber
model (France), a quick fashion model (France, Italy, and the UK), a rescue-shop
model (the United States), and a district model (Italy). Differences in consumer
preferences and the structure of retailing can explain some of these societal
differences, but the major explanations lie in quick and flexible manufacturing,
the externalities of production networks, and the incremental innovations
derived from "tacit" knowledge. Future challenges involve developing ways to
make "codified" knowledge and new technologies accessible to small firms,
establishing new coordinating mechanisms within small-scale supply chain
networks, and finding new ways to link small-scale suppliers to mass retail
chains. To assist in developing these improvements, this project will analyze
these societal differences, using field research and key-informant surveys in
the United States, France, the UK, and Italy.

This research will advance knowledge about the institutional sources of
innovation and national productivity growth. It will also help to refine
theories of the firm, business networks, and strategic business behavior in
several social science disciplines -economics, economic sociology, political
science, and regional science. Results will strengthen the competitiveness of
the apparel industry through improved innovation processes, so that the industry
can continue to provide jobs and entrepreneurship opportunities for immigrants
and other disadvantaged workers. The proposal outlines concrete dissemination
and technical assistance efforts to achieve these goals.