* 0328071
* (TSE03-H) Assessment Tool and Visualization for Regional Supply Chain Impacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* H. Scott Matthews, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 393,000.00

This grant provides funding to construct and demonstrate a decision-support
&lt;br/&gt;and visualization tool to examine the spatial distribution of supply
chain &lt;br/&gt;environmental impacts and sustainability implications of
producing many &lt;br/&gt;different goods and services in the United States.
This work builds upon &lt;br/&gt;an existing 500-sector economic input-output
model of the United States &lt;br/&gt;economy that has been used in conjunction
with energy, environmental, and &lt;br/&gt;other data to show where in the
supply chain impacts occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, most models in this
domain provide only total national level &lt;br/&gt;estimates. This project will
take the first steps to highly&lt;br/&gt;detailed estimates in this project by
providing regional and state-level&lt;br/&gt;indicators. This method should also
allow specific firms to compare their &lt;br/&gt;known supply chains with our
estimates from each sector. Local analyses of &lt;br/&gt;economic changes
typically omit the many indirect supply chain effects that &lt;br/&gt;occur. For
example, the emissions related to automobile manufacturing &lt;br/&gt;extend far
beyond the assembly plant. The result of this project will &lt;br/&gt;trace
purchases among 485 economic sectors and identify&lt;br/&gt;possible supplier
locations among existing plants. The spatial&lt;br/&gt;distribution of impacts,
the location of supply chain and transportation&lt;br/&gt;routes will be
visualized in a Geographic Information System (GIS).&lt;br/&gt;Typical analyses
include location of a new automobile assembly plant,&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure
investment, shifts to ecommerce, growth in service&lt;br/&gt;sectors, etc. Use
of the analysis system is intended help reduce&lt;br/&gt;environmental effects
of the regional economy, e.g., by reducing&lt;br/&gt;transportation demands,
moving suppliers closer to the production&lt;br/&gt;facilities, showing a firm's
indirect impacts, etc. With free availability &lt;br/&gt;on the World Wide Web,
we anticipate widespread use of the system.&lt;br/&gt;