* 0328601
* Learning to Perform Moderation in Online Forums
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Shlomo Zilberstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,843.00

Learning to Perform Moderation in Online Forums

Online discussion forums are a valuable resource for people looking to find
information, discuss ideas, and get advice on the Internet. The number of forums
continues to grow rapidly, covering such topics as politics, technical news and
advice, medical issues, and product ratings and opinions. Unfortunately, many
forums have too much activity, resulting in information overload. Moderation
systems are implemented in some forums as a way to handle this problem, but due
to sparsity issues, they are often not sufficient. This project is aimed at
automating the moderation process, which currently relies entirely on humans. A
framework for learning to perform machine moderation is developed by finding
patterns in the moderations made by humans. Four fundamental research challenges
are addressed: (1) Identify features that define a good or bad comment and
develop methods to extract these features efficiently; (2) Develop classifiers
that can be trained to moderate arbitrary comments with high accuracy; (3) Use
the knowledge acquired in training on moderated forums in different, possibly
unmoderated, forums; (4) Develop a system to combine human and machine
moderation effectively. Millions of people already use online forums on a
regular basis. This project will produce technology that will improve the
quality of service provided to users of online forums and reduce the cost of
operation by reducing substantially the amount of human moderation that is
needed. The broader impact of the project includes training graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of Massachusetts, traditional and non-
traditional dissemination effort involving deployment of the resulting
technology, and a newly formed alliance with an international research team at
INRIA, France.

http://anytime.cs.umass.edu/shlomo/research/MODERATE.html