* 0329136
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Preparation of Some Diatomaceous Earth Products for Special Industrial Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Kevin Powers, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 22,000.00

0329136&lt;br/&gt;Powers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports a
joint research project between Dr. Kevin Powers, Particles Engineering Research
Center (PERC), University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida and Dr. Suzan
Ibrahim, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute, Helwan,
Egypt. They plan to conduct studies involving the beneficiation,
characterization and evaluation of two grades (one high grade and on low grade)
of North African deposits of diatomaceous earth, a sedimentary deposit made up
of amorphous hydrous silica cell walls of dead diatoms with desirable
characteristics of low density, high porosity, and high surface area. These
characteristics coupled with their inertness, abrasiveness and other
characteristics make them extremely valuable in diverse industrial and domestic
applications. The Egyptian team will focus on the beneficiation of the ore
material. The U.S. team will be in evaluating the effectiveness and quality of
the beneficiated material through particle characterization, permeability
testing, electron microscopy and other testing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope:
Diatomaceous earth or diatomite is fine-grained siliceous sedimentary rock
consisting primarily of amorphous opaline silica with minor amounts of organic
residue, secondary minerals, as well as co-deposited non-diatomaceous or
crystalline clastic debris. Generally, for high-grade ores, gentle crushing is
applied, followed by drying, and milling in certain mills to avoid ore
destruction. Ores of low-grade have to be wet processed to remove the
accompanied contaminants. Physical properties of processed diatomite that
provide unique commercial value in a broad spectrum of market end-uses include
ornate fine structure, low bulk density, and high porosity and surface area.
Other properties are mild abrasiveness, high absorptive capacity, insulating
ability, relative inertness, and high brightness. End-use markets are diverse
and range from insulating brick and absorbents through quality sensitive filter
aids and premium quality functional fillers. New significant uses include
purification of plasmid DNA, high performance adsorbents. This is an
economically important mineral in both the United States and Egypt. The research
under this proposal will provide better understanding of the beneficiation
processes and the characteristics of the resulting products. The research
results will be disseminated in both countries via publications and within the
PERC by seminars and participation of undergraduate students associated with the
two institutions. &lt;br/&gt;