* 0329247
* Difficult Problems in Stereo and Motion Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Gerard Medioni, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 220,000.00

Robotics and Computer Vision
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#: 0329247&lt;br/&gt;Title: Difficult Problems in Stereo and Motion
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;PI: Medioni, Gerard&lt;br/&gt;U of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to address two difficult
problems in stereo and motion analysis. These two areas of computer vision have
been explored with numerous approaches and very good results have been achieved,
although for limited types of scenes, such as a single, smooth and textured
surface. Occlusion is a cause of many remaining difficulties, since most
algorithms cannot operate on areas visible in one image only. Furthermore, even
though the human visual system has no difficulty estimating the depth or
velocity of occluded objects, computer vision systems are incapable of that.
They either produce arbitrary results for the occluded regions, or, at best,
mark them as occluded. The second issue we need to address is the need for
processing at multiple scales. Many real scenes contain objects that are
perceived at different scales, both due to variations in size and level of
detail and due to variations in texture density. A multiple scale processing
scheme is necessary for processing such scenes. It must be capable of detecting
and preserving fine details, not allowing larger or richer in texture regions to
dominate smaller or less textures ones, achieving good continuation of
structures, and filling in missing data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome these
unavoidable difficulties, it is proposed to address stereo and motion analysis
from a perceptual organization point of view using the tensor voting framework.
It is claimed that tokens, generated by matching corresponding pixels in the two
images, form coherent perceptual structures in the appropriate space, while
erroneous matches generate outlier tokens. The tensor voting framework allows us
to efficiently detect perceptual structures without employing parametric models,
which makes it possible to handle arbitrary structures. Furthermore, the tensor
voting framework is non-iterative, requires no initial estimate and has only one
critical parameter, the scale of voting. It is proposed to explicit handle
occlusion by incorporating monocular information from the images in conjunction
with the results of binocular processing. Our proposed methodology not only
detects occluded regions, but also computes estimates for the disparity or
velocity of these regions, as shown in the preliminary results presented in the
project description. Instead of compromising the quality of the results by
selecting a single scale of analysis for the entire scene, which would be sub-
optimal in most regions, our approach automatically infers the smallest scale
that can preserve the finer details, then proceeds with larger scales to ensure
good continuation in regions with sparse or missing
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The preliminary results compare favorably to the best
algorithms reported to date, including some standard data sets. Based on these
results, the proposed approach is expected to significantly advance the state of
the art. The proposed research will also have an impact in the learning of both
graduate and undergraduate students at USC, and will be made available to the
scientific community through publications and presentations we intend to make,
as well as on the World Wide Web. It is believed that addressing the
difficulties described here is a critical step for the development of
operational computer vision systems, since it is an attempt to bridge the gap
between image acquisition and high-level vision, both of which are at a more
mature state than mid-level computer vision.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;