* 0329090
* Lowering the Barriers to Successful Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Brad Myers, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,200,000.00

Although computer programming has existed in its modern form for half a century,
it remains accessible only to a small fraction of the population. While
programming is an inherently difficult activity, there are currently many
barriers that prevent large portions of the population from learning to program
a computer. Some of these barriers can be overcome through new facilities in
programming environments. Current advanced programming environments provide a
number of tools to help programmers construct programs: direct manipulation
facilities to set up user interface widgets, code editors with coloring and
indenting, and various pop-up menus that help construct code. However, there is
little support to help users write the code that handles the dynamic responses
to events and high-level behaviors. Furthermore, the tools for debugging code
when something goes wrong are not much different than what has been available
for 60 years: print statements, break-points and inspecting the values of
variables. This is in spite of the fact that research shows that debugging and
specifying the dynamic behavior of code are some of the most difficult aspects
of programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Alice, a programming
environment that makes it very easy to program interactive 3D graphics, will be
augmented to provide significantly better tools to help both novice and expert
programmers develop and debug their programs. A number of novel ideas that have
not yet appeared in any system will be implemented, along with the best ideas
from prior systems and research (which have never been combined into one
system). Thorough formative and summative user testing of the ideas will provide
an understanding of which of the features are most useful; this will guide
further refinement of Alice so it does the best possible job of guiding
programmers to create correctly working solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to addressing the mechanical issues of programming, Alice provides an
opportunity to address the fact that relatively few women learn to program,
which can be called a sociological barrier. Many girls turn away from science
and technology during their middle school years, usually never to return. Middle
school girls represent a particularly difficult challenge, requiring a highly
motivating system with tremendous mechanical support. The PIs' approach to
lowering the social barriers is to provide programming as a means to other
motivating ends, especially storytelling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed research will be to discover new techniques to aide in the
construction and debugging of programs, and to measure and validate the impact
and effectiveness of these techniques with both novice and expert programmers.
The techniques envisioned to help with code creation include: graphical and
textual editors for storyboards that will help transition story ideas into code;
demonstrational and direct manipulation techniques for specifying dynamic
behaviors; check-pointing and undo facilities so programmers can more easily
explore multiple solutions and backtrack to a known state when necessary; smart
copy-and-paste that will help in transforming and reusing code; support for
collaboration and sharing of code; tools that will suggest likely causes and
fixes for run-time errors; and embedded special-purpose editors to help
construct Boolean expressions and scientific formulas. Techniques to support
understanding, testing and debugging include: providing easy inspection of data
so programmers can tell what is happening; pausing or break-pointing on any
program event including objects that are being changed, created, or deleted;
changing values at run time to explore the effects; providing a time-line
visualization to show important events and enabling programs to run forwards and
backwards from any point; support for asking "why" questions that will tie
graphics and program events to the code that caused them; support for asking
"why not" questions, which will use heuristics to propose reasons why some event
did not happen; and search capabilities so programmers can find variables with
particular values, or objects with certain
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts resulting
from this research will be to help make programming more accessible to novice
programmers, and more effective for both novice and expert programmers. One
important target group will be middle school boys and girls who are not
necessarily motivated to learn programming. The PIs believe they can make
programming accessible and compelling to this audience, while at the same time
making it easier for experienced programmers. These benefits will be evaluated
using thorough user tests at all points of the design and implementation.