* 0329318
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Hydrogen Production by Photovoltaic Powered Electrolysis
* O/D,OISE
* 08/08/2002,04/30/2006
* Olusegun Ilegbusi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2006
* USD 32,800.00

0138182&lt;br/&gt;Ilegbusi &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project between Dr. Olusegun Ilegbusi, Department of
Mechanical, Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, Northeastern University,
Boston, Massachusetts and Dr. Mahmut Mat, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Nigde University, Nigde, Turkey. This project is a combined theoretical and
experimental study to understand hydrogen development and the hydrodynamics of
bubbles in an alkaline electrolyzer. Other parameters to be investigated include
current density, applied potential, electrolyte and electrode materials, spacing
between the anode, cathode and membrane, and temperature and ambient pressure. A
two-phase mathematical model will be developed for the electrolytic process. The
model will consider heat and mass transfer, concentrations and ion transport,
electricity field, and chemical reaction occurring at the anode and the cathode.
Experiments will be designed and performed to validate and improve the
mathematical model. The fluid velocity, gas fraction, and bubble growth rate
will be measured using Laser Doppler Velocimeter (LDV) at Northeastern
University. The ultimate goal of this research is to investigate and develop
methods to increase the efficiency of electrolytic production of hydrogen by
means of hydrodynamic enhancements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Hydrogen is one
of the promising alternative sources of energy. There is limited systematic
investigation on how to quantify and efficiently exploit this energy. The two
collaborators plan to combine their expertise in experimental work and
mathematical modeling to study this interesting scientific problem. The US PI
has considerable experience and has access to extensive facilities at
Northeastern University. The Turkish scientist has strong experience in
mathematical modeling of two phase heat transfer. This research should improve
our understanding of the processes involved in electrolysis to produce hydrogen
using water and photovoltaic solar energy. The research will help in
establishing the technical framework for cost-effective production and usage of
hydrogen energy in Turkey and potentially for other developing
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;