* 0329098
* Laban Capture
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Christoph Bregler, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2008
* USD 672,534.00

This project's goal is to develop new motion capture and movement
representations inspired by Laban Movement Analysis (LMA). Consider a statement
such as: "Hey, that's John striding across the quad, I'd recognize his bold
confident walk anywhere!" Every human being has his/her own unique perceivable
movement style-repeated recognizable movement elements that can be notated-which
a Laban movement analyst would call a "movement signature." These elements in
their combinations and phrasing capture the liveliness of a person's movement-
his or her dynamic expressiveness. Despite advances in the motion capture
process, many important subtleties still get diminished or lost. If applied to
computer animation, current motion capture results lack the original dynamic
life-quality; the person's movement signature is not preserved, and the
animations look rather artificial and robotic. So it is unlikely that John would
look like himself in an animation done using current motion capture techniques.
The PI will collaborate with artists and scientists that are movement
specialists, to study current motion capture shortcomings and to develop LMA
filters that explicitly capture perceptually important features and amplify them
as necessary to achieve more expressive animations. To this end, the PI plans to
exploit new factorization-based capture techniques, and new representations of
dynamics that are estimated from example LMA data. The PI will also develop new
motion retargeting techniques to transfer and modify the measured dynamic LMA
features to other character models. . The PI will apply his techniques to
medical analysis and rehabilitation, gesture recognition, and archiving and
annotation of movement databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will lead to a better understanding of human movement analysis, and to
better computer tools that can be used for human movement in applications
related to HCI, medicine, psychology, education, entertainment and the arts.
&lt;br/&gt;