* 0329899
* SENSORS: A New Approach to Recognition Element Synthesis and Integration
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* David McQuade, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2006
* USD 331,784.00

Chemical warfare agents are insidious elements of modern weaponry. These highly
toxic agents can be delivered by complex methods such as guided missiles or by
simple devices such as the bags of sarin solution left on a Tokyo subway in
1995. Nerve gases such as sarin are easily prepared, making them readily
accessible weapons of mass destruction. Their acute toxicity requires that
precautions and antidotes be taken before exposure occurs. Sensors with high
sensitivity and rapid response can ensure the safety of civilians and military
personnel. The research results of this NSF SENSORS proposal will provide not
only unique sensors for nerve agent detection, but also advances in basic
recognition science. (I) The intellectual merit of the proposed activity: The
research consists of the development of peptide/dye conjugates designed to
rapidly react with and respond to G and VX type chemical warfare agents. Despite
many years of active research, no general platform has emerged that allows
development and optimization of specific sensors. A method to detect G and VX
agents using a general strategy for sensor design will be developed. This
approach could provide sensors for biomedical, food science, and environmental
applications as well. Amplification is necessary to detect non-lethal doses of
chemical warfare agents. The peptide/dye conjugates will be incorporated into a
new light harvesting-based amplification scheme that is a development at the
interface of photophysics and synthetic chemistry. This research will provide a
better understanding of how to control energy migration within solids, which
will also have implications for photovoltaic cell and organic light emitting
diode design. (II) The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity:
Despite great advances in science and engineering, our ability to monitor and
quantify air, water and food quality is rudimentary. In the future, inexpensive
sensors will continuously monitor the environment for pollutants, chemical and
biological warfare agents, and other toxins. This proposal outlines steps
towards measuring chemical warfare agents using robust and inexpensive means.
The proposed sensors should be easily and inexpensively incorporated into
portable sensors for use in shopping malls, airports, office buildings and
soldier uniforms to monitor for low concentrations of nerve agents. This project
is interdisciplinary and will train a student at the interface of photophysics,
materials science, and chemistry. The student will learn how to synthesize
organic dyes and polymers, how to create and characterize thin films, and how to
measure and quantify the photophysical properties. Students with this training
should be sought after by companies interested in telecommunications, organic
LEDs, photonics, and sensors. The PI also plans to create workshops and programs
to educate children and elementary and high school teachers. An important
element of this project is how light interacts with matter. Optical computing,
optical communications, photovoltaics, and other light harvesting devices are
becoming important areas of commerce. As such, elementary and high school
students should be exposed to basic concepts of absorption, luminescence, and
energy migration. As a step toward this goal, the PI will create "light
interacting with matter" workshops, hands-on demonstrations and training
opportunities for both students and teachers.