* 0329768
* ASTATPHYS-MEX-2003 and Advanced Materials Workshop to be held in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, August 24 - 29, 2003
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Juan De Pablo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2004
* USD 7,500.00

De Pablo, Juan J. U of Wisconsin - Madison

"ASTATPHYS-MEX-2003 and Advanced Materials Workshop, Puerto Vallarte, Mexico,
August 24 - 29, 2003" The Applied Statistical Physics Conference (ASTATPHYS-
MEX-2003) will take place from August 24 - 29, 2003 at the Hotel Krystal in
Puerto Vallarta, Mexico. It will be subdivided into seven parallel symposia.

The topics are:

1) Complex Fluids: Equilibrium and Dynamics 2) Nanobiotechnology 3) Nanoscience
4) Quantum Engineering 5) Catalysts and nanoporous material prepared by self-
assembly 6) Petroleomics: From Petroleum Composition to Commercial Realty 7)
Materials Characterization Techniques and Nanotechnology

Each symposia will include a keynote lecture and several invited lectures.
Approximately forty contributed papers will be submitted to each of the
symposia, and in addition, several hundred papers will be submitted for poster
presentations. Broader Impacts: The ASTATPHYS-MEX-2003 Conference will focus on
a number of exciting and timely topics in Molecular Engineering. More
specifically, the areas that will be addressed at the meeting include nano-tubes
and fullerenes, magnetic nano-structures, nano-circuits and nanolithography,
supramolecular chemistry and materials, polymers, gene-delivery, self-assembly,
confined complex fluids, ionic channels, dynamics of confined fluids, phase
transitions and layered materials and molecular design of catalysts (and nano-
catalysis). These are all timely and highly visible areas of research. By virtue
of taking place in Mexico, the meeting will attract a considerable number of
Latin American and European researchers. The size, structure, and attendant
composition are likely to foster increased interactions between scientists and
engineers from around the world in the general areas of nanotechnology,
molecular engineering, and statistical physics.