* 0329878
* Intelligent Health Monitoring of Aerospace Structures Using Wireless Sensor Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2010
* Fuh-Gwo Yuan, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 10/31/2010
* USD 377,008.00

The development of smart sensing and innovative health monitoring framework
based on smart sensors will require a major paradigm shift involving advanced
sensing, micro-processing, signal processing, wireless communication, and damage
identification algorithms. The proposed research seeks to develop a multi-sensor
data fusion information framework for aerospace structural health monitoring
using smart sensors. The smart sensors are capable of exciting diagnostic
signals, measuring physical parameters, interpreting and collaborating the data
into information, and communicating with a monitoring station over a wireless
link. The MICA platform developed at UC Berkeley will be used as a basis of this
research. The work is targeted at developing an active distributed smart sensing
system for quantifying and visualizing location and sizing of damage in
aerospace structures in near real-time. The ultimate goal of this investigation
is to provide flight crews or ground control center with a versatile and
powerful tool to visualize the damage at high-stress or flight-critical areas.
This study will identify and address basic scientific and engineering challenges
toward establishing SHMS in aerospace structures. Due to basic design
constraints of miniature smart sensors, results from this research will advance
such SHM systems by addressing fundamental limits along with conflicting
constraints imposed by power sources, collaborative computing efficiency, signal
processing technology, and wireless tradeoffs. The proposed research will lay
the groundwork for a novel wireless smart sensor network technology for near
real-time intelligent monitoring of complex aerospace systems and a broad set of
physical phenomena. It is envisioned that the proposed work will significantly
advance scientific and engineering knowledge in the areas of sensor technology,
digital signal processing, innovative SHM algorithms, damage reconstruction and
visualization, and laboratory methodologies with measurements. This is an NSF
03-512 (Sensors Initiative) project.