* 0329743
* SENSORS:  Design of Robust, Networked Control Systems via Convex Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Raffaello D'Andrea, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Project Summary Design of Robust,Networked Control Systems via Convex
Optimization Intellectual merit of the proposed activity We are on the threshold
of eing able to place sensors everywhere.This has een precipitated in part y the
continued rapid advances in sensor technology,which will allow us to place
sensors ranging from the nano- scale to the macro-scale on almost any physical
device,at an economically viable cost.This alone,however, would e limited in
scope without the ability to process the potentially vast amounts of information
generated y these devices,and the ability to network them to ensure that the
relevant information is made available to the appropriate
entities.Fortunately,computing and communication technology has een keeping pace
with sensor technology,and all the ingredients are there for major reakthroughs
in the near future in how we interface to,and control our environment.This will
certainly e hastened y the Sensors and Sensor Networks program,which will
promote the creation of new sensor concepts and new methods for facilitating the
transfer of information. There are some serious challenges,however,that must e
overcome efore these future sensor networks can e successfully deployed.One of
the major challenges is the ability to make the appropriate decisions based on
distributed information,across a distributed network.To put this challenge in
context,it is well known that two comparably simple dynamical systems can
exhibit complex ehavior when interconnected. This observation,and the associated
challenges,have een the driving force ehind much of the research in feedback
theory and feedback control.In particular,ensuring that feedback systems ehave
reliably,in the presence of uncertainty,has een the main focus of feedback
control theory,and continues to gain importance in dynamical systems theory.This
theory,however,has largely een focused on systems with degrees of freedom (or
system states),inputs,and outputs that can e counted in the tens to the
hundreds.What is required for the successful deployment of the em edded sensor
networks of the future are design and analysis tools that can handle systems
that are distributed,with potentially millions of states,inputs,and outputs. The
proposed work is aimed at developing new tools for designing and controlling
systems that are distributed across a network,with distributed decision making
units,with large num ers of components. The emphasis will e to develop tools for
systems governed y di .erential and di .erence equations,oth linear and
nonlinear,with large num er of components,and interconnected through networks of
limited connectivity.The principle theoretical tools employed will consist of
convex relaxations and semide .nite programming.The proposed work is focused,and
will not e an all-encompassing e .ort.Rather,it is aimed at solving some
fundamental problems in designing and controlling systems across networks,and
will thus e an integral component of the overall e .ort in the Sensors and
Sensor Networks program. Broader impacts of the proposed activity The PI has a
strong proven track record in this area.Examples include:1)advises approximately
thirty students every year,from computer science,electrical engineering,and
mechanical engineering,in the design and construction of complex electro-
mechanical and software systems as part of the Systems Engineering program at
Cornell (of which he is a co-founder);these systems are used y M.S.and
Ph.D.students for their research.2)Has given public lectures and demonstrations
at the Smithsonian in Washington,the Tech Museum of Innovation in San Jose,NASA
SIGMA series (a public forum for science and technology),National Engineering
Week activities at NSF (attended y local area high-school students).3)Gives
approximately .ve to ten demonstrations involving the control of autonomous
systems every year at Cornell to local-area elementary school children and
under-represented minorities.4)Has een an invited speaker at two NSF sponsored
workshops,attended y high-school teachers and students,aimed at promoting and
disseminating control related research.5)Has appeared twice on Scienti .c
American Frontiers,a television science program on public television hosted y
Alan Alda.6)Was the executive producer of a CD-ROM sent to hundreds of
prospective engineering students outlining Systems Engineering e .orts at
Cornell University.The PI will incorporate the proposed research into these
activities aimed at educating the public on systems and feedback,and more
roadly,on science and engineering.