* 0329695
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Surfactant Self-Aggregation on Solid Surfaces and in Pores
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Keith Gubbins, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2007
* USD 18,339.00

0329695 Gubbins This award supports the PI and several graduate, undergraduate,
and postdoctoral students from North Carolina State University in a
collaboration withMartin Schoen, Gerhard Findenegg, and Sabine Klapp of the
Physics Department at the Technical University of Berlin, Germany. The research
will focus on the self-assembly of surfactants on solid surfaces and in nano-
porous solids. Such self-assembly processes are as yet only poorly understood,
but are crucial in applications ranging from sensors, thin-film technologies,
lithographic processes, electronic devices , and sol-gel nano-coatings to
biomimetic materials. They are also of great fundamental interest, since many
unique features of the self-assembly are as yet unexplained. The phenomena of
interest spans a range of length scales from the atomic to the microscopic and
of time scales from picoseconds to microseconds, so that new simulation
methodology or theoretical techniques are required to study the systems
successfully. The project combines the expertise in experimental and dynamical
simulation studies of surfactant self-assembly of the Berlin group with the
extensive experience of the NC State group in equilibrium properties of host
phases confined within nano-porous materials.

The broader impacts of this collaboration are that it increases interactions
between US researchers and those in Germany, it promotes collaborative
opportunities and career development for US students, and it enhances the
infrastructure for research and education by laying the groundwork for future
international research and education opportunities.