* 0329766
* SENSORS:  Theory and Practice of Sensor Network Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Martin Haenggi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 08/31/2006
* USD 305,993.00

Populating our world with networks of sensors requires fundamental
understanding of tech- niques for connecting and managing sensor nodes with a
communication network in scalable and resource-e .cient ways.The proposed
research involves a comprehensive program of sensor network
architecture,design,evaluation,and implementation that integrates research
expertise in the areas of wireless networking and multiuser communications and
provides numerous op- portunities for enhancing student research and education
in the area of sensor networks,at both undergraduate and graduate levels. The
dominant trend in sensor network practice is to consider a dense collection of
tiny sensor nodes with limited computation and communication capabilities,all
connected via a .at,or ad hoc,wireless network.Yet theoretical studies in
multiuser communications suggest that substantially improved performance can be
obtained through sophisticated coordination among nodes,requiring more versatile
radios,hierarchy,and perhaps even sparse wired connectivity. Thus,the objectives
of the proposed research are to:1)identify network architectures that permit the
implementation of sophisticated transmission schemes that have been
theoretically studied,2)analyze such schemes in the context of sensor networks
and design new ones adopting a cross-layer approach and 3)implement these
schemes and verify their behavior on a real testbed. The intellectual merit of
the project lies in the improved understanding of an important emerging class of
wireless networks,and in the attempt to unite theory and practice.Clos- ing the
widening gap between theoretically proposed strategies and practically
implemented ones is crucial to understanding and improving the performance and
lifetime of these resource- constrained networks.Through a rigorous analytic
approach,contributions to the emerging area of network information theory are
expected,leading to substantial advances in energy-e .cient and delay-
constrained protocol design. The broader impact is manifested in part through an
e .ort to integrate teaching and research. Experimentation on a hardware
platform plays an integral role in both research and education. It will be used
for veri .cation,as well as for undergraduate and graduate projects that provide
students with hands-on experience in a real sensor network testbed.This project
will enable the acquisition of the necessary hardware.Two newly developed
graduate courses on multiuser communications and wireless networking will bene
.t greatly from this project.It is anticipated that by such close
linking,research and education cross-fertilize each other within the framework
of this proposal.Further,since the proposed architectures and related issues
carry over to other important classes of networks,the .ndings from this research
will have an impact on a much broader class of wireless networks,including
multihop cellular networks,that may soon become signi .cant for a major part of
our society.The broader impact will also be felt through a broad dissemination
of results and through current and future interactions with other universities.
A-1