* 0329153
* Evaluating Next Generation Probabilistic Planners
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Michael Littman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 07/31/2007
* USD 243,946.00

This research project will develop planning algorithms and a set of general
methods for evaluating probabilistic planners. Probabilistic planning is the
area of sequential decision making concerned with choosing operators that change
the state of the world when the available operators have uncertain outcomes. The
driving goal of this project is to advance the state of the art of probabilistic
planners toward increased efficiency, improved robustness to problem variations,
and broadened applicability to real-world problems. To accomplish its goal, the
project will focus on two interrelated tasks. First, it will propose and develop
a methodology for evaluating probabilistic planners. This will require studying
a set of alternatives and running experiments to correlate evaluation metrics
with desirable outcomes in increasingly realistic domains. The project efforts
will be coordinated closely with the larger research community through the
biannual International Planning Competition (IPC), which will soon introduce a
probabilistic track to its existing structure. This project will organize the
track and will provide the community with a set of software programs for
executing and evaluating plans in probabilistic domains. Second, the project
members will pursue the development of their own planning algorithms, with a
particular emphasis on approaches that exploit the relationship between
probabilistic planning and reinforcement learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will have definite research impacts in its study of the problem of
probabilistic planning and how progress should be measured in the field. It will
also advance the state of the art in planning and reinforcement learning through
the exploration of instance-based techniques for learning to plan more
effectively. However, the focus of the majority of the work will be on its
broader impacts on the planning community as a whole, with concrete domain
description languages, evaluation software, and benchmark problems that will
serve to focus the community's efforts toward developing algorithms to solve
problems of significant scientific and economic interest.&lt;br/&gt;