* 0329464
* Peroxy-acid Pretreatment-Microbial Degradation: A Hybrid Approach to Remediation of Contaminated Sediments & Soils - A Phase II Study (TSE03-O)
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Teofilo Abrajano, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 10/31/2008
* USD 350,000.00

0329464 Nyman The Phase I research proved the feasibility of a novel hybrid
approach for remediating contaminated sediments: peroxy-acid pretreatment
combined with microbial degradation of selected contaminants (e.g., polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), trinitrotoluene
(TNT), aromatic amines and other challenging hydrophobic organic compounds
(HOCs)). The unique advanced-oxidation process (AOP) took advantage of the
synergistic effect of enhanced pollutant desorption and solubility and parallel
compound transformation that ultimately led to efficient biodegradation. The
present Phase II proposal targets the complete elucidation of the rates and
mechanisms of the transformation of HOCs and understanding the engineering
parameters that control and limit the efficiency of the hybrid treatment.
Therefore, several HOCs will be examined in both synthetic and real sediment
matrices under varying experimental conditions. Isotope ratio mass spectroscopy,
in combination with other chromatographic and mass spectrometric techniques,
will be used to identify productprecursor relationships during various process
stages, estimate reaction pathways and kinetic parameters, and identify
potential reaction scavengers. The research will test the efficacy of the
optimized process using sediment cores obtained from a Superfund site in bench-
scale experiments. We have assembled a truly interdisciplinary team with a
unique combination of expertise, experience and analytical/experimental
capability that are required to successfully complete our research goals. The
same team, along with their students and associates, previously met and exceeded
the milestones set for our Phase I research. Broader Impact: We are addressing
the enormous societal challenge of remediating contaminated sediment and soil
with a novel hybrid technology. Unlike other AOPs, the peroxy-acid process is
simple, low energy, practical and requires easily implemented reactor designs.
In addition, to the efficacy of the process shown in our Phase I study,
increases in compound solubility and thus bioavailability may further stimulate
natural attenuation. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) could easily
employ this technology to remediate sediment (or soil) in a confined disposal
facility (CDF). Several companies, named as potentially responsible parties
(PRPs) in Superfund sites (such as General Electric Company), could use this
method to clean PCB contaminated dredged sediment, excavated soils or specific
industrial wastes. It is also important to realize that sediments, such as the
New York Harbor ones, must be dredged to maintain shipping lanes, and,
therefore, we need better remediation alternatives to process the dredged
sediment. The PIs have demonstrated strong track records in training
undergraduate and graduate students from several different disciplines (e.g.,
engineering disciplines and science). Similarly, the PIs have demonstrated track
records of exposing and encouraging high school students (especially women and
minority students) to activities and careers in environmental science and
engineering. Additionally, we believe that mentoring high school minority
students is needed to improve the enrollment of traditionally underrepresented
groups in engineering fields. As with the Phase I research, the Phase II
research will be the nexus of student training and research in environmental
science and engineering at RPI.