* 0330543
* NMI-Enabled Open Source Collaboration Tools for Virtual Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2003,09/30/2006
* David Shealy, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 355,742.00

This project pursues the NMI integration of a set of collaboration tools to
support virtual organizations with an emphasis on authentication and
authorization functionality. Authentication and authorization subsystem
functionality can be categorized as establishing identity, applying access
control rules, and provisioning system specific accounts. The Shibboleth
architecture supports federated administration of authentication and
authorization, but it does not provide account provisioning. System-specific
accounts are the vehicle for allocation and tracking of resources within the
system. Allocation of these accounts is frequently accomplished manually today
and the amount of work involved can serve as a barrier to collaboration;
automated account provisioning makes it easier for virtual organizations to
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the following specific goals for
NMI-enabled system integration: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)NMI-enable the web
interface to an open source mailing list application to include modular
authentication, graceful handling of attachments, and use of digital signatures
without the "Invalid Signature" error; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2)NMI-enable an
open source Content Management System that incorporates the WebDAV protocol;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Automatically provision NMI-authorized system accounts
via portable POSIX user account objects in LDAP; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4)
Prototype an NMI-enabled user space file system for dynamic provisioning of
files and resources based on user identity, regardless of user location;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(5) Form an Internet2 MACE-TOOLS Working Group to review
the project and provide feedback for improvement using the pledged Internet2
organizational and administrative support for this activity;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(6) Disseminate information on "How to NMI-enable
Applications and Systems;" and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(7) Provide Shibboleth
services for members of virtual organizations selected for the NMI testbed
activities to speed the adoption of NMI-enabled collaboration
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NMI and the contributions of this project to NMI are
important in broader society. Collaborations across organizational boundaries
occur even in small non-profit groups who form city or state-wide committees to
address issues of common interest. These organizations would benefit
tremendously by tying together their existing computer systems to share
information with very little additional administrative overhead.&lt;br/&gt;