* 0330034
* SENSORS:  :Collaborative Research: Artificial Cilia- Biologically Inspired Nanosensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Alison Flatau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 12/31/2007
* USD 327,001.00

Tiny hair-like sensors, or cilia, play a very important role in detection for
many biological species, including humans. This research effort takes
inspiration from the transduction processes of the inner ear's cochlea and cilia
to design acoustic sensors. Specifically, this project proposes to use nanowires
of magnetostrictive materials as hair-like sensors of ultrasonic and acoustic
signals. The proposed Artificial Cilia Transducers (ACTs) have many advantages
over current sensors, as these "magnetic hairs" can be easily fabricated in
arrays for enhanced sensitivity and/or spatial resolution as compared to current
ultrasonic pressure detectors, and the diameters, lengths and stiffnesses of the
hairs can be tailored to a wide range of frequencies. Our unique choice of
magnetostrictive materials will enable simultaneous detection of the distinct
resonances of multiple cilia using giant magnetoresistive (GMR) sensors. Along
with sensor development, several fundamental concepts of science will be
investigated as valuable byproducts of this work, including processes for
tailoring crystalline texture and grain size at the nanoscale for achieving
materials that are more ductile and have larger transduction than their
macroscaled counterparts and an understanding of Young's modulus at the
nanoscale will be developed through acoustic resonance
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;Unique contributions to science will be realized as the
development of ACTs lead to the ability to discriminate pressure waves with
spatial resolutions on the order of the inter-cilia spacing, ~ 40 nm. Other
future sensing capabilities (beyond ultrasonic and acoustic signals) could
include fluid flow, pressure variations, chemical contamination, and/or magnetic
fields. These parameters can be sensed by measuring sonic resonance (as in
hydrophone arrays), acoustic resonance chambers (as in the ear's cochlea), hair
motion, changes in resonant frequencies due to adsorbed chemicals and hair
motion, respectively. Also, future signal processing should enable the detection
of frequency, phase, and directionality using nanoarrays.
&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the PIs all have strong track records for involving
undergraduate students in laboratory research experiences and will continue to
do so with this project, including a new collaboration with Morgan State
University (an HBCU) that will provide summer internships for Morgan State
undergraduate civil Engineering students. The interdisciplinary, inter-
institutional nature of this project will be expose undergraduate and graduate
students to many unique opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;