* 0330110
* SENSORS:     Arrayed Optical Detection of Nanoscale Biomass
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Roberto Panepucci, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract

Intellectual Merit This Sensor proposal focuses on the ability to detect small
amounts of materials, including pathogenic bacteria and biomolecules integral to
cell responses. New approaches are proposed to the problems of transducing mass
changes and to the problems of on-chip multiplexing and demultiplexing. These
ideas are based on concepts developed for advanced MEMS and integrated optic
devices. Most current detection technologies are either, bulky, expensive or
slow. We propose a novel device/instrument for ultra-sensitive detection of
molecular amounts of material with applications in pathogen and biochemical
detection, medicine, drug discovery, and nanotechnology. The proposed technology
allows the detection of an array of different targets in an intrinsically
networked structure through fiber-optically linked structures. The technology
lends itself to high throughput at low cost through use of disposable passive
chips. The device consists of a silicon-on-insulator based chip that
incorporates ultra-sensitive nano-mechanical cantilevers with novel silicon-
based passive integrated optics. Passive optical ring-resonators are used for
on-chip wavelength multiplexing and demultiplexing of optical signals. The ring-
resonators act as filters for different wavelengths, which are guided to
different cantilever sensors. The cantilever waveguide is used for motion
detection. Mechanical vibrations in the MHz range are encoded on the optical
signal by one element of an array of biosensitized cantilever transducers. The
one-to-one association of individual wavelengths with mechanical vibrations of
different cantilever sensors allows one to address each sensing site. This
innovation in transduction strategy allows the use of ring-resonators that do
not need external tuning or closed-loop control. Furthermore, this strategy
requires inexpensive broadband sources for optical carrier signals. The sensed
shift in vibration frequency at each ring resonator/cantilever pair can be
detected in parallel on the external device. The principle of operation of the
biosensor is based on highly-sensitive, immunospecific attachment of pathogens
to silicon nanofabricated structures. In addition to detecting its presence, the
mass of the pathogen is also measured. Our preliminary results show that the
cantilevers are able to detect mass in the attograms to picograms range. The
additional information of the mass allows one to screen for false positives,
greatly increasing the efficiency of the method. The IC compatible fabrication
technology allows the cost to be truly minimized for the disposable chip.
Emerging from this method is the possibility of high resolution measurements of
the dry mass of a great variety of pathogens, from large unicellular organisms
to viruses and large macromolecules. This novel Si-based nanophotonic motion
detection scheme allows arrays of such devices to form a complete silicon
platform for reduced cost, increased sensitivity and enormous system level
integration revolutionizing functionality, cost and portability. Broader Impacts
This research will will enable large scale accessibility for inexpensive compact
tests, today only done in a few specialized laboratories. This will help prevent
and diagnose diseases and bio hazardous materials of today. One could envision
for example the detection of very small traces of hazardous chemicals used in
biowarfare by a soldier in the field, carrying the sensor in his pocket, or
extremely sensitive monitoring of a disease, in the doctor's office or at home,
by the patient himself using a disposable sensor.





