* 0330597
* Conference: On Bio-, Micro-, and Nanosystems, to be held on July 7-10, 2003, in New York City
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Michael Simpson, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 05/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

The purpose of this award is to support travel of participants to a conference
on Bio, Micro- and Nanosystems, to be held on July 7-10, 2003 at the Plaza Hotel
in New York City. The main objective of this conference is to bring together
physical and life scientists working on science and engineering at the interface
between synthetic and natural nanoscale systems. The topical areas of this
conference reside at a set of intellectual interfaces between disciplines, and
therefore will cover topics that are not the focus of conferences usually
sponsored by existing professional societies. Thus, this meeting will foster
interactions and exchange of ideas and information among groups of scientists
who do not normally meet together. The conference is a collaborative effort
between the American Society for Microbiology (ASM) and the Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) of Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE). The conference will feature approximately 30 oral and numerous
poster presentations. There are sixteen confirmed invited speakers (invited
speaker support provided by ASM and IEEE-EMBS) that cover a broad range of
scientific fields and ensures the participation of groups underrepresented in
science and engineering. The remaining oral presentations and all poster
presentations will be selected from submitted abstracts that were due April 4,
2003. The estimated participation is about 500 people from government agencies,
academic institutions and industry representing a wide variety of engineering
and scientific disciplines.

The conference web page may be found at:
http://www.asmusa.org/mtgsrc/biomicronano.htm

