* 0330897
* CRU-I: Exploring the Ecology of Flash Communication in Photinus Fireflies Through Collaborative Undergraduate Research with Computer-Simulated Signaling Behavior.
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Kevin Austin, Fitchburg State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 11/30/2006
* USD 663,228.00

Fitchburg State College is requesting funding for collaborative research project
in order to 1) explore how male courtship behavior in Photinus fireflies is
influenced by the behavior of conspecific and heterospecific Photinus fireflies
as well as how this behavior influences potentially predatory Photuris
fireflies, field mice and bats, 2) to develop new methods for investigating
communication between organisms and 3) to provide interdisciplinary research
opportunities for students of Biology and Computer Science at Fitchburg State
College. Together these outcomes represent the broader need to prepare students
who can think critically about experimental design and implementation and apply
the latest technology to solving scientific problems. This proposal provides a
vehicle to expose these students to the potential for scientific research and
graduate study as an integral part of any career in the sciences by: By
providing paid research opportunities for our undergraduates we will increase
our ability to prepare these students for advanced study in Biology. Exposing
students to research methods including the development and testing of
hypotheses. They will have the opportunity to publish results and discuss their
work with others at a national conference. Preparing students for careers in
computer science by giving them experience in all phases of a development
project from concept to deployment.

Courtship communication in biological systems represents a rapidly growing field
within behavioral ecology. While technology increasingly allows us to eavesdrop
on these communication systems, simulate signals, and identify behavioral
outcomes, this approach focuses predominantly on the behavior of the receiver in
response to signal variation. An added level of complexity is involved when we
attempt to monitor how the signaler may modify the signal in response to the
behavior of the receiver. In order to incorporate this added complexity into our
experimental designs we must simulate and manipulate the receiver's response to
the signal. This requires developing microcomputer-based instruments capable of
detecting and analyzing signals and outputting simulated behavioral responses.
This type of system can also allow us to test how the interaction between
signalers and receivers influences the behavior of conspecific and
heterospecific organisms that are observing this communication. Conducting this
type of research requires collaboration between Biologists who can provide an
understanding of the elements of the communication system and Computer
Scientists capable of designing appropriate microcomputer-based instruments.

The experiments we are proposing with Photinus fireflies require microcomputer-
based instruments that can perform real-time integration of behavioral data in
order to produce simulated behaviors and to measure subsequent behavioral
activity. Developing these instruments requires close collaboration between
Biologists with knowledge of the behavioral repertoires of interest and Computer
Scientists with the capability to develop appropriate tools. The objectives of
this collaboration are to 1) develop systems that mimic communication between
male and female fireflies, 2) refine these systems to more closely simulate the
dynamic nature of flash communication, and 3) integrate behavioral data from
other organisms to produce responses.