* 0330745
* CSEDI: Whole-Mantle Convection and the Transition-Zone Water Filter
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Karl Turekian, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2009
* USD 780,001.00

A major question about the Earth's interior is why the mantle
appears&lt;br/&gt;both well-mixed and unmixed at the same time. Geochemical
analyses imply&lt;br/&gt;that the two main types of mantle convective upwellings
(which create&lt;br/&gt;mid-ocean ridge basalts MORB and ocean-island basalts
OIB, respectively)&lt;br/&gt;have distinct chemical signatures and thus come
from different isolated&lt;br/&gt;layers in the mantle. However, seismological
studies suggest that&lt;br/&gt;cold downwellings (called subducting slabs) sink
across the entire&lt;br/&gt;mantle and would therefore stir the mantle and
destroy any layering.&lt;br/&gt;Thus there appears to be completely
contradictory pieces of evidence&lt;br/&gt;of how the mantle convects. However,
it has been recently suggested&lt;br/&gt;that melting at 410 km depth in the
mantle can act as a filter that&lt;br/&gt;sequesters incompatible elements into
the deep (sub-410km) mantle, but&lt;br/&gt;allows whole-mantle circulation of
major components, thereby satisfying&lt;br/&gt;both geochemical and geophysical
constraints. As most of the ambient&lt;br/&gt;upwelling mantle rises out of the
high-water-solubility transition&lt;br/&gt;zone into the low-solubility upper
mantle above 410km, it becomes&lt;br/&gt;water-supersaturated and undergoes
dehydration melting that filters&lt;br/&gt;out incompatible elements. The
filtered solid phase supplies dry,&lt;br/&gt;depleted materials to the MORB
source region. The filter, however,&lt;br/&gt;is suppressed for hotter, faster
mantle plumes which therefore deliver&lt;br/&gt;enriched OIBs. This "water-
filter" model raises many new questions: (1)&lt;br/&gt;What is the predicted
structure of the putative melt layer at the 410km,&lt;br/&gt;and how can this be
tested seismologically? (2) What is the influence&lt;br/&gt;of the filter
mechanism on mantle convection and chemical circulation?&lt;br/&gt;(3) What is
the nature of hydrous melt at deep upper-mantle conditions?&lt;br/&gt;Answering
these and a host of other important new questions demands
an&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary approach and therefore involves a team comprised
of&lt;br/&gt;a geodynamicist, an experimental mineral physicist, a seismologist
and&lt;br/&gt;a geochemist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the education of two graduate
students in a highly&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary project entailing geodynamics,
mineral physics,&lt;br/&gt;seismology and geochemistry. The water-filter model
also raises new&lt;br/&gt;questions and fields of research that will drive
interaction between&lt;br/&gt;disciplines and provide focus and hypothesis-
testing for the larger&lt;br/&gt;observational and experimental programs such as
EarthScope, OMD (Ocean&lt;br/&gt;Mantle Dynamics) and COMPRES.