* 0330514
* SENSORS: Towards a system theory for the robust design of large-scale
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* David Tse, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2007
* USD 900,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0330514&lt;br/&gt;Kannan Ramchandran&lt;br/&gt;U of Cal
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the current buzz around sensor networks
has been driven by dramatic recent advances in sensor device technologies.
Despite noteworthy efforts to build infrastructure and clever protocols to
network these power-limited devices in order to push their operational envelopes
for specific applications, a fundamental rather than an incremental
understanding of the system performance limits of large-scale robust networks
remains far from mature. It is a daunting system theory challenge to push the
fundamental frontiers of sensor networks. It is this grand challenge that is the
focus of this research. This study addresses scaling laws and robustness issues,
but more importantly, aims at concrete design guidelines and algorithmic
prescriptions. In short, this effort provides the much-needed systems theory
expertise to make large-scale robust sensor networks a reality. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overarching themes are (i) large scale, and (ii) robustness of
sensor networks. Sensor networks are unique in that channel physics and sensor
source models fundamentally underpin the sensor signals being acquired,
processed, and distributed across the network for decision-making and control.
Accordingly, channel physicsdrives scaling laws and percolates through all
functional tasks. Percolation theory is used to study scaling laws and dictate
designs for robust network connectivity. Sampling theory, is studied in a
fundamental way to to address robustness versus performance tradeoffs between
sensor oversampling density and per-sensor A/D precision under local
communication constraints. Finally, this research ``closes the loop'' around
sensor networks by studying distributed inference and robust control based on
partial data using hybrid systems theory. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research effort is organized into three highly coupled functional
categories: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(i) Large-scale sensor network design
guidelines: channel physics and percolation theory. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(ii)
Sensor field representation and data acquisition: distributed sampling theory.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(iii) Distributed inference under communication
constraints and robust adaptive control.