* 0330272
* SENSORS: Sensor Networks for the Study of Heterogeneous Fluxes in Lakes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Chryssostomos Chryssostomidis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2007
* USD 749,885.00

Hemond 0330272

Modern sensor technology has a great potential to help advance both
understanding and monitoring of the environment. These benefits can be maximized
by linking sensors together in intelligent networks. This project will create a
unique network of fixed and mobile sensors that can be adaptively controlled to
most effectively and efficiently study the coupling between lake physics and the
biologically-mediated cycling of methane, a globally important greenhouse gas.

One major challenge that such a sensor network will address is the high degree
of physically-driven chemical and biological heterogeneity, at multiple scales,
that typically occurs in natural waters. Heterogeneity poses both practical and
philosophical problems. Firstly, can one determine a meaningful average state of
the system using traditional (a limited number of) observations? Secondly, given
chemical and biological processes that are non-linear, can average values alone
predict chemical fluxes, or is it necessary to have information on structure,
and to employ higher order statistics? The only practical way to obtain the
needed information density will be through sensor networks.

A novel and significant feature of the proposed network will be utilization of
the complementary strengths of fixed chemical sensors and miniaturized mobile
analytical instrumentation, integrated via electronic and acoustic networking,
and operating under intelligent control algorithms. The network will be tested
in a study of the coupled, heterogeneous, time-varying, and multi-scale
geochemical and physical processes that control the cycling of methane.
[redundant with para 1]. Intellectual goals include advances in the applied
science of sensor networks as well as advances in the fundamental understanding
of how heterogeneous mixing processes govern methane consumption within the
water column. This project will be carried out by a multidisciplinary team of
investigators, and coordinated under a system engineering plan. The project also
has broader community significance, as lakes and related surface waters provide
important goods and services, and are integral components of the biosphere. As
humans increasingly rely on these systems for food, potable water, and
maintenance of ecosystem integrity, a better understanding of their
biogeochemical cycles and increased ability to monitor their health is
necessary. The proposed sensor network and the observations it generates will
advance the understanding, monitoring, and management of surface waters. Data
generated by the sensor network will be made available via internet connections
for undergraduate and K- 12 education, public awareness, and use by local water
resource managers.