* 0330540
* Planning Grant for the Inger and Walter Rice Center for Environmental Life Sciences, Virginia Commonwealth University
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Gregory Garman, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2007
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning Grant for the Inger and Walter Rice
Center for Environmental Life Sciences, Virginia Commonwealth
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Virginia
Commonwealth University under the direction of Dr. L. Smock to develop a
strategic plan to guide the development of programs and infrastructure at the
University's new biological field station, the Inger and Walter Rice Center for
Environmental Life Sciences. The site, consisting of about 350 acres of
undeveloped land along the James River near Richmond, Virginia, supports a
diversity of terrestrial and aquatic habitats that will greatly enhance VCU's
research capabilities, university-level instruction, and outreach education
programs for K-12 students and life-long learners. Establishment of this field
station, which is only 30 minutes from downtown Richmond, is especially exciting
because of its proximity to our urban campus and its ability to serve a
relatively large urban and rural population of students of underrepresented
ethnicity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the Planning Grant is to hold a
series of workshops to develop a comprehensive strategic plan for the Center.
Participants of one workshop will be drawn from field stations throughout the
region, drawing on their experience to develop plans pertaining to
administration, data management, and research and education programs at the
station. A second workshop will bring together researchers from academic and
government agencies to develop potential research collaborations focused on the
ecology, conservation and policy issues of large rivers, this being the proposed
primary focus of research at the Rice Center. A third set of workshops will
focus on outreach education, bringing together appropriate K-12 teachers and
administrators from the surrounding school districts, as well as potential
partnering organizations and agencies, to develop a comprehensive plan for the
development of outreach programs. The outcome of these activities will be a
written 5-10 year strategic plan for the Rice Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed activities have both strong intellectual merit and broader impacts to
the public. Development of the Rice Center, as guided by the outcome of this
Planning Grant, will result in a field station with a clear direction toward
supporting a wide range of collaborative research activities focused on the
ecology of large rivers. The high number of students of underrepresented
ethnicities both in universities and K-12 programs throughout the region who
will have direct access to programs at the Rice Center is significant. This
field station has the potential to greatly impact instructional activities
throughout the region and to greatly enhance opportunities for faculty,
university-students, K-12 programs and life-long learners. &lt;br/&gt;