* 0330096
* Changes in Atmospheric Oxygen (O2), Carbon Dioxide (CO2), and Argon (Ar) Concentrations in Relation to the Carbon Cycle and Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Ralph Keeling, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/2008
* USD 1,201,667.00

The precise measurement of atmospheric oxygen was pioneered by the PI. Records
of changes in atmospheric oxygen along with carbon dioxide levels have been
documented for nearly 15 years at a number of sites throughout the globe using
flask sampling of air. These data are extremely useful in documenting and
quantifying sources and sinks of atmospheric carbon dioxide, and their evolution
with time. In particular, sinks of carbon over land and ocean can be
constrained, the response of ocean biogeochemistry to climate change quantified,
and climatologies of air-sea heat exchange tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work is continued in the present investigation, with the addition of activities
designed to improve the quality of the data, including addition of a measurement
site at Ascension Island, equatorial ship board measurements, improvements to
the gas handling procedures and equipment, harmonization of standards, data
management activities, and coordination with the group at Princeton who make
similar measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work
include contribution to the goals of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, and thus to national and international policy on climate. These data
will be of great use in modeling studies to assess the understanding of various
carbon related processes. In addition, there exists significant potential for
unexpected global phenomena of societal relevance. Technology for making climate
relevant observations will be advanced and made available to the scientific
community through publications and the training of students.