* 0330657
* Bull Shoals Field Station Renovations
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2006
* Emmett Redd, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter H. McCartney
* 11/30/2006
* USD 61,144.00

A grant has been awarded to Southwest Missouri State University under the
direction of Dr. J. Greene to improve the Bull Shoals Field Station (BSFS)
facilities by drilling a well, installing a sewage disposal system, and
replacing the electrical wiring and plumbing in the current facility. An
environmentally sound sewage disposal system is required because of the location
of BSFS on the shore of Bull Shoals Lake and within the White River Basin
watershed. In addition, such a facility will serve to educate the public
regarding environmentally responsible wastewater treatment facilities. The
replacement of the plumbing along with the new sewage disposal system will
create a more sanitary and environmentally responsible facility. A new well must
be drilled to provide potable water. In addition, electrical wiring must be
replaced for safety purposes, and will allow for a reliable source of
electricity for IT and laboratory equipment. Improved facilities will enable
scientists to perform more research and analyses on site, dramatically
increasing the number and quality of investigations that can be performed at the
BSFS. The impact of these infrastructure enhancements will allow researchers,
university classes, K-12 school field trips, and community groups access to a
fully functional facility and allow for longer periods of stay. BSFS will also
be used to educate the public about science and environmental stewardship.