* 0330244
* SENSORS: Hourglass: An Infrastructure for Sensor Network
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* H. Kung, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 806,000.00

This proposal will address research issues such as: how to construct sensors
that can usefully function for tens or hundreds of years; how to construct and
manage such sensors on a limited power budget, and how to construct an
infrastructure that can collect data from deployed networks of sensors and route
that data efficiently to the applications that need them; how to build a system
capable of supporting applications that we cannot even imagine today, and what
is the business value of these systems and how can they fundamentally transform
the services that can be provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system to
be developed under this project has three overall components: the sensor
networks themselves, the infrastructure that we call a data collection network,
and the tools necessary to enable development of real applications. At the
hardware level, construction of low-power, long-lived devices will be developed
and energy-efficiency goals will be met by leveraging all levels of the design
hierarchy: from the circuits, architecture, and software. At the infrastructure
level. Hourglass is an architecture for dynamically directing data and control
between sensors and applications, and is designed to be flexible enough to adapt
to unforeseen applications and to cope with sensor networks that are embedded
infrastructures designed to last many years, by enabling adaptivity to rapid
advances in technology while still retaining the ability to interact with legacy
sensor networks, which cannot be changed for logistical reasons. At the
application layer, real problems who can ensure that the systems to be build
solve real problems in business, medicine, and environmental monitoring. These
three layers are connected via both wired and wireless communication links and
we propose to address fundamental questions related to: 1) the development of a
power efficient adaptive communication protocol with embedded prioritized MAC
for intra-node communications and control and 2) the development of Over The
Horizon (OTH), a long distance communication protocol between the sensor network
and the outside world in case of support network infrastructure failure in cases
such as in the event of an emergency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;