* 0330717
* CSEDI: Collaborative Research:  Toward a Comprehensive Model of Mantle Flow &amp; Seismic Anisotropy in the Western US - Using Mineral Physics to Directly link Geodynamics &amp; Se
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Vera Schulte-Pelkum, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 105,604.00

Quantifying the relationship between seismic anisotropy and mantle flow is
important for advancing our understanding of surface tectonics and convection in
the Earth's mantle. The investigators propose a joint approach: to calculate
regional geodynamic flow models, compare derived finite strain to mineral
physics calculations of texture, and perform seismological modeling to find both
strain and texture predictions for anisotropy that are compatible with
observations. They strive to answer the following questions: How are strain,
mantle flow, and anisotropy related, in orientation and in magnitude? To what
degree are deep convective currents coupled to the lithosphere? Can results from
laboratory deformation experiments be applied to the behavior of the mantle at
much lower strain rates? The western United States are an ideal natural test-bed
for this project since the density of seismic and geodetic data is one of the
highest worldwide, allowing for good lateral and depth resolution, which will
increase further during the Earthscope efforts. The proposed study will also be
useful for planning the future deployment of seismic instrumentation, in
particular within the western United States plate boundary region. Funding will
provide support for two female PIs and for the career development of two junior
researchers working on a self-directed project. At the end of the funding
period, the PIs expect to provide the community with a real-world test of
texture formation algorithms and strain-anisotropy relationships, and with a
quantitative guide to the interpretation of seismological observations of
anisotropy with respect to geodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;