* 0330145
* Sensors and Sensor Networks:  Development and Testing of Practical Algorithms for Online Interpretation of Sensor Data through Wavelet Decomposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Tapas Das, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

Project Summary: Development and Testing of Practical Algorithms for Online
Interpretation of Sensor Data through Wavelet Decomposition&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 0330145&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent growth in sensor
technology and its applications have made it easy to gather abundance of data.
Unfortunately, the data collection rate via sensors usually far exceeds our
current ability to process them. A remedy to this bottleneck situation is the
development of effective and online implementable statistical algorithms for
data interpretation. Furthermore, continued miniaturization of the sensors have
significantly increased the sophistication of the sensor fabrication technology
which itself is heavily dependent on sensors. Thus, both ends of the sensor
technology (fabrication and data interpretation) stand to gain from this
research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The funding granted would allow us to 1)
develop theoretical analysis needed to assess the effectiveness of online
multiresolution algorithms in interpreting sensor data, and construct efficient
univariate and multivariate online algorithms, 2) test online algorithms on
sensor data collected from a nanoscale fabrication process, and 3) develop a new
Wavelet-EWMA feedback control strategy using online sensor data analysis
algorithms. Our strategy for objective #1 is to first build a mathematical model
for the multiresolution data analysis scheme in order to assess performance
measures such as false alarm rate, and average run length. Our testing strategy
is an elaborate one. We will collect a variety of sensor data from the test bed
that relate to a number of outstanding operational issues. With each of these
data sets, we will not only test the performances of the algorithms, but also
use the test results to provide answers to the above issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the mathematical analysis developed by this
research would provide a strong foundation for performance assessment of wavelet
based online multiscale algorithms. This science base would lead to the
development of online and practically viable algorithms for sensor data
analysis. Transfer of knowledge discovered through the proposed research into
technological innovations will be enhanced through our collaborations with the
semiconductor industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;