* 0330670
* NMI:  Disseminating and Supporting Middleware Infrastructure: Engaging and Expanding Scientific Grid Communities
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Carl Kesselman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 09/30/2007
* USD 2,102,000.00

In 2001, the Grid Research, Integration, Development and Support (GRIDS) Center
was established to define, develop, deploy, and support an integrated national
middleware infrastructure. This proposal seeks to extend this work to (1)
broaden the scope and capabilities of the middleware delivered; (2) embrace and
extend emerging Open Grid Services Architecture (OGSA) standards; (3) expand the
range of communities supported; and (4) establish international consensus in
middleware. GRIDS Center 2 (GC2), like GC1, will rely heavily on open protocols,
and open source implementations, and will work closely with major U.S. projects
including the NSF Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure (PACI),
the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), the Pittsburgh
Supercomputer Center (PSC), and Internet2 to reach out to other user communities
and to address integration with campus infrastructures. The proposal details a
strategy to aggressively transition relevant technologies to
standards&lt;br/&gt;and industry, building on strong corporate
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal stresses dissemination and
support of this national middleware, with emphasis on outreach to scientific
communities. Specific goals of this proposal are to: 1) Develop and deploy
scalable federated support, bug tracking, and software delivery services. 2)
Improve the quality of the software releases, support, and training. 3) Outreach
to the community with the goals of ensuring that early adopter user communities
are successful and that new user communities are entrained in the use of the
infrastructure. 4) Leverage the PIs' long history in running production
facilities to develop tools and procedures to ensure that the resulting software
is acceptable, deployable and supportable in a wide variety of
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities have significant
intellectual merit and will bring broad benefits to society at large. The GRIDS
leadership and staff are well qualified, having established leadership in the
development and deployment of Grid middleware. These activities are on the
cutting edge, yet they have real and immediate implications for technology users
in the research/education domain, and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of GRIDS Center has already been considerable, with more than a dozen
leading companies such as IBM, Hewlett-Packard, and Oracle having committed to
building on our technology for their Grid products. GC2 will see even greater
emphasis on these outreach efforts, centering on the emergent OGSA standards
that are being driven by the GRIDS leadership.&lt;br/&gt;