* 0330676
* Development of a Residential Facility at the Selman Living Laboratory Biological Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2005
* William Caire, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Central Oklahoma under the
direction of Dr. W. Caire to provide for the construction of a residential
facility at the Selman Living Laboratory (SLL), a biological field station
created in 1998. The SLL occupies 334 acres of remote mixed-grass gypsum prairie
and was established to promote ecological research and hands-on educational
experiences in western Oklahoma. Research and education endeavors have developed
to the point where a facility was needed to house visiting scientists, students,
and community groups for extended stays. The proposed 1,680 square-foot
multipurpose building will be located on a 10-acre portion of the SLL adjacent
to an access road, rural water supply, and electric services. The facility will
accommodate up to 25 individuals and will provide housing as well as space for
research and educational activities. The lack of facilities at the remote SLL
has meant that researchers and students had to commute a considerable distance
for accommodations.

It is important for present and future generations to know as much as possible
about this nation's land. This knowledge will help contribute to appropriate
land management, thereby preserving it for future generations. The SLL's unique
combination of prairies, gypsum outcrops, caves, and the associated springs and
wetlands in western Oklahoma have not been the subject of many studies. The SLL
is the only field station established in North America to study such an
ecosystem. The Selman Cave System is one of several gypsum caves in western
Oklahoma, but the only one located in a biological field station and available
for study. These caves and associated land support several species of bats and
many different prairie wildflowers and wildlife. The SLL provides protection to
the cave system and has become an excellent site for research and conservation
education. When students and the general public experience such ecosystems first
hand, it is much easier for them to champion the causes of conservation and
biodiversity to others. While the proposed grant will fund the construction of
lodging and research space to facilitate extended periods of study, it will also
permit K-12 teacher training, student workshops (including workshops for K-12
students who are tomorrow's teachers and scientists), and educational
opportunities for the general public.

