* 0330612
* GridDB-Lite:  Database Support for Data-Driven Scientific Applications in the Grid
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Joel Saltz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 403,000.00

The purpose of this project is to develop a middleware framework to enable
efficient execution of queries for extracting the data of interest from large
scientific datasets in a distributed environment. The project will develop and
evaluate a middleware infrastructure, Grid Database-Lite (GridDB-Lite), to
support the following basic database operations in the Grid: selection of the
data of interest from datasets distributed among disparate storage systems; and
transfer of data from storage systems to compute nodes for processing. The
architecture will leverage two developed frameworks: Active Data Repository and
DataCutter. The project will also: design a framework to incorporate an object-
relational model for querying scientific datasets; develop algorithms for
efficient; examine methods for indexing and declustering of large datasets in a
distributed environment; and develop and evaluate algorithms for efficient
transfer of selected subsets of datasets from distributed storage clusters to
processor memories or disks on destination compute
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact and Intellectual merit - This
research project proposes to address issues that pertain to a key step in large
scale data analysis, which is the extraction of the data of interest from large,
distributed datasets. As dataset sizes continue to grow, an efficient solution
to this step will be increasingly important to wide-scale deployment of data
analysis in the Grid. This project will also have a significant impact on
teaching and human resource development. As part of the curriculum in the
Biomedical Informatics Department, the proposers will offer a course (BMI731) on
large-scale data management and manipulation. This course exposes students in
biomedical informatics to grid technologies, and enables computer scientists to
discover new data-intensive grid applications. Students in this course will gain
experience with GridDB-Lite and will be exposed to application development. A
majority of funds in this project will be used to support Ph.D students, and to
train them to make long-term research contributions in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;