* 0330626
* NMI:  Extending Integrated Middleware to Collaborative Environments in Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Douglas Van Houweling, INTERNET2
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,090,365.00

Building on the foundations of the existing NMI-EDIT work, this proposal intends
to set new directions in a number of specific thematic areas within Security,
Directories, Virtual Organization (VO) Management, and Middleware End-to-End
Diagnostics, while continuing its efforts in Outreach and Evaluation services.
Specifically, the proposed work will:&lt;br/&gt; respond to unmet needs by
expanding core enterprise architecture to include important new tools in
enterprise and federated security and in authorization&lt;br/&gt; complete basic
directory service developments, with particular focus on support of inter-realm
directory operations&lt;br/&gt; establish a framework and associated tools to
support critical needs for middleware diagnostics &lt;br/&gt; provide evaluation
and outreach to ensure continuing successful impact of NMI
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accomplishment of these objectives will have broad
impact by:&lt;br/&gt;strengthening the ability of campus core middleware
infrastructure to support research, education, and administration, and the
breadth of campus deployments&lt;br/&gt;facilitating multidisciplinary, multi-
institutional collaboration in many scientific areas through shared data,
digital libraries, web-based services, computing, code, facilities, and
applications&lt;br/&gt;continuing to leverage user-managed security and privacy
in a growing number of applications and provide the scalable and sustainable
architecture that success in middleware requires&lt;br/&gt;promoting and
supporting the development of open standards and open source approaches, and
encouraging collaboration with government and international
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's outcomes also are likely to have
additional benefits, including seamless and timely integration of research
materials into academic courseware; engagement and retention of the best and
brightest IT architects from leading campuses and discovery of gems of expertise
in unlikely institutions; creation of a community of practitioners, who are
developing and refining best practices that have, in turn, accelerated
deployments and convergence; and influence on the corporate sector, shaping a
federated marketplace that serves higher education requirements for privacy and
security.&lt;br/&gt;