* 0330135
* SENSORS: Integrated  Molecular Sensors Derived from Combinatorial Protein and DNA Libraries
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Bruce Armitage, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2006
* USD 675,000.00

EXPERIMENTAL AND INTEGRATED ACTIVITIES &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SENSORS: Integrated
Molecular Sensors Derived from Combinatorial protein and DNA
Libraries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bruce A Armitage&lt;br/&gt;(EIA -
0330135)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is on the construction of integrated molecular sensors derived from
combinatorial libraries of proteins and DNA. An integrated molecular sensor
consists minimally of two components: the recognition element that binds to the
target molecule (analyte), and the signal transducer that converts the binding
event into a readable signal. The recognition element will be derived from the
aforementioned combinatorial libraries. These libraries will be generated either
through genetic engineering for proteins or through chemical synthesis for DNA.
The assumption is that at least some of the library members will fold into a
three-dimensional structure that is complementary to some part of the target.
Controlled in vitro selection procedures will then be used to isolate members of
the libraries that bind to a particular target, namely the ricin A-chain
protein, with high affinity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research are several-fold. While much of the work proposed is of a fundamental
nature, the target molecule to be used in the selections, the ricin A-chain
protein is of immediate relevance. This target is important due to recently
heightened concerns about the use of the ricin toxin, which includes the
A-chain, in bioterrorism and biowarfare. Moreover, the methods to be developed
for constructing integrated molecular sensors can be applied to many other
targets. Functional sensors for use in the clinic and the field can be realized
from this research. Students working on this project will be exposed to a broad
range of techniques including chemical synthesis, molecular biology and optical
spectroscopy. In addition to the expected academic year efforts, graduate
student mentors and undergraduate students will be recruited for a special
summer research team that will spend ten weeks working in a highly
collaborative, multidisciplinary environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;