* 0331740
* Workshop on Nanoscale Systems, Dynamics and Control;  June 3, 2003;  Denver, CO
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2003
* Metin Sitti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Masayoshi Tomizuka
* 11/30/2003
* USD 19,950.00

The purpose of the workshop is to bring together leading researchers from many
different&lt;br/&gt;disciplines in the current trend, challenging unsolved
problems, and applications of nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;systems, dynamics and control
as a new emerging field. Nanotechnology which is aimed to&lt;br/&gt;control the
materials and processes at the molecular and nanoscales has become one of the
critical&lt;br/&gt;technologies of this century. Scientists and engineers are
focused on solving basic and&lt;br/&gt;technological problems, and system based
research is still very immature. Modeling, design,&lt;br/&gt;integration, and
control of nanoscale systems is of vital importance in a host of
applications&lt;br/&gt;ranging from nanomanufacturing, micro/nanorobotics, and
material characterization, to the design&lt;br/&gt;and control of devices for
biotechnology, information technology, and medical applications.
The&lt;br/&gt;workshop will address both the state of the art and future
directions of the field with very&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary presenters and
audience.&lt;br/&gt;Invited speakers with different areas of specialty would
introduce the state-of-the-art issues,&lt;br/&gt;achievements and open
challenges in their topics which include scanning probe
microscope&lt;br/&gt;dynamics and control, nanomanufacturing system monitoring
and control, nanorobotics,&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale system integration,
nanomanipulation and nanoassembly, bionanosystems, controlling&lt;br/&gt;and
directing self-assembly, nanopositioning systems and control, biomimetic and
smart&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale systems and structures, nanoscale physics, modeling of
nanoscale dynamics and&lt;br/&gt;systems, novel nanoscale system applications in
biology, medicine, information technology,&lt;br/&gt;materials, etc., hard disk
storage systems using nanoprobes, advanced man-machine user&lt;br/&gt;interfaces
for nanorobots, and etc.&lt;br/&gt;A final report after the workshop will be
submitted to the NSF which could be used for defining&lt;br/&gt;current status,
open research challenges, funding guidelines, possible initiatives, etc. in
the&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale systems, dynamics and control area.