* 0331381
* Structure-Property Relationships in Colossal Magnetoresistance Thin Film Materials through Nanofabrication
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Yuri Suzuki, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2005
* USD 170,158.00

This project seeks greater understanding of the spin, charge and lattice
coupling in a class of ferromagnetic cubic perovskite materials known as
"colossal" magnetoresistance (CMR) materials through nanofabrication and
characterization. The project also emphasizes the development of integrated
research and educational opportunities at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. The magnetoresistive response of ferromagnetic cubic perovskite
materials such as (La,Sr)MnO3 is extremely sensitive to lattice strain and thus
to structural distortion. Correlating structural distortions with magnetic and
electronic properties is particularly important in shedding light on the origin
of the anomalously large magnetoresistance effect observed. This project
specifically addresses (i) the relationship between local magnetic structure and
the strain state through geometrical confinement and (ii) the magnetotransport
in submicron size device heterostructures. The strain state of CMR materials can
be tailored by geometrical confinement through nanofabrication and the resulting
nanostructures will be characterized magnetically and electronically. This
approach provides information not only on the interplay between structure and
magnetics behind the anomalously large magnetoresistance in these materials but
also on the fundamental quantum limit of their incorporation into magnetic
recording applications as magnetic media become
denser.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in a
topical area of materials science having high potential technological relevance.
The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
level to new aspects of magnetic devices. The basic knowledge and understanding
gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving the perform-ance
and stability of advanced devices by providing a fundamental understanding and a
basis for designing and producing improved materials, and materials
combinations. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;