* 0331227
* Inquiry-Based Learning Through Laboratory Exercises in Seismology:  An Invitation to the World of Science Research
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* John Ebel, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2006
* USD 177,220.00

Kafka&lt;br/&gt;0331227&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inquiry-Based Learning Through
Laboratory Exercises in Seismology: An Invitation to the World Of Science
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a simple, inexpensive seismograph, it is
possible to record earthquakes at great distances from across the globe. This
grant designs laboratory exercises and a student research project that are based
on seismograms recorded by a simple, inexpensive AS1 seismograph and on
earthquake information available on the Internet from global monitoring of
earthquakes. These learning experiences invite students into the world of
scientific research by inquiry-based learning through investigation of what is
recorded by seismographs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual merit of
this activity involves the revision and refinement of our work to date on
developing authentic science experiences that engage students in solving real-
world scientific problems. Working with partners in the Boston College Lynch
School of Education, two Boston public high schools, and one middle school, we
develop laboratory investigations to support student-centered research projects
based on the AS1 seismograph. During the two years of this project, we are
working closely with three target schools (two high schools, and one middle) in
the Boston area, and the entire undergraduate elementary teacher population in
the Lynch School of Education, as well as our undergraduate geoscience majors.
At a minimum this involves approximately three high school science teachers and
their students (about 400 students), 110 undergraduate elementary teachers,
three middle school teachers and their students (about 300), and 20
undergraduate geoscience majors. However, through our outreach and dissemination
components we are in a position to impact a much larger
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work involves
engagement of underrepresented minority populations in the doing of real hands-
on science. Further, this work serves as a testing ground where we develop
scientific activities that can be used in all high and middle schools in the
state of Massachusetts. We are continuing the development of a series of
authentic science laboratory exercises associated with our first-year
introductory geophysics course for majors, to develop a student research
project, and to extend these laboratory exercises and research project to two
other populations: an undergraduate science course for prospective teachers in
the Lynch School of Education, and two inner-city high schools (Brighton High
School and Odyssey High School), and a middle school (South Middle School in
Waltham, MA). These activities are based on seismograms recorded by the AS1
seismograph and on earthquake data available on the Internet.