* 0331626
* SGER: Functional Genomics Tools Based on Double Standard RNA-mediated Transcriptional and Post-transcriptional Gene Silencing
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Richard Jorgensen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The principal goal of the proposed research is to maximize the efficiency and
the effectiveness of RNA interference (RNAi) as a tool for functional genomics
in plants, especially polyploids. Currently, RNAi technology suffers from
several limitations that severely limit its usefulness for genome-wide
determination of gene functions, as well as for more focused reverse genetic
investigations directed at specific subsets of the genes encoded by a genome.
High-throughput mutagenesis by RNAi is not possible because the necessity of
inserting two copies of the same sequence in silencing constructs requires that
each construct be made individually, which is laborious and expensive. The
approach proposed here exploits sense co-suppression, a means of inducing RNA
silencing with a single copy of the target sequence. This allows the
construction of silencing constructs for a large number of genes simultaneously
in pools (i.e., production of silencing constructs in a in massively parallel
manner). The justification under SGER for this small, exploratory project is
that it brings a new approach to the problem of generating mutations in a high-
throughput manner in crop plants, especially polyploids. In addition, we will
evaluate the relative effectiveness of dsRNA-mediated transcriptional silencing
as compared to post-transcriptional silencing for use in focused reverse genetic
experiments, which are common components of plant functional genomics projects
directed at specific families of related genes. Results and methods will be made
available publicly via the RNAi tools section at The Plant Chromatin Database
(ChromDB: http://chromdb.biosci.arizona.edu/), by presentation at appropriate
scientific conferences, and by means of publication in scientific journals.
Novel vectors will be made freely available via a public repository such as the
Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC: http://www.biosci.ohiostate.edu/~p
lantbio/Facilities/abrc/abrchome.htm).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
This project will fund an underrepresented minority high school student who will
participate in the proposed research and receive independent study credit hours
through the University of Arizona Honors College and Summer of Excellence
program for superior high school students.&lt;br/&gt;