* 0331537
* CSU Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2009
* Joseph Sheley, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2009
* USD 7,948,000.00

California State University Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
Program, Phase III &lt;br/&gt;nitiated in 1994, the California State University-
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation &lt;br/&gt;Program (CSU-LSAMP)
is a comprehensive, statewide program dedicated to increasing the
&lt;br/&gt;number of students from underrepresented minority groups (URM)
graduating from campuses &lt;br/&gt;of the California State University (CSU)
with baccalaureate degrees in science, technology, &lt;br/&gt;engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The CSU-AMP Alliance includes 47 public
&lt;br/&gt;postsecondary institutions: 19 CSU campuses plus 28 California
Community Colleges (CCC). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With past NSF support, CSU-
LSAMP contributed substantially to broadening participation of
&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines. If the annual number of
STEM degrees awarded &lt;br/&gt;to URM students had remained at the 1993 pre-
CSU-LSAMP baseline of 750, the total number &lt;br/&gt;of degrees awarded
between 1994-95 and 2001-02 would have been 6000. Instead, a total of
&lt;br/&gt;11,601 degrees were awarded over the past eight-year period, an
increase of 5,601 URM-&lt;br/&gt;STEM degrees. The potential for CSU-LSAMP to
further increase overall participation of URM &lt;br/&gt;students in STEM is
strengthened by projections for changes in the number and proportion of
&lt;br/&gt;URM students graduating from California public high schools. In Phase
III, CSU-LSAMP &lt;br/&gt;proposes to engage approximately 2,000 URM
students/year in activities that sustain or further &lt;br/&gt;improve
individual student retention and progression rates achieved during Phase I and
Phase &lt;br/&gt;II, and proposes to increase the number of URM-STEM degrees
awarded from the 2001-2002 &lt;br/&gt;level of 1,485 to 2,528 in 2007-2008.
Hence, the CSU-LSAMP goal is to award over 1,000 &lt;br/&gt;more STEM
baccalaureate degrees to URM students by the end of the project period.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Since California Community Colleges enroll approximately
63% of college-going students in &lt;br/&gt;California, partnership activities
that improve transfer rates are critical to achieving the degree
&lt;br/&gt;production goal. Therefore, during Phase III, CSU-LSAMP will complete
construction of &lt;br/&gt;.bridges. between CSU and CCC partners that
facilitate student advancement through this &lt;br/&gt;critical decision point.
Since many of the strategies initiated in Phase I and Phase II for lower
&lt;br/&gt;division students have already been institutionalized, CSU-LSAMP will
also introduce activities &lt;br/&gt;in Phase III that are designed to enhance
graduate school preparedness of upper division &lt;br/&gt;students with the goal
of improving aggregate student progression to STEM graduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Phase III activities provided by each CSU campus will
focus on four common objectives: (1) &lt;br/&gt;increasing transfer rates of URM
students from the community colleges to STEM majors in the &lt;br/&gt;CSU; (2)
enhancing first and second year retention rates and overall academic performance
of &lt;br/&gt;URM students in STEM majors to levels comparable to levels for
non-URM students; (3) &lt;br/&gt;enhancing performance of URM students in math
and science courses; and (4) increasing the &lt;br/&gt;number of URM students
interested in pursuing graduate study in STEM disciplines, and
&lt;br/&gt;enhancing graduate school preparedness of upper division URM-STEM
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The types of activities that will be offered to
support each objective have consistently been &lt;br/&gt;shown to facilitate
retention and progression of URM students in STEM, and represent a set of
&lt;br/&gt;well-established .best practices. for accomplishing the objectives.
These activities include: &lt;br/&gt;course articulation between CSU and
community colleges; individual transfer agreements with &lt;br/&gt;community
college students; advising/orientation programs; peer mentoring; faculty
mentoring; &lt;br/&gt;intensive summer or academic year programs designed to
prepare students to excel in calculus &lt;br/&gt;courses; supplemental academic
year workshops designed to enhance performance in specific &lt;br/&gt;math and
science courses; graduate information workshops; AY or summer internships and
&lt;br/&gt;research experiences; GRE preparation workshops; participation in
scientific and professional &lt;br/&gt;conferences; interactions with other URM-
STEM serving programs; and Interactions with URM-&lt;br/&gt;STEM serving prog ms
at Ph.D. granting institutions.