* 0331285
* QSB: The Design and Construction of Coupled Genetic Regulatory Modules
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Jeff Hasty, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 09/30/2006
* USD 500,000.00

An important theme in post-genomic research is the dissection and quantitative
analysis of the complex dynamical interactions involved in gene regulation. The
molecular interaction maps involved in many important cellular processes often
resemble circuit diagrams, and this analogy highlights the motivation for a
quantitative description of gene regulation. An electrical circuit is invariably
accompanied by a set of equations which faithfully describe its functionality,
and it is built from knowledge of the properties of the individual components
(resistors, capacitors, inductors, etc.) to provide a framework for predicting
the circuit behavior resulting from component modifications. An acceptable model
describing a given molecular interaction map should be similarly built from
knowledge of the basic regulatory themes in order to enable the prediction of
the effects of genetic perturbations of the system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on the construction and utilization of genetic "circuits" for
dissecting, analyzing, and controlling the dynamical interactions involved in
gene regulation. Previous investigations of engineered gene circuits have
included the development of positive feedback and co-repressive switching
networks, as well as an oscillating circuit. These previous studies have
explored several of the building-block modules that constitute large-scale
genomic wiring, and thus represent a first step towards an understanding of
whole-genome regulatory complexity. The current project will build upon these
previous studies by designing and constructing higher order networks consisting
of coupled genetic regulatory modules. Specifically, the investigators will
model and construct a regulatory network which couples a co-repressive module
with an unregulated constitutive module, and explore how such coupling can
induce oscillations in a toggle switch. As a second project, they plan to model
and construct a synthetic network which couples the phase oscillator known as
the "repressilator" with a relaxation oscillator module, and explore the
synchronization properties of the coupled oscillator system. This approach could
lead to an experimentally validated set of mathematical rules for understanding
the complex circuitry of whole-genome regulatory processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The top-down approaches, which are used by many
investigators to analyze the expression states of thousands of genes, have
contributed towards understanding the global patterns of gene expression and
assessing gene lethality. The bottom-up approach to be used in this project,
which reduces the complexity of these gene networks to their essential
components, will lead to the modular dissection of network architectures and
refined descriptions of gene expression dynamics. The combination of these two
complementary approaches will eventually lead to the elucidation of the
organization and functioning of gene regulatory networks. In addition, work
stemming from this research should enhance the ability to utilize synthetic gene
networks as new logical forms of cellular control, and could in turn lead to
important applications in functional genomics, nanotechnology, and gene and cell
therapies.