* 0331416
* ME: Metabolic Engineering of Root-Colonizing Bacteria for Rhizoremediation of Chlorinated Ethanes and Heavy Metals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Wilfred Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2008
* USD 765,847.00

This project will combine the multidisciplinary expertise of the Principal
Investigators (PIs) to develop a potentially reliable and economical process for
the simultaneous removal of heavy metal and organopollutants from contaminated
soil. Integration of metabolic engineering strategies with testing in real soil
settings represents a unique effort that expands the fundamental development of
metabolic engineering into a practical remediation technology. The benefit to
society will be the development of an environmentally benign strategy that
addresses mixed waste contamination in an inexpensive
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves intersection of principles
and methods of molecular genetics, protein engineering, and environmental
engineering. Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers participating in
this research will gain an integrated perspective of the important interfaces
and synergies connecting biochemistry, modern genetics, and process engineering.
As the integration of research and education is one of the key programs of NSF,
the proposed research will involve the participation of K-12 school students,
undergraduates and graduate students, particularly form underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full impact of this project will be the
development of a metabolically engineered root-colonizing bacterium that can be
used for simultaneous removal of heavy metal and organopollutants. An optimized
host for TCE degradation and heavy metal removal/resistant will be engineered by
employing parallel protein engineering, surface engineering, and pathway
engineering strategies.&lt;br/&gt;