* 0331478
* Symposium JJ "Combinatorial and Artificial Intelligence Methods in Materials Science II"  held at the Materials Research Society (MRS); Boston, MA; December 1-5, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2004
* USD 3,000.00

The Materials Research Society Symposium on Combinatorial and Artificial
Intelligence Methods in Materials Science II will be held in Boston, MA December
1-5, 2003. The goal of the conference is to facilitate multidisciplinary
interactions and information exchange within a broad spectrum of researchers, to
include graduate students, post doctoral scholars and junior faculty working in
priority areas of the broad field of combinatorial and high throughput materials
science. The NSF funds will be used exclusively to offset the expenses
associated with attending the symposium for U.S. participants, specifically
graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, junior faculty and selected plenary
speakers in this new area of materials research. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The
materials research community continues to have a direct impact on important
technological areas that are crucial to advancing society through the design,
synthesis and application new materials. Such areas include the fundamental
scientific aspects as well as advanced applications of combinatorial materials
science, artificial intelligence needs for automation, data mining and knowledge
discovery. Since these technical areas are of very high priority to industry,
students educated and trained in these multidisciplinary areas compete very well
in the job market and go on to contribute in many significant ways to the global
economy.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;