* 0331105
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Rice Agricultural Intensification and Sociopolitical Development in the Bronze, Central Western Korean Peninsula
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2004
* USD 11,889.00

Under the supervision of Robert D. Drennan, Bumcheol Kim will carry out doctoral
dissertation research in central western Korean on the transition from the Early
Bronze Age (1300-800 B.C.) to the Middle Bronze Age (800-400 B.C.). This
transition represents the initial appearance of social inequality and emergent
chiefdoms in the region along with the intensification of rice production. By
analyzing settlement data at various scales equivalent to different social
components (e.g. regional polities, local communities, and individual
households), Mr. Kim will reconstruct the relationship between agricultural
production and emergent social complexity. His research will position the
societies studied along a continuum ranging from complete household autonomy in
subsistence affairs to direct management of agricultural systems by centralized
authorities as a means of mobilizing surplus resources. His methodology will
include primary regional settlement survey; incorporating data from previously
conducted surveys into GIS analysis along with information on topography,
hydrology, soils, and ancient transportation routes; and comparison of household
artifact assemblages recovered in previously conducted excavations at sites in
the regional survey area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex societies that
developed independently in different parts of the world, including Korea, often
relied on intensive agricultural technologies that required massive input of
human labor but yielded very large returns per unit of land. Such patterns of
production have often been the basis of social hierarchy since they can provide
the means for elites to mobilize the labor of primary producer households toward
the generation of the surplus necessary for funding sociopolitical institutions.
The operation of such systems has most often been studied in highly developed
forms, leaving the origins and initial development of such political economies
poorly documented. Even studies of the "chiefdoms" that preceded fully developed
states tend to concentrate on the more complex forms of chiefly organization
rather than its initial stages. They also focus on what level of social
complexity is required for organizing intensive agricultural systems, more than
on how the relationship between social hierarchy and agricultural production
worked. Although our knowledge of the ways in which such systems worked in the
ancient Near East and in the New World tropics has grown substantially,.
comparatively little attention has been paid to this issue for early East Asian
complex societies, and Mr. Kim's research will help fill this gap in our
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project will have a broader
impact on the infrastructure of archaeological science by providing the doctoral
candidate with training in the design, direction, and realization of
professional field research, by providing fundamental field experience to a
number of graduate and undergraduate archaeology students who will assist in
carrying out the project, and by building international collaborative
partnerships among individual and institutional participants.&lt;br/&gt;