* 0331727
* Workshop: Diffusion Tensor Imaging and the Cognitive Neurosciences, New York
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* John Gabrieli, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 08/31/2004
* USD 37,344.00

This workshop will convene advanced researchers from four communities to discuss
methods and uses for measuring and modeling white matter tracts in the human
brain. The goal is to integrate those maps into the widely used functional
imaging maps based on regional cerebral blood flow in gray matter brain areas.
In particular, the workshop will assemble leading researchers in cognitive
neuroscience, clinical neuroscience, MR-Diffusion Tensor Imaging, and algorithm
development. The workshop has four specific goals: (1) Explore the most advanced
uses of diffusion tensor-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DTI) for modeling
white matter neural connectivity and tractography, and to assess its validity
compared to other methods. (2) Discuss methods for integrating models of white
matter into cognitive and clinical neuroscience data and models, comparing DTI
to other methods. (3) Discuss how to promote new advances in DTI techniques for
applications relevant to cognitive and clinical neuroscience. (4) Discuss how to
implement new advances in DTI in readily accessible software that can be
distributed to the cognitive and clinical neuroscience communities. The workshop
will involve very short presentations by experts, panel discussions, and focused
small group discussion. In attendance will be 3 -5 postdoctoral fellows from
each community. The workshop will be held in New York City, and will be one and
a half days in duration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
workshop is the facilitation of inter-disciplinary approaches to the refinement
of emerging MR diffusion tensor imaging techniques specifically for the purposes
of analyzing white matter networks non-invasively. The incorporation of white
matter maps into cognitive and clinical neuroscience research and theory is
expected to have pervasive impact. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the workshop include the following. Leaders and very junior researchers in at
least four separate research communities will focus intensely on exchanging
views and educating each other to the scientific, technical, and software
aspects of DTI, as compared with other measures of white matter connectivity. In
addition to such cross training and advanced education, it is expected that
collaborations &lt;br/&gt;will develop out of the interactions in this workshop,
enhancing the capacity for greater applications, developments, and impact of
DTI. Moreover, although this conference is small in size, it will be used as a
seed for symposia and panels at annual meetings of the constituent professional
societies for these involved researchers. &lt;br/&gt;