* 0331151
* Making Earth Science Research Accessible Through New Media Technology
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Doug Prose, EARTH IMAGES FOUNDATION
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2007
* USD 212,216.00

Prose&lt;br/&gt;0331151&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This
grant lays the groundwork for a project that will integrate cutting-edge
international geologic research with the development of innovative multimedia
Earth sciences educational resources. The PIs, Doug Prose and Diane LaMacchia of
Earth Images Foundation, are carrying out pre-production and production
activities for two Earth science documentary videos and a classroom guide and
interactive DVD for each. The PIs are collaborating with research scientists, a
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) television production director at KQED in San
Francisco, and a curriculum specialist to prepare and execute the shooting plan
for filming the initial activities of several major scientific programs. Filming
will cover the deep drilling to install sensors 4km deep in the San Andreas
Fault, to penetrate the Hawaiian shield lava down to pre-existing seafloor, and
the recovery of million year old sediments from Lake Malawi. Another effort will
capture video from a multidisciplinary geophysical efforts surveying the ancient
shield and accretionary arc in Venezuela and the Caribbean basin, and the
evolution of the Appennine Mountains in Italy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Borader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are creating a design plan to produce the classroom
guides and DVDs; and preparing video treatments that produce videos compelling
to both a PBS audience and to students in introductory Earth science classes.
The video shooting plan, the educational material design plans, and video
treatments are all evaluated by an external evaluator. The final products
increase the availability of up-to-date Earth sciences educational materials
that formally and informally increase science literacy and encourage young
people to enter the Earth sciences as a profession. The DVDs also serve as a
prototype for using new multimedia technology to organize and adapt the latest
scientific research results into a rich learning experience. The PIs have filmed
scientists that serve as role models to under-represented students in Earth
sciences: women and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;