* 0331181
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Obsidian Exchange in the South Central Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Mark Aldenderfer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2004
* USD 11,990.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Mark Aldenderfer, Nicholas Tripcevich will survey
and test archaeological sites in the vicinity of a large obsidian source in the
highlands of southern Peru. Research has shown that the Colca Valley of Peru was
a primary source of obsidian for people in the south-central Andes for over
8,000 years. In excavations at archaeological sites hundreds of kilometers away
from the source itself, researchers have found this chemically distinct obsidian
material in sites associated with cultures ranging from early foraging groups to
those of the powerful Tiwanaku state. The geological source of this obsidian was
only recently identified and Tripcevich's survey in the vicinity of this
obsidian source will build on the preliminary research that has been conducted
to date. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How would changes in regional demand for obsidian
affect the activities of people visiting the source over the millennia?
Significant changes in the socio-political context of obsidian consumption in
the region occurred between the Late Archaic (4,800 BC) and the Late Formative
(AD 500) with the appearance of social hierarchy and dramatic public
architecture in the Lake Titicaca Basin to the east. Was obsidian procurement
and exchange closely tied to the emerging elite on the shores of Lake Titicaca?
Anthropological theory suggests that long-distance social networks and the
circulation of non-local commodities are significant components serving the
political ambitions of aspiring leaders. This study will provide a perspective
on the changing nature of obsidian procurement and demand by focusing on changes
in initial processing of the obsidian at the source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will survey 70 km2 at the quarry and in the adjacent river
valley, and will conduct limited test excavations at the quarry and at two
stratified sites. Prehistoric exploitation of obsidian in the source region will
be documented through lithic reduction strategies at and near the high-altitude
obsidian source, stratigraphic evidence from test excavations, and settlement
pattern data from survey. By examining changes in lithic processing strategies
at the obsidian source, as well as shifts in settlement pattern and debitage
distributions in the nearby river valley, this project will connect behavior in
the lithic procurement area and the residential Colca valley with political
changes known to have taken place regionally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
investigation of obsidian production in the Colca area represents a case-study
of the relationship between lithic procurement and exchange, and the evolution
of social complexity that will be comparable to other regions in the world. A
central methodological aim of this research project is the integration of new
geographical technology for approaching spatial analysis problems. Throughout
the organization, design, acquisition, and analysis phases of the project remote
sensing and geographical information systems (GIS) will have played a central
role. This project aims to foster greater scholarly cooperation in the use of
these technologies internationally and to educate interested students of both
Peruvian and foreign backgrounds about the application of GIS to anthropological
research questions. The results of this research will be prepared for
publication in refereed journals as well as for dissemination to scholars and to
the public through the project website. Additionally, the graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the project will gain field and analysis
experience through participation in this project.&lt;br/&gt;