* 0331755
* STUDY:  A Prototype Radiation Therapy Treatment Planning Research Toolkit
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Eva Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 12/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

This Study Grant supports the research of the NCI-sponsored Optimization
Collaborative Working Group (CWG), consisting of nine members from multiple
disciplines. The initial goal of the CWG involves developing standards for web-
based tools that will enhance the development and validation of dose computation
and optimization algorithms in the delivery of radiation treatments. The CWG
members will implement prototypes of these web-based tools and data sets that
can be examined by peers in this area of treatment planning, and solicit
examination and feed back from a small group of these peers. Specifically, the
project is a proof-of-concept study that involves discussion and work aimed at
evolving a design that can support the grand vision of developing a
comprehensive software environment to facilitate research on radiation therapy
treatment planning. CWG members will exchange ideas, experiment with their own
software, develop and implement strategies for interfacing component software
systems, and develop a rudimentary database of patient cases. By the end of the
twelve-month timeframe, several hands-on demonstrations and exercises will have
been developed to demonstrate proof-of-concept. The proof-of-concept
experimentation will lay the foundation for a follow-up multi-year joint
collaborative project phase of production-quality development in which a
comprehensive database of patient cases and plan directives will be created, and
a production-quality toolkit that meets researcher needs for dose calculation,
modeling, optimization, and evaluation will be developed.

The success of this project will advance frontiers of knowledge in several
areas. First, the research allows objective analysis of computation and
optimization algorithms that are viable for clinical use in treatment planning
design. It will help to validate the correct implementation and usage of these
algorithms and to understand their limitations. Second, the toolkit will provide
a set of tools and a distribution method that will allow Quality Assurance
Centers, research scientists, and clinicians to develop, validate and implement
treatment plans that can be benchmarked against accepted standards, and will
therefore help to advance the associated frontiers of knowledge. Third, the
toolkit will foster interdisciplinary collaborations among clinicians, medical
physicists, and optimization researchers as it offers a common planning
environment with patient cases and evaluation tools for objectively comparing
plan quality resulting from different optimization techniques. Finally, from an
educational standpoint, it offers a common treatment-planning platform in which
Ph.D. students and residents among these three fields can be cross-trained so as
to develop high-quality optimization and computational tools for Intensity
Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT) treatment planning design.