* 0331710
* Electronic Structure of Conducting Polymers and Organic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Miklos Kertesz, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 11/30/2007
* USD 246,000.00

This award is funded by the Materials Theory Program in the Division of
Materials Research and the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in
the Chemistry Division. The objective of this project is to determine strategies
and perform reliable calculations for predicting the fundamental properties of
organic molecular semiconductors and organic conjugated polymers. While the
proposed work relies heavily on first principles calculations, empirical
elements in the computational modeling process are retained and emphasized.
Intermolecular packing is difficult to predict from first principles, but
packing directly effects intermolecular hopping, the key parameter to be studied
in the first part of this project. The effect of intermolecular packing on the
band structure of conjugated polymers, the subject of the second part of this
project, is indirect often exerting its effect through torsional degrees of
freedom. In either case, the integration of direct or indirect experimental
information on packing or torsion ensures that the quality of the predictions is
more reliable, than it would be in a purely first principles
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reliability of the predictions for the
organic molecular materials is ensured via a multi-scale approach in which
dimers play a central role. The dimer level splittings can be treated with very
accurate quantum chemical methods, and the effect of a number of key influences
will be studied systematically, including level of theory, basis set, and
geometrical effects, which will be used to predict the electronic structure of
these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For conjugated polymers, the approach
contains similar elements, but the proposed work focuses on predicting small
band-gap polymers. Several effects influence the band-gap, including
connectivity, various geometrical factors including deviations from planarity
and bond localization, and others that are more chemical in nature such as
heteroatoms and side groups. Plans include method development for a polymer
computer code, and applications across specific groups of polymers that have the
potential of producing very small band-gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
has the potential to significantly influence experimental studies by helping to
search for new and better functioning materials for device applications. The
project also involves students at the undergraduate and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Materials Theory
Program in the Division of Materials Research and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division. The objective of this
project is to determine strategies and perform reliable calculations for
predicting the fundamental properties of organic molecular semiconductors and
organic conjugated polymers. This research has the potential to significantly
influence experimental studies by helping to search for new and better
functioning materials for device applications. The project also involves
students at the undergraduate and graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;