* 0331066
* SGER:  Does Re-expression of Vimentin Induce Resumption of Axonal Elongation?
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Thomas Shea, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marc D. Servetnick
* 06/30/2004
* USD 63,945.00

Neurons, extend long processes called axons, that act essentially as telephone
wires and transmit the signals that allow us to think, feel and move. During
embryonic development, axons elongate at a rapid rate, connecting nerve cells
and muscles. Once an axon reaches its target, however, it stops elongating and
stabilizes its structure, since its task is now to remain connected for the
lifetime of the individual. The axon is supported internally by a series of
fibrous structures collectively referred to as the cytoskeleton (that is, the
skeleton of the cell). Dr. Shea's laboratory has shown that the rapid elongation
during development is mediated by a protein called vimentin, that forms pliable
filaments that rapidly assemble and disassemble. Once the neuron reaches its
target, however, it stops producing vimentin, and replaces it with a different
group of proteins called neurofilaments. Neurofilaments make fibers that cross
link and bind together, and form a stabilized matrix that supports the now
fully-grown axon. Unfortunately, should an axon die or be severed, the portion
that is connected to the neuron is unable to start growing again to allow
reconnection to its previous target. The PI has studied these events in
neuroblastoma cells; a cell line, due to ease of manipulation and cost-
effectiveness. Their early observations indicated a developmental heirarchy in
intermediate filaments (IFs). Vimentin (Vm) is the predominant IF species during
axonal initiation. During axonal elongation, Vm expression ceases and neurons
express neurofilament (NF) proteins, which increase axonal caliber and stabilize
the developing axon. Dr. Shea's laboratory has demonstrated by intracellular
delivery of neutralizing antibodies and antisense oligonucleotides that Vm is
essential for axon initiation but is dispensable once the axon has formed;
conversely, NFs are not required for axonal initiation but are essential for
axonal stabilization. The PI proposes to examine further this phenomenon in
motor neurons (neurons that connect to and stimulate muscle cells) grown outside
the body, to determine whether or not we can induce axons to start growing again
and whether or not such axons stop growing when they reach their targets. Dr.
Shea's laboratory is proficient in all of the required methodologies, and this
project will provide rich training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students.



