* 0331402
* Metabolic Engineering (ME):    Genomic and Genetic Approaches to Solvent Tolerance in Anaerobes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Eleftherios Papoutsakis, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/28/2007
* USD 619,497.00

This project is to understand and exploit the molecular basis that determines
tolerance of the industrially important anaerobic clostridia to solvents.
Furthermore, the Principal Investigators (PIs) aim to develop general genomic
and metabolic engineering strategies for understanding the molecular basis of
tolerance to chemicals and for developing tolerant strains. The PIs' hypothesis
is that the molecular basis of what makes bacterial cells able to withstand high
solvent concentrations can be used to metabolically engineer cells so that they
can tolerate higher concentrations of solvents and related chemicals. For these
studies, the PIs will employ Clostridium acetobutylicum, whose genome has been
sequenced. Based on data from the current funding period, overexpression of
heat-shock (stress) proteins (HSPs) - which are molecular chaperones assisting
protein folding and re-folding - was shown to confer increased ability to
produce and tolerate high butanol concentrations, as well as prolonged cell
metabolism. These traits were likely due to the stabilizing effect of HSPs on
the cellular machinery. A first specific aim of this project is to use the
concomitant overexpression of HSPs and metabolic genes for generating strains,
which produce and tolerate high levels of butanol. Promising recombinant strains
will be characterized in fermentation studies using DNA-array based
transcriptional, Western and flux analysis. A second objective is to use DNA
arrays and a "Systems Biology" approach for identifying other genes that might
be involved in and confer solvent tolerance. The two proposed strategies
constitute Aims 2 and 3. The first strategy involves the construction of
plasmid-based genomic libraries (with different origins of replication),
transformation into the parent organism, and identification of those
plasmids/genes, which confer the desirable phenotype. This approach builds upon
and extends a recently proposed method and employs a DNA-array based selection
process. Second, full-genome DNA arrays will be used to capture the global
picture of the transcriptional programs of four different solvent-tolerant
strains in order to identify commonly overexpressed genes possibly related to
the tolerant phenotype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;