* 0331249
* Late Pleistocene Extinction and Paleoenvironments in Southern Nevada: Combining Effective Geoscience Curricula with Authentic Research for High School Students and Teachers
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Stephen Rowland, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2008
* USD 149,954.00

Buck 0331249

This innovative geoscience education partnership links the administration and
faculty of the new Shadow Ridge High School (opened Aug. 2003), the Clark County
School District K-12 Mathematics, Science, and Instructional Technology Services
(MSITS) Department, geoscientists from the University and Community College
System of Nevada (UCCSN), and a number of influential community partners for the
development and implementation of an innovative, more effective inquiry-based
model of Earth system science teaching and learning. Shadow Ridge HS has the
District's first Earth science honors class. The class integrates three powerful
learning components to improve student achievement in Earth science and
increases the numbers of students completing a rigorous Earth system science
class: 1) the EarthComm modules and laboratory activities, co-developed by the
American Geological Institute and NSF, published by It's About Time, Inc; 2) the
establishment of an Earth Science Laboratory in the new high school, based on a
large collection of extinct fauna fossils collected from Pleistocene deposits
near the high school, and loaned by the Gilcrease Nature Sanctuary; 3) authentic
research at the Tule Springs site by students and their teachers, placed on the
National Register of Historic Places for its paleontological, geological and
archaeological importance. These activities are linked through an engaging theme
still being vigorously debated in the professional paleontological and
archaeological literature: the cause (or causes) of extinction in North America
of almost three dozen genera of mostly mammals at the end of the Pleistocene.
Through specially developed Inquiry Modules, students and teachers explore such
topics as the purported association of human artifacts with extinct fauna in the
Tule Springs deposits, evidence for climate change during the late Pleistocene,
biology and ecology of the extinct Columbian mammoth, and others. UCCSN
geoscience and archaeology faculty are working with Shadow Ridge HS Earth
science teachers and CCSD curriculum specialists to develop and implement these
Inquiry Modules in the classroom. Block scheduling is used to facilitate
extended periods of field research for all students in the class; math, english,
and social studies teachers integrate Earth science literature, data, and
examples into their own classes. New teachers are hired with this project in
mind. Intellectual merit: This project implements a new Earth science honors
course based on national science standards and use of effective instructional
tools and teaching methodologies (EarthComm) to improve student achievement and
increase the numbers of students taking challenging Earth science coursework.
The project provides authentic research opportunities in field and laboratory
settings for students to link their course work with a nationally important
geological and paleontological site next door to the new high school.
Visualization technologies are used to enhance learning, and the project links
many activities across disciplinary boundaries in the high school curriculum.
Project evaluation is conducted by the Shadow Ridge HS and MSITS to determine
the project's effectiveness. Broader impacts: If the project is effective at
Shadow Ridge HS, wider implementation of this type of program with its
curricular and research elements could significantly improve high school
students' chances of passing the new state-mandated science proficiency exam,
required for graduation for the class of 2006. The project could be used as a
model for Earth science honors classes in high growth school districts such as
CCSD (population in Clark County increased 68% between 1990 and 2000) where the
establishment of new schools provides frequent opportunities for significant
change in approach and curriculum. If successful, the program could be adopted
in some of the 30 new secondary schools planned for the CCSD, potentially
reaching thousands of secondary students. A strong community partnership coupled
with commitment from the high school to divert discretionary revenue to the
program and the adoption of a high school proficiency exam in science helps
sustain the program.