* 0331239
* CEDO Intercultural Field Station Improvements: Integration of Science and Community Participation in Northern Gulf of California Marine Protected Areas
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Peggy Turk-Boyer, Intercultural Center for the Study of Deserts and Oceans
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2006
* USD 112,948.00

This award provides support for a series of improvements in the infrastructure
of the Intercultural Center for the Study of Deserts and Oceans (CEDO), a
biological field station and visitor center at Puerto Penasco, Northern Gulf of
California. Activities at the station include marine and desert field research;
K-16 educational programs; residency for individual researchers and classes;
public education through talks, field trips, and exhibits; and public meetings
and conferences to support regional conservation planning and resource
management. The station's parent organization, CEDO Intercultural, has developed
a model process for international collaboration in the fulfillment of its
mission to advance and share knowledge about the Northern Gulf of California and
surrounding Sonoran Desert, and for advancing related goals of promoting
conservation and sustainable use of the region's natural and cultural resources.
Visitor data show growing use of the facility from 1998 to 2002, the majority of
users being undergraduate students from 24 institutions in the US and Mexico.
Through an online user survey, the station has identified priority needs for
improvements in dormitory and lab space, and improvements in field and lab
research equipment, transportation, library and office equipment, and workspaces
with computers and internet access. These improvements will strengthen
international collaboration in research, education and conservation of
ecosystems and resources shared by diverse U.S. and Mexican researchers and
educators along the Sonoran Desert borderlands.