* 0332062
* U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research on Classical and Noncommutative Gaussian Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Wlodzimierz Bryc, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2006
* USD 14,572.00

This is a US-Polish mathematical research project to explore a new connection
between classical probability and non-commutative harmonic analysis. The
principal investigator is Dr. Wlodek Bryc from the University of Cincinnati. His
Polish collaborator is Dr. Marek Bozejko from Wroclaw University. The need for
their collaboration arose from an unexpected occurrence of the same class of
processes in their research, indicating an unexplored link between certain
models of classical probability and those of deformed quantum theory. The main
goal of this collaboration is to advance the understanding of non-commutative
processes which have classical versions, and to use classical probability as a
guide and motivation in defining appropriate generalizations of the concept of a
"non-commutative Brownian motion". The researches will construct new classes of
non-commutative processes and will study the classical versions of already known
non-commutative processes. To facilitate the exchange of expertise, the
researchers will rely on mutual visits, email contacts, internet posting at
http://math.uc.edu/free-gauss/, participation in common meetings and workshops.
The US participants will attend summer workshops hosted by the Polish
affiliates, and likewise, the Polish partners will visit the US for seminars,
which will both provide unique training for US graduate students and foster the
rapid exchange of ideas.

By bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Central/Eastern Europe, the
project will open and advance a new layer of connections between classical
probability and non-commutative harmonic analysis. In the past, cross boundary
research and exchange of ideas has had great success and was critical for major
advances in non-commutative and classical probability. Over the last decade,
significant progress in the understanding of free group von Neumann algebras
arose from Voiculescu's ingenious introduction of free probability and free
convolution. Likewise, the connection between probability and non-commutative
harmonic analysis has attained increasing importance, as concepts which
originally arose in free probability are now becoming powerful tools in
classical probability, as in the works of Dembo, Guionnet and Zeitouni. The
works of Buchholz, Pisier and Xu on non-commutative martingales have opened new
directions of research, and the researchers hope for a similar impact from this
project.