* 0332001
* Integrated Physical-Social-Economic System Dynamics Modeling for Managing Extreme Events Induced Risk on the U.S.-Mexico Border Crossing Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Yi-Chang Chiu, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2007
* USD 461,326.00

Land border ports of entry are critical in both national and regional terms. By
offering legal and safe crossing points, they help integrate people and
economies between nations. Yet they also apply important controls and
regulations. The border-crossing infrastructure, regional traffic flows, local
economy, and broader societal activities in the region are highly interdependent
in nature. The flows of people and trade in the system are largely determined by
the capacity and efficiency of the transportation and inspections
infrastructure. These interactions, which may include feedback adjustments to
maintain equilibrium or a cascade of successive failures, have not been modeled
in an integrated fashion and have not been well understood, making understanding
the overall impacts of extreme events difficult. Extreme-event-induced sudden
disturbances or security policy changes in one system often lead to cascading
and undesirable effects on the others. The challenges of capturing the impact
propagation are due to nonlinearity, stochasticity, and time lags of system
dynamical interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an
integrated border infrastructure risk management framework, which entails two
objectives. The first objective is to develop a System Dynamic (SD) based
framework and a set of integrated models for the border physical-social-economic
system. These models will serve as tools for understanding border system
dynamics, predicting the impacts of risk reduction policies, evaluating
mitigation strategies, and modeling recovery processes. The second is to develop
a risk assessment and mitigation framework and models for the border region,
with a particular emphasis on assessing the criticality of border crossing
infrastructure systems, evaluating border security policy and operations,
designing information dissemination and public and business preparedness
schemes, and identifying transportation and inspection system operations
strategies.