* 0332961
* Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Comparative Study of the Hand and Wrist in Cebus apella and Saimiri sciureus
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Mary Marzke, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 11/30/2005
* USD 2,763.00

Identifying skeletal features in the hands and wrists of early fossil hominid
species (humans and their closest bipedal relatives) that may predict stone
tool-making capabilities is of interest to anthropologists, because stone tools
are found in fossil deposits where more than one hominid species has been
recovered. Chimpanzees have traditionally been used as a model for early hominid
hands because of their close genetic relationship to humans and their use of
tools in the wild. Capuchin monkeys, less closely related to humans, rival
chimpanzees in their tool-using abilities in captivity. Capuchins are unique
among monkeys in that they frequently pound objects against trees in the wild.
Pounding may be pre-adaptive for tool-making behaviors; therefore, capuchins may
provide an alternative nonhuman primate model for identifying features in the
fossil hands of early hominids that reflect stresses on the hand associated with
pounding and forceful manipulation of stones.&lt;br/&gt;The question addressed
by this study is whether there are features of capuchin hand muscles and bones
that reflect their distinctive manipulative behaviors. The answer will be
approached as follows. First, relative cross-sectional areas of cadaver hand
muscles will be compared in Cebus apella (tufted capuchin) and Saimiri sciureus
(common squirrel monkey, a close relative of capuchins). Cross-sectional area
reflects a muscle's potential to exert force and is estimated by measuring its
volume and its fiber length. Second, relative leverage of these same muscles
(i.e., their lever arms) will be estimated by passively moving each hand joint
while simultaneously measuring (1) the joint's full range of motion and (2) the
distance moved by the muscle tendon crossing the joint. These measurements will
allow estimation of each muscle's potential to exert torque, i.e. the relative
ability of each muscle to rotate a bone at a joint. Finally, skeletal features
that reflect relative areas and lever arms of these muscles will be identified,
described and measured, where possible. It is predicted that capuchins will have
some hand muscles that are capable of generating relatively greater torques than
in squirrel monkeys, and that these muscles will be associated with distinct
skeletal features. &lt;br/&gt;These data are essential to analysis of
manipulative capabilities. They have not been previously obtained for either
species. Once muscles with large torque potentials have been identified in the
capuchins, these muscles can be tested in a future study using electromyography,
to determine whether they are indeed strongly recruited during pounding
behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;Training in the techniques and interdisciplinary approach
used in this study will be offered to other researchers at workshops, to
undergraduate and graduate students at Arizona State University, and to high
school students, including underrepresented groups, at open houses sponsored by
the IGERT Neural &amp; Musculoskeletal Adaptations in Form &amp; Function
program (NSF#9987619) at Arizona State University, to which both the PI and Co-
PI are attached. Broad dissemination of the collected data, techniques, and
interdisciplinary approach will allow for research collaborations worldwide to
use the capuchin as an alternative nonhuman primate model in clinical research
on hand function.&lt;br/&gt;