* 0332528
* Maryland Technology Partnership for Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Lawrence Herron, Jr., Morgan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2007
* USD 600,000.00

0332528 DeLoatch

This award is to Morgan State University to support the activity described below
for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).

Partners The partners include Morgan State University (Lead Institution),
Emerging Technology Center, Maryland Technology Development Corporation, Prince
George's County Economic Development Corporation, Chesapeake Bay Region
Technical Center of Excellence, Geo-Centers Incorporated, University of
Baltimore Center for Technology Commercialization, University of Maryland,
Maryland Department of Business and Economic Development. Meridian Management
Group, New Market Growth Fund, Toucan Capital Corporation.

The primary objective of this partnership is to apply the techniques honed by
Maryland's industry-university technology transfer infrastructure to the
challenge of transferring knowledge created by the State's federal laboratories
into innovations that create new wealth and build strong local economies. The
primary social impact of this effort is to broaden the participation of
underrepresented institutions and groups in the nation's economy. The Maryland
Technology Partnership for Innovation consists of a consortium (led by Morgan
State University) that focuses on small companies in three economically
distressed regions of the State of Maryland: the City of Baltimore (distressed
urban area), Prince George's County (inner suburb with high minority
population), and the Eastern Shore (depressed rural region). More than 20
companies will be provided with intensive, customized technical and managerial
assistance to implement commercialization strategies that create new products
from federal technologies, attract private capital, and create jobs in
economically distressed communities.

Potential Economic Impact Maryland has more federal R&D laboratories than any
other state (more than $6 billion annually in intramural research), yet Maryland
has many economically distressed regions. The activities of this award focus on
providing the infrastructure to commercialize new technologies from the federal
R&D in these laboratories to improve the economic well being of three model
regions hat are economically distressed: city, suburban, and rural. University
involvement provides technical and business/management expertise to make the new
companies competitive. The economic development activities of the private sector
and state/regional governments provide a more favorable business climate as well
as technical and managerial expertise. New jobs in regions with high population
of underrepresented groups will result. The management plan is sufficient to
give the infrastructure a very high probability of being sustained after the
award has terminated.

The intellectual merit of the activity lies in developing a model for
commercialization of technology developed in federal laboratories via
partnership with universities, small businesses, venture capital funds,
incubators, and regional and state government agencies. Economically distressed
communities do not fully benefit from the activities of the national research
enterprise. States typically do not deploy their technology development programs
in economically distressed communities. Thus this is a fairly novel approach.

The broader impacts of the activity concentrate on involving underrepresented
groups in the innovation enterprise. This grant is led by Morgan State
University (a Historically Black University) and involves an urban and a
suburban region with high percentages of underrepresented minorities, as well as
a rural region that is economically distressed and underrepresented in the
technology innovation enterprise.