* 0332503
* Third Sound in Superfuild 3He
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* James Davis, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2004
* USD 264,834.00

9971502 Davis

This is a condensed matter physics project that investigates quantum phenomena
in liquid helium. Surface waves usually cannot occur on the thin liquid films
which are adsorbed on solid substrates because viscosity inhibits their motion.
However, in the special case of thin superfluid 4He films, these surface waves
can exist and are given the name "Third Sound". This laboratory recently
observed similar surface waves in thin superfluid 3He films. The discovery of
third sound in superfluid 3He creates several exciting new opportunities because
3He is an unconventional p-wave Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superfluid. In
some respects the complexities of the p-wave system are echoed in the more
recently discovered d-wave high-Tc superconductors where the superconductivity
may originate in a single 2-dimensional (2-d) atomic layer (CuO2). Thus,
understanding of 2-d unconventional superconductors is both of fundamental and
practical interest. Superfluid 3He, in very thin films, is an unconventional 2-d
superfluid which will be investigated using third sound. Studies of quantum
phase transitions are among the area of interest in this and related
superconductor/superfluid research. The wide variety of experimental tools used
in this research will provide an opportunity for training graduate students and
post-docs in sophisticated research techniques. This experience will allow them
to contribute to the nation's technological infrastructure. %%% This is a
condensed matter physics project that investigates quantum phenomena in liquid
helium. Waves on the surface of a fluid provide a powerful tool for studying the
fluid itself and the surrounding physical environment. For example, the
decreasing speed of ocean waves as they approach the shore reveals the depth of
the sea and the strength of gravity. Although gravity is a common restoring
force, others exist, including the electrostatic force which causes a thin
liquid film to adhere to a solid. Such forces are the basis for all adherence of
liquid films to solids. Previous investigations of surface waves in helium have
been restricted to the 4He isotope where the superfluid waves are said to
propagate via so-called 'third sound'. However, this project is focuses on the
recent discover of third sound in 3He. The quantum properties of 3He differ
significantly from those of 4He and present a number of new research
opportunities. The physics of the 3He surface is a close counterpart to a number
of technologically important thin film systems including high-Tc superconductors
and the 2-dimensional electron gas in MOSFET transistors. Third sound in 3He
will be used as a tool to probe the fundamental quantum physic of thin liquid
films. The wide variety of experimental tools used in this research will provide
an opportunity for training graduate students and post-docs in sophisticated
research techniques. This experience will allow them to contribute to the
nation's technological infrastructure.



