* 0332696
* Innovation Networks for Collaborative Product Development in the Wisconsin Plastics Industry Cluster
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Tim Osswald, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2006
* USD 600,001.00

0332696&lt;br/&gt;Veeramani&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University
of Wisconsin-Madison to support the activity described below for 24 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include the University of Wisconsin-Madison (Lead Institution), University of
Wisconsin- Stout, University of Wisconsin-Platteville, Milwaukee Area Technical
College, Phillips Plastics, Serigraph, Flambeau Corporation, Teel Plastics,
Bemis Manufacturing, Georgia Pacific, Kelch Corporation, Engineering Industries,
Kaysun Corporation, Simtec-USDA Forest Products Laboratory, University of
Wisconsin- Extension Small Business Development Centers, Eau Claire/Chippewa
Falls Economic Development Association, Office of the Governor of Wisconsin,
Wisconsin Manufacturers &amp; Commerce, Wisconsin Technology Council, and
Forward Wisconsin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fosters innovation-driven
sustainable economic growth in Wisconsin's plastics cluster by (1) catalyzing
innovation through knowledge creation, technology transfer, application of
emerging and novel methods and tools for polymer engineering and polymer
processing, and commercialization by the industry partners, (2) building human
capital through workforce education and training to provide expertise in
innovative polymer materials, engineering, and processing to industry, and (3)
enhancing enabling infrastructure for networking, collaboration, and
entrepreneurship to catalyze innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The plastics industry is one of the few industries in which the
United States still holds a strong leadership in the global market. However, the
threats of global competition are very real as companies are increasingly
outsourcing to foreign companies where manufacturing is far cheaper owing to
lower labor and materials costs as well as fewer regulatory constraints.
Manufacturing accounts for 23% of the jobs in Wisconsin. The only means to
improve and maintain the United States' competitive position is through
innovation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the activity lies in
the creation, transfer and application of emerging materials, tools and
technologies that lead to the development of new plastics and processes having
superior characteristics and economic potential for
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity
include a scientifically and technologically literate and diverse workforce
prepared to capitalize on this new knowledge to drive innovation and
productivity growth, plus an infrastructure that enables innovation through
networking, collaboration and entrepreneurship in Wisconsin's plastics industry.
Underrepresented groups are involved in the research and workforce development
programs.&lt;br/&gt;