* 0332573
* Greater Philadelphia Bioinformatics Alliance
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Susan Davidson, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/2007
* USD 600,000.00

0332573 Tozeren

This award is to Drexel University to support the activity described below for
24 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).

Partners The partners include Drexel University (Lead Institution), Pennsylvania
State University-Great Valley, Temple University, Thomas Jefferson University,
University of Pennsylvania, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Fox Chase Cancer Research Center, Wistar
Institute, and BioAdvance-The Biotechnology Greenhouse Corporation (an alliance
of the biopharmaceutical industry in the Philadelphia region).

The primary objective of this award is to "transform knowledge into innovation
in computational biotechnology in SE Pennsylvania. This is accomplished through
developing training and education programs in bioinformatics, creating a virtual
network of universities, industry, government agencies, and venture capitalists;
promoting interdisciplinary teamwork; and supporting innovative business plans
for commercially viable knowledge-based biotechnology ventures. The alliance
activities have four main objectives that are interrelated and complementary:
developing and maintaining a skilled workforce; creating a robust bioinformatics
network; a "computational orchestra" that will catalyze and capture innovation
in bioinformatics and biomedicine; and help create an infrastructure for
commercialization of innovation. The activities also include development of
multi-level, comprehensive and results-oriented educational and training
programs to create and maintain a skilled bioinformatics workforce, from
graduate level to continuing education.

Potential Economic Impact The Greater Philadelphia region is home to
approximately 80 percent of the pharmaceutical employment in the U.S. and is
rich in medical institutions, medical colleges, and biotechnology startup
businesses. The grant will transform the wealth of biology and computational
science resources in the regional universities and research institutions into
innovation to accelerate the growth of the life sciences industry in the region.
The activities will create new companies and jobs, and provide the workforce for
those jobs.

The intellectual merit of the activity lies in providing an integrated effort
from fundamental research in biological and computational sciences, creating a
multilevel education and training program in bioinformatics, and support
innovation in the region.

The broader impacts of the activity concentrate on creating a new education
program that seamlessly integrates curricula at the vocational and high school
level to the community college level to undergraduate and graduate degrees at on
of several regional universities. Underrepresented groups will be involved in
all of the activities of the grant.