* 0332479
* SGER: Developing Learning Theory for Genetic Network Inference
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Ilya Nemenman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2005
* USD 88,359.00

The recent explosion in the number of papers published on practical and
theoretical aspects of inference from data and data mining attests to the great
progress in our understanding of learning theory. However, some glaring holes in
understanding still exist, and, while the number of fields of application
continues to rise, literature addressing conceptual problems is scant. The most
troubling gap is that there is, in fact, no unique theory of learning yet
developed: the number of principled approaches is nearing a dozen. Moreover,
purely empirical, highly specialized techniques are proliferating
innumerably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A few attempts have been made to build a
common foundation for all methods, but a full under-standing is still lacking.
Similarly, even though equivalence of many approaches is presumed, it is clear
that for purely practical reasons some techniques may be superior to the others
in different settings. In complex data analysis tasks, it might be beneficial to
use different approaches for different sub-tasks. However, this rarely happens:
most authors' expertise is highly specialized, and without a unifying theory
there is a fear of less familiar methods and a general unwillingness to use them
together with the more common ones. On the other hand, there exists a broad
field of problems for which a uniform understanding and simultaneous usage of
many methods is essential. Currently, one of the most pressing such tasks is
learning genetic regulatory pathways from microarray experiments. These
experiments are characterized by extreme undersampling; thus learning methods
with inherent capacity controls should be used. Straightforward in-corporation
of prior biological knowledge is also absolutely essential. Further,
astronomical amounts of data supplied by the experiments require methods that
are either analytically simple or computationally efficient. Both traits,
however, are hampered by non-uniformities in the data (e.g., missing or
irregular samples). None of the current methods alone is capable of addressing
these disparate issues. Only a careful synthesis, grounded in a good
understanding of common foundations and practical differences, can be
successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is designed to address
all of the above-mentioned fundamental issues in learning theory, with the
inference of genetic regulatory networks as a useful testbed. &lt;br/&gt;