* 0332845
* Template-Assisted Electrochemical Deposition of Magnetoresistive Nanowire Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2009
* Angelica Stacy, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 10/31/2009
* USD 794,583.00

This project involves the development of template-assisted electrodeposition as
a convenient, cost-effective route toward the fabrication of nanowires. This new
synthetic tool will be developed and used to generate and study magnetoresistive
nanowire arrays as one-dimensional nanowires and nanowire arrays with unusual
properties and potential for integration and miniaturization into current
technologies. Students working on the project will gain valuable experience in
both synthetic methodology and structure and property characterization
techniques as they apply to the continually emerging area of nanomaterials. The
project will also nurture active interactions between our laboratories and
national laboratories (e.g., Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory), allowing
for multidisciplinary growth of the students involved with the project. %%% A
major revolution in high-density data storage and retrieval occurred in 1970
with the invention of magnetoresistive read heads. Today, these sensors are
major components in computer hard drives and memory, and hence the improvement
in greater storage capacity per unit volume is in constant demand. Within the
past decade, one-dimensional nanowires and nanowire arrays have captured the
interests of many groups in a wide variety of fields, mainly due to their
unusual properties and potential for integration and miniaturization into
current technologies. Subsequently, the extremely small dimensions of
magnetoresistive nanowire arrays allow for significant increases in storage
capacity per unit volume based on size alone. Although template-assisted
synthetic methods are widely used for the preparations of one-dimensional
nanowire arrays, many of these techniques are expensive and elaborate. This
research project explores a template-assisted electrodeposition procedure that
provides a convenient, cost-effective route toward the fabrication of nanowire
arrays. Students trained in this highly interdisciplinary area will compete very
favorably for jobs in industry or academia. ***