* 0332093
* Research Starter Grant-Distribution of Genetic Variation in a Recently Derived Adaptive Trait
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Robb Brumfield, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

The development of new biotechnologies such as the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and automated DNA sequencing have greatly facilitated the ability of basic
researchers to study genetic variation. New genetic markers of potentially great
relevance to biologists are known as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). To
put them to the test, Robb Brumfield, in his NSF Research Starter Grant,
proposes to use SNPs (pronounced "snips") to understand the evolutionary history
of a group of brilliantly plumaged birds known as manakins that inhabit the
rainforests of the New World Tropics. Previous studies of these birds have found
that hybridization and sexual selection have both played important roles in
their speciation. SNPs should provide the needed resolution to determine which
process has played the more important role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brumfield's
results will provide insights into the evolution of secondary sexual traits
(i.e. traits that evolve because females prefer them but which are not
necessarily in the best interest of the male for survival; a male peacock's tail
is a good example). Because secondary sexual traits could evolve directly by
female's desiring those traits or indirectly through hybridization with a
closely related species that has a desirable trait, disentangling the relative
importance of those processes is critical for a detailed understanding of their
evolution. Brumfield's results should also help other biologists determine
whether SNPs represent the best type of genetic marker for their own
evolutionary studies of natural populations.&lt;br/&gt;