* 0332902
* The Effects of Fluid-Particle and Particle-Particle Interactions on the Structure and Flow Properties of Suspensions of Fibers and Disks
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Donald Koch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 03/31/2008
* USD 279,473.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0332902&lt;br/&gt;D. Koch, Cornell
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A major challenge for the
scientific understanding and engineering design of structured materials and
complex fluids is to determine the effects of fluid flow on the structure and
properties of non-spherical-particle suspensions. A balanced approach of
analytical theory, computer simulation and experiment will be applied to two
problems on the forefront of this topic: &lt;br/&gt;(a) The orientation of
slender fibers in high Reynolds number laminar and turbulent flows; and (b) The
effects of fluid-mediated particle-particle interactions on the structure and
rheology of suspensions of disks. While detailed theoretical models and careful
experimental measurements are available for the flow-induced structure in fiber
suspensions in viscous fluids, relatively little is known about the rotation of
fibers when fluid inertia is important on the fibers length scale. More
generally, the proper description of particle-fluid interactions for particles
whose size is comparable to or larger than the size of the smallest eddies of a
turbulent flow constitutes the most important current challenge in the
description of particle-laden turbulent flows. In the proposed project, a novel
simulation method will be developed that couples a slender-body description of
the force distribution along a fiber with a spectral solution of the Navier-
Stokes equations to describe particle-fluid interactions in a turbulent flow
when the fiber length is comparable with the size of the eddies of the turbulent
flow and inertia influences the fluid velocity disturbances produced by the
fiber. This model will be applied to predict the turbulence-induced dispersion
of fiber positions and orientations and the rate of sedimentation of fibers in
turbulent flows. The most basic question concerning the motion of fibers at
finite Reynolds number is how a fiber will rotate in a moderate Reynolds number
simple shear flow. In the PIs current NSF sponsored research, analytical
predictions have been obtained indicating that inertial effects cause a fibers
orientation to drift toward the vorticity axis of a simple shear flow. The
proposed study includes an experimental investigation of the motion of single
fibers in a Couette cell to validate the predictions for the direction and rate
of migration of fiber orientation. The proposed project will also extend the
experimental and analytical approaches used to study fluid-mediated fiber-fiber
interactions to understand the nature of such interactions in materials filled
with disk-shaped particles. &lt;br/&gt;Microlithography methods will be used to
produce model systems of rigid disks suitable for studies of the rheology and
flow-induced orientation of disks in Newtonian fluids over a range of particle
concentrations. This experimental study will be complemented by a theoretical
analysis of disk-disk interactions to predict the effects of hydrodynamic
interactions on the orientation distribution and rheology of the disk
suspensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: High-aspect ratio fibers and
disks are commonly used to enhance the mechanical, thermal and electrical
properties of polymeric materials. These properties are highly sensitive to the
structure induced by fluid flow when the materials are processed in the molten
state. At the present time, commercial software based on the rotation of fibers
in a low Reynolds number Newtonian fluid with a rotary diffusion to describe
fiber-fiber interactions is widely used to predict structure in fiber
composites. The experimental and theoretical studies of the effects of disk-disk
interactions on disk orientation will provide the first step toward developing
engineering models for the flow-induced structure in polymeric materials filled
with platelet shaped particles such as mica flakes and silica clay particles.
During the production of paper, pulp fibers suspended in water flow onto a
porous conveyer belt to form a fiber network. It is desirable to use a turbulent
fluid flow to disperse the fibers uniformly in space with isotropic
orientations. In these flows, the Reynolds number based on the fiber length is O
(10). The simulation method developed in this project will provide the first
rigorous description of fiber motion under these conditions. The project will
train a doctoral student and undergraduate researchers with the ability to
interface analytical approaches with computer simulation and validate their
models experimentally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;