* 0332852
* GDSE/RES - Gendered Pipelines? Sex Segregation in Engineering and Math/Computer Science Fields of Study
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Maria Charles, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2005
* USD 100,022.00

In discussing women's under-representation in mathematics-intensive educational
programs, social scientists often invoke the analogy of a (leaky) pipeline,
focusing on the characteristics of individuals and their immediate social
environments that promote or hinder successful passage through the science
pipeline. The proposed research aims to supplement such individual-level
analyses by considering the cultural and structural factors that constitute this
pipeline's context and determine its contours. Aggregate-level data from 44
developed, developing, and transitional countries are employed to examine how
cultural ideologies and features of national educational and economic systems
are related to levels of female participation in engineering, mathematics and
information technology fields of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Previous research by the PIs and others has identified cultural attitudes about
gender roles as one of the most important determinants of cross-national
variability in educational gender segregation. The current project aims to
explicate these cultural effects. Detailed data on eighth-grade boys' and girls'
math/science attitudes and math/science achievement in 44 countries, collected
through the Third International Math and Science Surveys (TIMSS), allows
evaluation and comparison of different explanatory mechanisms. In addition,
structural determinants of sex segregation in higher education, including
overall female enrollment rates, features of national higher education systems,
female economic opportunities, and national economic development will be
considered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team, from University of California San
Diego and Western Washington University, will employ a new log-linear modeling
approach, which allows distributional patterns to be compared across educational
systems characterized by different rates of overall female enrollment and
different programmatic structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: There is
a growing consensus among researchers and educators that female under-
representation in math and science cannot be understood with attention to
individual-level attitudes and interests alone. If they are to fundamentally
change the gender composition of these fields, policymakers must also attend to
the role of broader cultural ideologies and organizational practices. Cross-
national research of the sort proposed here is an excellent way of exploring
effects of cultural and structural variables and of identifying the appropriate
locus for policy efforts aimed at integrating these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;