* 0332903
* GDSE/DEM: Women at CENS: A Research System
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Deborah Estrin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 11/30/2007
* USD 899,689.00

University of California Los Angeles, Center for Embedded Networked Sensing
(CENS), proposes to design a model undergraduate research experience maximizing
those features and components of other undergraduate research programs that are
most effective in promoting women's longer-term commitment to science and
engineering. The design will be based on a survey of many examples of research
experiences for undergraduates (REU's) implemented to date, and, based on
published research and evaluation results of REU's. The project will exhibit a
model of "REU best practices." CENS has chosen the disciplines of engineering,
computer science, and the physical sciences to focus efforts because of the low
representation of women in these three doctoral fields. Students will be
recruited from Mills College and Harvey Mudd College, in partnership with the
UCLA Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is widely accepted that REU's are a significant positive experience for
students, but the reasons why are not well known. The project will test its
model by conducting a program for female students at CENS, and evaluate the
results. The expected outcomes for students include: increased hands-on skill
set and research experience; improved teamwork, problem-solving, presentation,
and content skills as identified by project; improved self-confidence and
increased positive attitudes towards respective disciplines; increased number
applying for and participating in undergraduate research experiences; increased
retention through graduation in respective disciplines; and increased interest
and participation in pursuing graduate study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will use a systems approach as a framework for the three main components of
programs currently being implemented at institutions across the
country:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Environment: A research environment that offers
women undergraduates experiences in leading research with direct societal
implications (e.g., environmental, safety, educational). The connection between
the research environment and the societal implications generates a medium
through which successful recruitment can occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Experience: A research experience structured so as to promote successful and
productive outcomes for students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Engagement: A vital
support structure to ensure academic and social integration for each student.
The model program proposed in this project will allow for a more comprehensive
understanding regarding which engagement strategies are most effective for
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The work will provide faculty
members and administrators of undergraduate research programs in engineering,
physical sciences and computer science with tools for developing successful
undergraduate research programs for their students, with particular
effectiveness for female students.&lt;br/&gt;