* 0332927
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Impact of the Non-Antimicrobial Properties of the Tetracyclines on a Medieval Nubian Population
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Dennis Van Gerven, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 10/31/2006
* USD 11,070.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research will assess the impact of the non-antibiotic properties
of naturally occurring tetracyclines on the health of a Medieval Christian
population from the site of Kulubnarti in Sudanese Nubia. The tetracyclines are
a family of antibiotics that have had valuable clinical applications since their
introduction to the medical profession in 1948, and decades of clinical studies
have proven them to be effective for the treatment of a wide range of infectious
diseases. More recent medical research, however, also has identified a number of
beneficial non-antimicrobial properties of the tetracyclines, including the
mitigation of bone loss. In addition, tetracyclines exhibit potentially harmful
properties, including iron antagonism. Both bone loss and iron deficiency are of
considerable anthropological interest and have been investigated previously
within the Kulubnarti population. By investigating the role of tetracycline in
either alleviating or exacerbating these conditions, this research will provide
new and important knowledge regarding some of the health risks and benefits of
the ingestion of naturally occurring antibiotics for ancient populations, and
will supply a foundation for future research at Kulubnarti and in other parts of
Nubia.&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are three-fold: (1) to investigate
patterns of tetracycline labeling within the Kulubnarti population, including
those based on age and sex, as well as changes through time; (2) to investigate
the relationship between tetracycline labeling and cortical bone maintenance at
Kulubnarti; and (3) to investigate the relationship between tetracycline
labeling and iron levels at Kulubnarti. The results of a preliminary
investigation of relationships between tetracycline labeling and elemental iron
levels indicate that the proposed research will produce interesting and
meaningful results. &lt;br/&gt;The study has intellectual merit because it will
address fundamental theoretical and methodological issues in anthropological
research. It will investigate the ingestion of tetracycline as a behavioral
adaptation to stressful environmental conditions in ancient Nubia, and will
explore alternative methods for the examination of bone iron levels. It will be
the first in-depth bioarchaeological study of the non-antimicrobial properties
of tetracycline. The research will contribute to a large body of literature
regarding the relationship between biology and culture, and will be of
particular interest to those working in areas of the world where tetracycline is
known to have been ingested. Ultimately, it also will improve current
understanding of the health risks and benefits of the ingestion of naturally
occurring antibiotics for both ancient and modern populations
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;The study also will have broader impacts. The project will
contribute to undergraduate and graduate student education, and will enhance
inter-departmental and organizational partnerships at the University of
Colorado. The research also will contribute to the scientific community's
understanding of biological and cultural adaptations of past human
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;