* 0332650
* UNCP Biotechnology Business and Industrial Training Center
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Leonard Holmes, University of North Carolina at Pembroke
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/2009
* USD 600,000.00

0332650&lt;br/&gt;Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to University of
North Carolina at Pembroke to support the activity described below for 24
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include
University of North Carolina at Pembroke (Lead Institution), Central Carolina
Community College, Fayetteville Tech Community College, Richmond Community
College, Robeson Community College, Southeastern Community College, Carolina
Commerce and Technology Center, Embrex Incorporated, Kelly Scientific Resources,
New Brunswick Scientific Company, Wyeth Vaccines, Lumber River Council of
Governments/Workforce Development Board, Robeson Office of Economic Development,
and Scotland County Government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
regional efforts to foster the establishment and growth of a biotechnology
cluster in southeastern North Carolina. It has a broad goal to stimulate
economic growth and increase the economic well being of the region. The
University of North Carolina Pembroke Regional Center for Economic, Community
and Professional Development will coordinate the establishment of a University
of North Carolina Pembroke Biotechnology Business and Industrial Training
Center. The center will house a bench-to-pilot-scale fermentation and
biotechnology facility and will provide the resources, curriculum, and programs
for biotechnology-related training, as well as academic activities. The goals
for the activity are to increase the number of regional higher paying jobs by
accelerating the growth of biotechnology companies, increase the trained
workforce in the biotechnology sector, mobilize the underrepresented populations
in the region by providing training, and offer entrepreneurs technological and
business support, including connections to sources of
capital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;Southeastern
North Carolina is economically distressed. The effort will provide education and
training for underrepresented groups to make them employable by an emerging
biotechnology cluster sector. The availability of a workforce will help attract
other biotechnology companies creating more jobs. The effort is part of North
Carolina's Biotechnology Initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the activity lies in its focus on providing state-of-the-art knowledge
and skills in biotechnology to academic and industrial participants. It will
serve as a model for academic-led economic development that can be transferred
to other economically distressed rural regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the activity include improving technical workforce skills and
training K-16 teachers in biotechnology, increasing participation of
underrepresented group in the innovation enterprise, and increasing the economic
well being of a distressed region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;