* 0332411
* YIA: Identifying the Targets of Selection During Sunflower Domestication
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2003,11/30/2006
* John Burke, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* TEST user
* 11/30/2006
* USD 886,839.00

Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The domestication of crop plants from their
wild relatives is a result of strong selection on traits relating to things such
as seed dormancy and dispersal, growth form, flowering time, yield,
palatability, and nutritional value. This selection results in a characteristic
decrease in genetic variation in and around the genes controlling such traits,
thereby providing a means for identifying agronomically important genes. This
research is aimed at identifying and characterizing genes that experienced
selection during the domestication and subsequent improvement of sunflower. The
primary goal of this research is to identify genes that bear the population
genetic 'signature of selection' based on data derived from molecular genetic
markers and DNA sequencing. A related goal is to investigate the function of
these genes on the basis of their genomic locations relative to traits that have
previously been mapped in sunflower as well as through analyses of gene
expression. Taken together, the results of this research will provide a much
more detailed understanding of the origin and evolution of one of the world's
most important oilseed crops than is currently available. This work will also
result in the development of permanent genetic resources for the scientific
community, including 800 gene-based simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers as well
as DNA sequence data derived from both putatively selected genes and candidate
genes identified on the basis of their similarity to genes of known function
from other taxa. All data will be made available upon publication via public
databases including COMPOSITdb (http://compositdb.ucdavis.edu), the Compositae
Genome Project Database (http://compgenomics.ucdavis.edu), and GenBank. Finally,
this work will result in the training of undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers in the development and utilization of genomic tools, as
well as the analysis of large molecular datasets&lt;br/&gt;