* 0332555
* An Integrative Workforce Training and Retraining Program for the Computer and Semiconductor Industry in the Rocky Mountain Region
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Steven Abt, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2008
* USD 599,688.00

0332555 Chen

This award is to the Colorado State University to support the activity described
below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships
for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).

Partners The partners include the Colorado State University (Lead Institution),
Hewlett-Packard, Poudre School District, Fort Collins High School, and Front
Range Community College.

The proposed program attempts to push computer and semiconductor engineering
education into the high schools to increase positive awareness of the computer
and semiconductor engineering industry and to provide the opportunity for people
who are interested and who may otherwise select a totally different career. The
program will provide a large, diverse, and highly trained workforce pool to meet
the demand for professionals in these fields. The program seeks to provide a
workforce from technicians to PhDs. No single institution can provide such a
range of education and training seamlessly, making this integrated approach
unique. The goals of the program are: 1. Create a pre-engineering curriculum in
computer and semiconductor science and engineering. 2. Create an integrated
curriculum that is more responsive to the needs of industry by working closely
with the partners during the curriculum development stage. 3. Provide
internship/co-op programs through local industry to give students real work
experience as part of the education/training. 4. Provide training for high
school teachers and community college faculty to maintain long-term training
that is relevant to industry. 5. Provide summer camps to attract and train
students at the high school level for careers in these two fields. 6. Recruit
adults in mid-career who wish to make career changes to enter these fields.

Potential Economic Impact The information technology area is pervasive in the
U.S. economy. There are not enough workers to fill all of the job opportunities
that exist today, and the shortage will grow in the future. The pipeline for
educating and training workers is long and we must begin now to keep up with the
demands to keep the U.S. economy at the forefront in this global economy. The
intellectual merit of the activity lies in the creation of the novel integrated
education and training of the technologically literate workforce through
collaboration of the university, community college and local secondary school
districts with the regional computer-related companies.

This proposal is excellent in terms of Broader Impacts. The project, because it
is so well integrated with local industrial needs, could have a very positive
impact on economic development in the region. The model for workforce education
and training could be exported to other regions of the nation. Underrepresented
groups will participate in the activities of the grant and will benefit from the
outcomes.