* 0333112
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Sequences of Exceptionally Large Bacteriophage Genomes
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Roger Hendrix, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 12/31/2007
* USD 642,764.00

An important class of bacteriophages (bacterial viruses) exists that contain
very large genomes (~500 Kbp), which are as big or bigger than the smallest
genomes of prokaryotic organisms. Preliminary analysis of the first phage of
this class to be sequenced (phage G) reveals many surprises and some clues as to
what genes are carried by these large viruses. In a collaborative effort among
Dr. Roger Hendrix (P.I.), Dr. Graham Hatfull and Dr. Jeffrey Lawrence (all of
the University of Pittsburgh), six new large phage genomes will be sequenced and
analyzed. This research will provide important insights into the diversity,
evolution, and origins of viruses and their role in the evolution of their
hosts. Furthermore, the genomic sequences of these large phages will provide
clues as to the determinants of genome size and fluidity, and challenge the
traditional view that genes belong either to viruses or to hosts. Phage genome
sequences and their annotation will be made available to the scientific
community through a dedicated web server, along with custom databases of
bacteriophage genome sequences, and will be useful resources for the community
of bacteriophage biologists. Phage genomics also offers excellent educational
opportunities for undergraduate students, integrating a variety of disciplines
such as microbiology, ecology, evolution, genetics, genomics, gene expression,
virology, computational biology and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;