* 0333576
* PATH: Functionally Graded Cement-Based Materials for Residential Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Leslie Struble, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 08/31/2008
* USD 298,817.00

This research project addresses the production of cement-based materials for
residential&lt;br/&gt;construction using extrusion so as to produce functionally
graded microstructures and then&lt;br/&gt;measure and compute the engineering
properties provided by such microstructures. The&lt;br/&gt; two primary
objectives are: to develop construction components (e.g., siding) with graded
cellular&lt;br/&gt;structures that are highly porous in the center and dense on
the outer surface, thereby reducing the&lt;br/&gt;density without producing high
permeability and low strength usually associated with highly&lt;br/&gt;porous
materials and to produce components (e.g., beams) with graded
fiber&lt;br/&gt;reinforcement such that highest concentration of fibers occurs
at the bottom of the beam where&lt;br/&gt;the tensile strain is greatest,
thereby taking advantage of the substantial mechanical benefits
of&lt;br/&gt;fibers in extruded cement-based composites with a lower overall
fiber volume through efficient&lt;br/&gt;engineering of the microstructure. Co-
extrusion of multiple constituents and multiple cycles of&lt;br/&gt;extrusion
will be used to process these materials. Specimens will be examined using
scanning&lt;br/&gt;electron microscopy to determine whether the processing is
producing the desired&lt;br/&gt;microstructures. Engineering properties
(modulus, Poisson ratio, strength, fracture toughness)&lt;br/&gt;will be
computed based on microscopic and macroscopic scales. The computed properties
will be&lt;br/&gt;compared with measured properties and with observed
microstructures so as to demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;validity of the computation and
to refine the computational method as needed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A relevant
broad impact of the proposed research is its potential to increase the use of
advanced&lt;br/&gt;cement-based materials in residential construction. These
materials have important advantages&lt;br/&gt;over the more traditional wood-
based materials (fire resistance, durability), however, their use
has&lt;br/&gt;been limited by their high density and low toughness, issues
addressed directly by this research.&lt;br/&gt;An industrial advisory group will
help assure that the research is suitably innovative,
industrially&lt;br/&gt;feasible, and economically viable The proposed research
will also impact education, adding studies of residential&lt;br/&gt;construction
in the civil engineering curriculum and making studies of construction
materials&lt;br/&gt;available to students in architecture.&lt;br/&gt;