* 0333308
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Coupling Diversity with Function:  Metagenomics of Boreal Forest Fungi
* BIO,EF
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Thomas Marr, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2007
* USD 911,591.00

Fungi play dominant roles in decomposition and plant nutrient acquisition, and
thus influence net primary productivity, carbon sequestration in soil, and the
biogeochemical cycling of key elements such as nitrogen and phosphorus. Little
is known about the roles of particular fungal species in these processes, in
part because many species cannot easily be isolated in pure culture. Metagenomic
methods offer solutions to this isolation-bias problem. The boreal forest plays
a central role in global biogeochemical cycling due to its abundance and because
it stores approximately 30% of the earth's reactive carbon. Hence, fungal
diversity and function in the boreal forest are compelling subjects for
metagenomic scrutiny. This project will undertake the most detailed examination
to date of fungal diversity, genetic relationships and substrate specificity
within a single geographic region. In the first step, 32,000 clones from PCR
libraries of fungal ribosomal gene-regions amplified from soil DNA extracts will
be sequenced. The DNAs will be extracted from key soil substrates (e.g. leaf
litter, humus, wood, roots) within each of three forest types that are important
components of the northern boreal forest. Discovery of novel fungi and their
substrate preferences are anticipated. In the second step, the same ribosomal
region will be sequenced in 4000 dried fruitbodies (e.g. mushrooms) maintained
within the UAF Mycological Herbarium. The herbarium specimen sequences will
permit below-ground and above-ground views of diversity to be compared, will
help identify unknown fungi, and will provide a powerful database for
identification of the constituent fungi observed in 'community fingerprints'
from a variety of related ecological studies.