* 0333196
* IGERT: Integrative Education and Research on Biointerfacial Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2011
* Yves Chabal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 12/31/2011
* USD 3,746,381.00

This IGERT program at Rutgers University, focused on integratively engineered
biointerfaces, will be an intimately collaborative effort of 32 selected faculty
from graduate programs in Molecular Biosciences, Physical Sciences (Physics,
Chemistry &amp; Chemical Biology), and Engineering (Biomedical Engineering,
Ceramics and Materials Engineering, Chemical and Biochemical Engineering,
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The program derives strength from the highly cross-disciplinary nature of over
fifteen research project areas identified at the cutting edge of the field of
biointerfaces, and programmatic partnerships with five strategic centers of
excellence to promote cohesive access for the IGERT community to state-of-the-
art research infrastructure. A wide range of thesis project themes is planned
for the IGERT trainees, developed around three research and educational thrusts,
(1) living cell-based interfaces, (2) microengineered and nanoengineered
biointerfaces, (3) biosensing and bioresponsive interfaces. The five major
partnering Centers for the IGERT program are: Keck Center for Collaborative
Neuroscience, Center for Nanomaterials Research, New Jersey Center for
Biomaterials, the Laboratory for Surface Modification, and the Rutgers Center
for Computational Design. The educational core of the proposed IGERT program
will intimately support the research program, and includes graduate courses in
the integrative areas of biointerfacial engineering, as well as course modules
on responsible conduct of research, technical communications, entrepreneurship
and effective teaching/learning methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The IGERT curriculum is designed to foster a community featuring the next
generation of biointerfacial and biomaterials engineers by offering IGERT
graduate fellows a range of interactive experiences at multiple levels: multi-
disciplinary coursework, lab rotations in two cross-cutting research groups,
biannual participation in symposia, and participation in a
national/international conference resulting in a white paper. To maximize its
impact, the IGERT program will offer varied programmatic pathways to promote
diverse modes of professional development of IGERT graduate fellows: (1) Summer
research internships at selected international sites for academically inclined
students; and (2) Translational research and industrial summer internships for
students interested in industrial and entrepreneurial careers. Through a
partnership with the Robert Davis Learning Institute of the Rutgers Graduate
School of Education Institute, the IGERT program will establish a COLTS
(Community of Learners and Thought Shapers) program, inspired by communication-
driven cognition models, to encourage IGERT fellows to develop as learners by
dynamically communicating their research on integratively engineered
biointerfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;