* 0333269
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Finishing the Draft Genome of Magnaportha grisea
* BIO,EF
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Bruce Birren, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2007
* USD 1,300,000.00

Rice blast disease caused by the fungal pathogen Magnaporthe grisea is a major
threat to worldwide food security. Decades of intense research have turned this
organism into the prime model for study of fungal phytopathogenesis. A high
quality draft genome assembly has been produced, offering 7X sequence coverage.
The sequence and its automated annotation are widely used by many fungal
researchers and have rapidly advanced M. grisea gene identification. However, as
with any draft sequence, there are missing and interrupted genes, unanchored
sequence, and global mis-assemblies. The whole-genome methods that the M. grisea
research community is prepared to adopt require a complete and accurate genome
sequence. The specific objectives of this project are to: 1) Generate a fully
finished genome sequence for Magnaporthe grisea. 2) Integrate the genome
assembly with existing physical and genetic maps. 3) Generate automated
annotation of the M. grisea genome. 4) Provide training, education and outreach
opportunities centered on genomic studies of a fungal plant pathogen.

The availability of a finished sequence will enable discovery among researchers
working with Magnaporthe as well as with many related pathogenic and non-
pathogenic filamentous fungi. Through comparative genomics the Magnaporthe
sequence will impact scientists engaged in fungal, genetic, and evolutionary
studies, as well as computational biology. The education and outreach activities
in this project offers new opportunities for faculty and students from
underrepresented groups to engage in fungal genome based research.