* 0333197
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Algal Virus Genomics
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* James Van Etten, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2006
* USD 309,227.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Michael Graves of the University of
Massachusetts (Lowell) and James Van Etten of the University of Nebraska
(Lincoln) to sequence the genomes of 4 genetically diverse viruses that infect
certain unicellular, eukaryotic, chlorella-like green algae found in freshwater
environments worldwide. The chlorella virus genomes are very large; one isolate,
PBCV-1, (genome size = 330,744 bp dsDNA) codes for 11 tRNAs and ~375 proteins,
nearly half of which resemble proteins of known function. Many of these genes
encode proteins (e.g. DNA restriction endonucleases and enzymes involved in
protein glycosylation) rarely associated with viruses. Comparisons between
PBCV-1 and other chlorella viruses indicate they are very diverse; the entire
"gene pool" of the chlorella viruses exceeds the 375 PBCV-1-encoded genes.
Therefore, the sequence of a single isolate does not give the total picture and
many new genes await discovery among the numerous isolates. The sizes of the
chlorella virus genomes (&gt; 300 kbp) are comparable to bacterial artificial
chromosomes (BACs) and therefore technologies developed for shotgun subcloning
and sequencing BACs will be employed. Additionally, chlorella virus genomes
contain little repetitive sequence and their genes are densely packed;
therefore, every sequence read will contain at least part of a
gene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, the study of algal viruses is in its
infancy. Algae play an important role in aquatic environments and algal viruses
play a significant, albeit poorly understood, role in regulating algal
communities, e.g. destroying toxic algal blooms such as those responsible for
red tides and brown tides. Therefore, the study of algal viruses is critical to
a better understanding of the dynamics of aquatic environments. The knowledge
gained from this study will help to advance the study of algal virology and the
roles these viruses play in their environment. While the sequence of chlorella
virus PBCV-1 led to an increase in our knowledge of the genome structure of
large dsDNA algal viruses, it also revealed how little we know. Undoubtedly, the
genomic sequences of additional chlorella viruses will identify new genes that
encode proteins that are both scientifically interesting and may have commercial
value. Finally, the information gained from this research will advance the study
of the evolutionary history, not only of all algal viruses, but also the
evolutionary histories of the other families of large dsDNA viruses such as the
pox viruses and herpes viruses.