* 0333818
* Integrating and Extending the Instructional Architect: An Instructional Service for NSDL
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Laurie Nelson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2006
* USD 306,591.00

This project significantly extends previous work in developing Instructional
Architect, with three objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Integration of Instructional
Architect within the NSDL Core Integration System including access management,
discovery and search, and an open specification to support the use of
Instructional Architect by NSDL portals and collections. &lt;br/&gt;2.
Extensions to Instructional Architect including support for sharing
instructional products, for authoring different kinds of instructional
resources, for personalized recommendations, for interoperability with
commercial learning management systems, and for student use. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Extended dissemination, sustainability, and evaluation of Instructional
Architect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project continues to develop partnerships
with educational user groups and digital libraries to help support the
dissemination and sustainability of this work. Also underway is a series of
workshops for pre-service and in-service teachers, and school library media
specialists, consisting of an intensive introduction to the NSDL and the
Instructional Architect, followed by in-depth project and implementation work.
Evaluation of participant activities resulting from these workshops is being
performed to understand how teaching and learning both shape and are shaped by
digital resource usage. In addition, the focus on cultivating and studying a
strong community of users provides rich documentation of enablers and barriers
of successful implementation of digital libraries and services in educational
contexts, and supports effective replication elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;