* 0333529
* Collaborative Research: THREDDS Second Generation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Daniel Edelson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2006
* USD 94,954.00

The central mission of the THREDDS project is to make it possible for educators
and researchers to publish, locate, analyze, and visualize in a wide variety of
educational settings. In the initial phase THREDDS established a solid, working
prototype of services and tools to enable data providers to create inventory
catalogs of the data holdings at their site and educational module builders to
author compound documents with embedded pointers to environmental datasets and
analysis tools. These catalogs and data-interactive&lt;br/&gt;documents can then
be harvested into digital libraries using standard protocols. THREDDS Second
Generation (THREDDS2G) is expanding the team of contributors and the breadth of
data in the collections, taking advantage of recent technological advancements,
and integrating THREDDS technologies with emerging standards and related
environmental data systems. In addition it is actively engaging new disciplines
and incorporating new tools that are making the end products more useful at all
educational levels, for decision makers and for the general public. THREDDS2G
significantly augments and expands the existing project as it breaks entirely
new ground in several areas. The main objectives fall into the following
categories:&lt;br/&gt;1. Interactive Educational Modules: work with the
community of educational content builders and data providers to create
educational modules that incorporate facilities for finding and interacting with
environmental datasets.&lt;br/&gt;2. Enhanced Metadata Catalogs: Using tools and
inventory catalogs implemented in the initial phase, develop additional catalogs
with significantly enhanced metadata to simplify the process of finding and
using scientific data, developing standards and tools for enhanced metadata,
incorporating scientific ontologies, and implementing scientific data
models.&lt;br/&gt;3. Interoperability with Geographic Information Systems (GIS):
Create interoperable data systems with coherent connectivity and access to GIS
data using GIS and traditional THREDDS clients.&lt;br/&gt;4. Dataset Search and
Discovery and Other Web Services: Working collaboratively with NSDL and DLESE,
ensure that THREDDS systems evolve toward compatibility with emerging standards
in Web services.&lt;br/&gt;5. Education-oriented, Standards-based Client
Software: Integrate an education-oriented GIS client analysis and display
application called MyWorld to THREDDS data services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
THREDDS is a highly collaborative project, the Unidata Program Center is leading
and coordinating the development, disseminating the software, and supporting the
THREDDS community. With strong new partnerships that include leading
organizations in K-12 educational technology, hydrology, solid Earth studies,
societal impacts, and GIS, the impact of THREDDS2G will extend well beyond even
the vast Unidata audience. Significant co-funding of this project is being
provided by the Division of Earth Sciences in the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences in recognition of the importance that this project has on the
development of software tools for accessing, cataloging and analyzing content of
environmental datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;