* 0333010
* IGERT: Assessing the Implications of Emerging Technologies: A Graduate Research and Training Program
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Merritt Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 12/31/2009
* USD 2,883,385.00

Technologies in areas such as ubiquitous computing, genetic engineering, and
nanotechnologies are developing at extraordinary rates. Understanding of
economic, security, environmental, and cultural implications of emerging
technologies has not kept pace. Decision makers typically base strategies on
unstated expectations regarding the nature and effects of technological change.
Because forecasting errors are endemic, analysts often rely on implicit
assumptions to reduce their vulnerability to criticism. By contrast, this
program explicitly identifies areas of uncertainty about effects of emerging
technologies and develops strategies to mitigate uncertainty. Scientific and
policy spheres typically come together after lines of conflict are drawn.
Creators of technologies focus on immediate issues of development and
application, while policy analysts assess the broader implications of
technological change only after controversy has flared. By contrast, this
program appraises knowledge when options are greater, interests are less
entrenched, and policies are not yet locked into place.

This IGERT program trains graduate students to engage early and explicitly with
the pervasive uncertainty that is often under recognized in technology
assessment exercises. It features: (1) Trainees with Complementary Expertise,
including engineers from the Technology and Policy Program, social scientists
from Political Science, and humanists from the Science, Technology and Society
Program; (2) Integrated Curriculum with three new core courses to develop
methodological and substantive competencies in evaluating economic, security,
environmental, societal, and ethical consequences of technical change; (3)
Multidisciplinary Panels of faculty and students to develop and test methods
used in training and set student research. The panels feature retrospective
analysis of past emerging technologies and prospective analysis of
nanotechnologies, ubiquitous computing, and genetic engineering, with a fourth
technology to be selected later; and (4) IGERT Seminars to reinforce the panels
and courses with intensive interaction among trainees, faculty and staff.

Intellectual Merit: The program seeks to generate knowledge in three domains.
(1) Substantive: identify knowns and unknowns on implications of emergent
technologies; and backcast to identify present actions to improve future
responses, including targeting research to reduce uncertainty. (2) Procedural
and institutional: identify constraints on use of emerging information on
effects of current technologies; and foster adaptation to emerging information
by public and private institutions. (3) Methodological: develop ways of
integrating formal and qualitative methods; and for using research on past
emergent technologies to improve responses to current emergent technologies.

Broader Impact: Methods and substantive findings will be distributed through
graduate student placements, academic publications and conferences, and via MIT
Congressional Staff Seminars on science and technology issues. In addition,
government, business, and NGO participation in the project will serve to check
on academic blindness, to enrich graduate education, and to engage the world
beyond the academy. Senior staff from the Departments of State and Defense, EPA,
the UN, Goldman Sachs, Ford Motor, AFL-CIO, and Environmental Defense have
expressed interest in participating in panels and research groups.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
this sixth year of the program, awards are being made to institutions for
programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported
by NSF.