* 0333612
* Neuro Imaging through Internet2
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Patrick Hof, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

Mount Sinai School of Medicine (MSSM) seeks funding for an Abilene/Internet2 to
better handle the demands of image analysis and processing. A recent National
Center for Research Resources (NCRR) grant allowed the institution to upgrade
the computer network in the main research building. The wide area network now
presents a bottleneck for collaboration with other institutions. The connection,
itself, will also support collaborative projects in the following areas:

3-dimensional Morphometric Analysis of Mammalian Neurons: A collaboration
between MSSM, investigators from the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
(NYU), New York University School of Medicine, SUNY at Stony Brook, and the
University of New South Wales, Australia. Researchers at MSSM study the
structure-function relationship of neurons in the brain, employing advanced 3D
microscopic imaging techniques as well as 3D image processing, rendering,
analysis and modeling. CNIC investigators are using confocal and multi-photon
microscopes to image (in 3D) entire pyramidal neurons in the cortex at the
highest resolution possible. This creates approximately 20-gigabyte data sets
for a single neuron. After the data is collected, it is exported to computers,
where image stitching, volume rendering, deconvolution and 3D-image analysis is
done. This award will greatly facilitate the capabilities of off-site
collaborators to access these large datasets as well as manipulate and analyze
the data using unique software developed by CNIC investigators and hosted at
MSSM. Neural Mechanisms of Vestibular Function: MSSM researchers and
collaborators at Washington University, the University of Utah and NASA-Ames are
studying vestibular functions. Electrophysiological and microscopic studies are
being performed to determine the basis for regional variations in afferent
response dynamics across the vestibular sensory epithelium. 600 Mbytes to
1.2-gigabyte data sets are created using a multi-photo laser. The ability to
manipulate the data in 3D via access to volume rendering and 3D image analysis
software hosted on MSSM computers will provide invaluable information to off-
site collaborators. Furthermore, due to the length of time required to compile
the data for any one experiment, it will be greatly beneficial for collaborators
to review the data as it is collected (in real time) on the multi-photon
microscope. This will avoid any delay in feedback and permit the off-site
collaborators to modify experimental conditions.