* 0333080
* IGERT: Cellular and Molecular Imaging for Diagnostics and Therapeutics
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Christine Schmidt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Holly K. Given
* 09/30/2008
* USD 3,943,400.00

The advent of cellular and molecular-based detection and therapeutic
technologies has begun to transform the way we think about human disease.
Instead of relying only on clinical evaluation and general physiologic markers
to detect disease and select therapy, physicians are beginning to use cellular
and molecular biomarkers of disease to select and even to design the optimized
therapeutic regime for an individual patient. To achieve the promise of this
approach requires tools to detect molecular and cellular markers of disease in
vivo and to monitor their modulation in response to therapy. Cellular and
molecular imaging have the ability to dynamically visualize biomarkers of
disease in single living cells and tissues with microscopic resolution, yielding
a fundamental change in the way we diagnose disease, and select and monitor
therapy. To achieve the promise of cellular and molecular imaging requires
engineers and scientists with a wide breadth of skills in imaging science,
contrast agent development, and design of tools to monitor cellular and
molecular-based therapeutics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this IGERT
project is to develop an interdisciplinary graduate training program focused on
cellular and molecular imaging for diagnostics and therapeutics. This
interdisciplinary program builds on our existing IGERT grant in Optical
Molecular Bio-Engineering. Over the last four and a half years, our team has
trained students to develop and use new photonic technologies, adaptable and
specific contrast agents, and computers to address both fundamental biological
questions and the need for improved diagnostic imaging modalities. At the same
time, the University of Texas at Austin, the UT M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and
the UT Health Science Center at Houston have invested heavily in new
interdisciplinary programs in Biomedical Engineering. In this competitive
renewal, we integrate these efforts, to develop a multidisciplinary training
program in cellular and molecular imaging for diagnostics and
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The clinical use of cellular and molecular
imaging hinges on the availability of a cadre of professionals with inter-
disciplinary training spanning imaging science, biomarkers of disease, design
and use of molecular contrast agents, and the principles of cellular and
molecular based therapies. This project will develop an inter-disciplinary new
pathway, which synthesizes these fields in a single graduate degree. The degree
program will incorporate four important inter-disciplinary features. (1) A
doctoral portfolio program of coursework will prepare students to carry out
inter-disciplinary research in this field. (2) Students will carry out inter-
disciplinary research under a new advisory structure, where co-advisors from
different disciplines supervise the student's research. The thesis committee
will have broad participation from faculty in the Colleges of Engineering and
Natural Sciences as well a clinical mentor. (3) Students will receive training
in technology assessment and transfer, to help them appreciate the spectrum of
translational research as it leads to commercial products. (4) Students will
participate in at least one internship where they see the application of their
research in a different setting: Clinical internships allow students to
participate in translational, clinical research; industrial internships enable
students to participate in technology development; and international internships
enable them to carry out research and development with a global perspective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit and broader impacts of this IGERT
project reside in the integration of inter-disciplinary research and education
that will bring together teams of students, faculty and clinicians with diverse
skill sets to develop and evaluate novel molecular and cellular imaging systems
for diagnostics and therapeutics. These teams will collaborate to develop and
present courses and seminars, to define important clinical problems and to
develop and evaluate engineering based solutions. Through participation with
historically minority Texas undergraduate institutions, we will recruit graduate
students from underrepresesented groups to participate in this program. As we
focus on the parallel development, assessment, and transfer of technology, we
will create key partnerships with industry. These partnerships will provide our
students with information about a variety of career opportunities, and will
expedite the process of bringing the research advances developed here to general
medical practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;