* 0333028
* SARS - Think Ahead
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Edward Fredkin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

EIA-0333028&lt;br/&gt;Edward Fredkin&lt;br/&gt;CMU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SARS
Think Ahead&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SARS-TA is
an analysis and forecasting system for staying ahead of a potential SARS
pandemic. It is a new methodology for explaining and communicating the
consequences of the various alternatives that governments will face in the
battle against SARS. A set of Excel spreadsheets tracks up-to-date historical
data for every country in the world. That data, along with various forecasts of
the future course of the epidemic based on standard epidemiological models, are
displayed in meaningful ways. Clear graphs show the predicted effects of actions
and inactions that a particular governmental authority might consider taking.
SARS-TA provides a new perspective as to what is likely to happen in the world
and in each country. It is designed to provide both understanding and motivation
to those in government who must make difficult decisions in a timely fashion.
SARS-TA has the capability of demonstrating the likely consequences of a lack of
preparedness or of delays in the implementation of specific
recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system is designed to access a special
SARS-TA database on the web. The database is updated with the latest
epidemiological data from The World Health Organization. Each day the up-to-date
data can be downloaded and automatically incorporated into every user's copy of
SARS-TA. In addition to giving an accurate picture of what is happening in the
world and in every country, this historical data plays a crucial role in the
functionality of the system. The purpose of SARS-TA is to give health officials
in every country, region and city a better way of understanding the current
state of the potential SARS problem, along with interactive calculations and
graphical outputs that can better communicate to political leaders who must
decide and approve of the actions that may be needed to economically bring a
SARS outbreak under control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different regions of the world
have differing amounts of resources and capabilities. There cannot be one best
solution for how to address a SARS outbreak that will work in every part of the
world. Further, many such regions are ill equipped to be able to design and
carry out the best program suitable to their country's particular problems and
limitations. What SARS-TA does is to allow a sophisticated numerical evaluation
of proposed efforts so as to determine the likely consequent numbers of SARS
cases and deaths, along with the total financial burdens, both as direct and
collateral results of an epidemic, including the costs of efforts to control the
epidemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SARS-TA addresses a hitherto unsolved
intellectual problem: how to optimize various government decision making
processes when there is only probabilistic data available to determine the
consequences of those decision and when time is of the essence. What we know is
that with sufficient resources, wealthy countries often cope very well, while
those governments with scarce resources are very often unable to make efficient
use of the resources they have. It is clear that systems similar to SARS-TA
could be very useful in other epidemics or in the case of other situations where
governments need to react quickly despite having incomplete knowledge of what
they are facing and of the consequences of their actions. &lt;br/&gt;