* 0333655
* A Hispanic Scientist Development Pilot Program to Broaden Hispanic Undergraduate and Graduate Participation in the NSF Science and Technology Centers
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* William Gil, Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

OIA-0333655&lt;br/&gt;Flores&lt;br/&gt;Hispanic Association of Colleges and
Universities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hispanic Association of
Colleges and Universities (HACU), a national, non-profit organization,
representing more than 300 colleges and universities across the US and Puerto
Rico, provides a voice that articulates complex policy issues on and conducts
national programs to champion Hispanic success in higher education. One such
program, the National Internship Program has developed a long and distinguished
record of providing summer internship opportunities for over 3,000 students in
the federal and private sectors since its inception in 1992. &lt;br/&gt;Building
upon the success of the internship program for undergraduate and graduate
students, HACU will implement a pilot Hispanic Scientist Development Program to
nationally recruit students to participate in research and educational
activities at the NSF-sponsored Science and Technology Centers (STCs). Besides
providing a rich atmosphere for encouraging future scientists and engineers,
STCs conduct innovative, world-class research of national importance, that
promise to contribute to the Nation's competitive potential through discovery
and education. The HACU-STC partnership will offer a significant number of
under-represented students the opportunity to participate in STC-based research.
Consequently broadening the participation of all citizens, and enhancing
diversity within NSF's programs in regards to the Foundation's strategic goal of
People, Tools, and Ideas. &lt;br/&gt;