* 0333392
* IGERT: The Vanderbilt-Fisk Interdisciplinary Program for Research and Education in the Nanosciences (VaFIPREN)
* EDU,DGE
* 10/15/2003,05/31/2011
* Leonard Feldman, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 05/31/2011
* USD 2,944,417.00

The Vanderbilt-Fisk Interdisciplinary Program for Research and Education in the
Nanosciences is a graduate level program focused on research and graduate
student education associated with nanoscale science and engineering. This IGERT
program combines the resources of Fisk University and Vanderbilt University in a
unique university partnership. Students may enter Vanderbilt and earn a Ph.D.,
or enter Fisk University, earn a M.S., and then matriculate to the Vanderbilt
Ph.D. The intellectual merit is associated with both the research goal - a
fundamental and comprehensive approach to the nano-scale science and
engineering; and the educational goal- a program, centered in interdisciplinary
materials science, to train graduate students to be self-starters and self-
learners. Educational and research goals are built on the extensive need for a
true interdisciplinary approach required for modern materials science at the
nano-scale level. The research theme is the creation, characterization and
modeling of nano-structured materials. This is motivated by recent advances in
lower dimensionality and creation of unique nanostructures, to access the realm
of designed quantum confinement and to realize new materials properties. The
educational component comprises a complete background in the interdisciplinary
materials sciences which provide the underpinnings of nano-science and nano
scale engineering, including current theory, modeling, and experimental
practices. IGERT students will be prepared for the fast changing environment
associated within nanotechnology. Features of the educational schedule include
research rotations, internships, teaching assignments and specialized courses in
interdisciplinary nano-science, literature retrieval and science ethics. The
broader impact of this project lies in the very strong coupling between Fisk
University (a M.S. granting HBCU) and Vanderbilt University. The IGERT is
expected to be a significant factor in the cross-fertilization of these two
institutions and the stimulation of under-represented groups to participate in
nano-scale research and education. In addition we expect the educational aspects
of the IGERT to provide a new concept in interdisciplinary education, tuned to
the era of nano-scale science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an
NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year
of the program, awards are being made to institutions for programs that
collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;