* 0333389
* IGERT: Program in Computational Biology (COB)
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2012
* Robert Shapley, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 09/30/2012
* USD 3,872,625.00

Many achievements in the biological and biomedical sciences are fueled by
advances in technology and computational science. To address the complex
challenges in the biological sciences in the 21st century, there is a growing
need for professionals who can translate scientific problems in biology into
mathematics and computations; for such productive work, familiarity with modern
scientific computing approaches as well as key biological challenges is
essential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This IGERT award is for a
multidisciplinary Computational Biology (COB) doctoral program at NYU and MSSM
targeting students interested in pursuing research in biology/biomedicine who
require a transition from/to the mathematical/computer/physical sciences to best
meet scientific challenges and career goals. This experimental, bidirectional
program will offer integrative training that exploits NYU's strengths in applied
mathematics, computer science, biology, and biochemistry, and Sinai's leadership
in biomedicine. The major COB research themes - macromolecular modeling,
computational genomics, and physiological modeling - will train students to
investigate biological systems spanning wide temporal and spatial scales, from
atoms and macromolecules, to cells and organs, to organisms. Modeling biological
systems across such scales is essential for a modern systems biology approach
aimed at understanding physiological processes and diseases and applying this
knowledge to biomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To integrate training in
biological and computational areas and provide trainees broad scientific
perspectives and work experiences, the COB PhD program includes: (1) Dual
faculty mentorship for thesis research; (2) Interdisciplinary training through
flexible and background-tailored tracks in scientific computing and
computational biology (courses in computer science, applied mathematics,
biology, and biomedicine), trainee-led seminars, and ethics/research conduct
courses, while ensuring competitive time to degree (5 years); (3) Summer
internships in industry, academia, government (Agilent, IBM, Celera, Merck,
Novasite and 3D Pharmaceuticals, supercomputing centers), or international
laboratories; (4) Learning environments and activities that promote
interdisciplinary interactions and broader collaborations within and outside
NYU/MSSM, including: trainee-led COB seminars, annual COB retreat, and common
COB lab/lounge; and (5) Mentoring and career development activities to ensure
student retention, especially women and underrepresented groups, through student
advisory committees, trainee-led support group, and partnerships with Burroughs
Wellcome Fund and NYC's IGERT programs at CUNY and Columbia. The COB doctoral
program will be evaluated and evolved continuously by its executive and
internal/external advisors in close collaboration with the pedagogical experts
of NYU's Center for Teaching Excellence (CTE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: COB will train math/computer science students to successfully model
biological systems and, in turn, provide biology students the grounding in
computational techniques so they can tailor the model and algorithms to specific
biological problems. To help bridge disciplinary gaps, we will design
background-tailored short (non-credit) courses before Year 1 and promote peer
learning by pairing students from complementary backgrounds. We expect that
COB's activities will enable trainees to act as catalysts for novel
interdisciplinary collaborations and to acquire expertise in cutting-edge
research areas; these experiences will prepare them uniquely for research and
education careers in academia, industry, and government. In addition, COB's
program of integrating scientific grounding, experience in team-oriented
multidisciplinary projects, mentoring, and career broadening activities will
serve as a new model of graduate training at NYU/MSSM and beyond, promote the
development of curricula for computational biology, and provide the opportunity
to develop the COB doctoral degree at NYU based on the new model. Recognizing
the urgent need for diversity in the sciences, we will make concerted efforts in
conjunction with participating departments and with successful new minority
initiatives at NYU to recruit and retain the brightest students, especially
women and other underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-
wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists
and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the
program, awards are being made to institutions for programs that collectively
span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;