* 0333136
* IGERT - Entrepreneurship at the Interface of Polymer Science and Medicinal Chemistry
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Lon Mathias, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2009
* USD 3,755,080.00

This IGERT program addresses America's long-term need for top-notch scientists
capable of translating research results into new technologies and new
businesses. It combines excellent interdisciplinary science education with
entrepreneurial and business training. Faculty and students from two Mississippi
universities will form teams and develop joint projects exploring how polymer
science and medicinal chemistry can synergistically extend the methods of making
and evaluating new materials, new bioactive agents and new applications of
biomaterials. Participants will be centered in the School of Pharmaceutical
Science at the University of Mississippi and the School of Polymers and High
Performance Materials at the University of Southern Mississippi. They will be
tied together through research projects, broad education in business and
entrepreneurialism, and interactions with industry in the US and abroad.
Specific components of the intellectual merit include: Basic research projects
coupling medicinal/pharmaceutical science and polymeric materials; Discipline-
centered, interdisciplinary and entrepreneurial education involving students-
teaching-students, workshops, seminars, short-courses, industrial internships
and international experiences; and Continuous reinforcement of the discipline
and entrepreneurial components by team-building activities, video conferencing
plus joint proposals, presentations, publications and business
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of this program is inherent in the
materials and methods being developed, and in how the projects and business
plans are implemented: Within the state, bringing together two excellent
programs to teach and do research at a truly innovative and socially important
science interface; Within the US, by developing a successful model for research
and teaching in science that uniquely combines structured education, training
and hands-on experience in business and entrepeneurialism; and World-wide,
through learning from and teaching students and industrial practitioners in
other countries and other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
experiencing this program will be able to start their own companies, perhaps
even at or before graduation, and to be highly effective members of larger
company research and development teams. The methods and education materials
developed will also be made available to members of the local community,
industry in the state and throughout the nation, and students and faculty at
universities everywhere through workshops, seminars, books and training manuals,
and distance-learning courses and degrees. It is expected that this IGERT
program will serve as a model for integration of science and entrepeneurial
education that have immediate and long-term impact on other programs in
Mississippi, and will result in new businesses that will enhance economic
development in the state and quality of life
everywhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;