* 0333078
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Is Habitat Change a Cause of Demographic Collapse for the Milne-Edwards Sifaka?
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Patricia Wright, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2004
* USD 8,020.00

Environmental changes can increase or decrease primate food abundance,
availability, and quality. Yet, the scientific community has received
conflicting results as to the effect that habitat disturbance has on primate
populations. This study will investigate the effects of habitat disturbance on
the ecology and behavior of a large-bodied rainforest lemur, the Milne-Edwards
sifaka (Propithecus diadema edwardsi) in Ranomafana National Park (RNP),
Madagascar. Using a combination of methodologies, this project will investigate
how: 1) food species availability and abundance, 2) animal densities, 3) diet
selection and chemical content, 4) activity budgets and ranging patterns, and 5)
social structure and behavior differ between groups of Propithecus within
primary and disturbed forest sites. This year-long study will demonstrate which
resources are important for Propithecus survival, the strategies that this taxon
employs to maximize survival and reproductive success. &lt;br/&gt;Currently, the
scientific literature contains very few comparative studies addressing the
effects of habitat disturbance on animal populations. However, as habitat
disturbance and destruction are altering forests at a rapidly accelerating pace,
the ability to understand and predict the impact of these changes will shape the
future of the world's biodiversity. Given their large body size and slow life
history, accurate population density estimates and the ability to understand the
effects of habitat disturbance will be key to future conservation and management
plans, and the survival of Propithecus and many other tropical forest species.
As RNP represents a natural experiment, through which to study the effects of
habitat change, the data collected during this project will help to evaluate
many of the theoretical arguments on habitat disturbance that have been proposed
in the literature and increase our understanding of the relationship between
animals and their environments.&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide Madagascar's
National Park Service (ANGAP) with much needed information on the ways that
forests and animal communities respond to habitat change and forest
regeneration. Such information will be useful in the selection and management of
protected areas within Madagascar, and provide new information with which the
health of these areas can be assessed. Data on lemur densities will help to
refine lemur population estimates, as estimates in this project will take level
of habitat disturbance into account. Such data are vital to conservation
efforts, as these data will alert ANGAP and the international community to high
risk areas. This project will also expand local capacity to conduct scientific
research and conservation education programs, as ten local research assistants
and four Malagasy graduate students will participate actively in the research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;