* 0333091
* GOALI: The Use of Sequestrants for the Dissolution of Scaling Deposits
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Christine Grant, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2008
* USD 269,980.00

Grant, Christine S. North Carolina State U

"GOALI: The Use of Sequestrants for the Dissolution of Scaling Deposits"

The primary goal of this research is to elucidate the transport and interfacial
mechanisms responsible for the dissolution of mineral salts in the presence of
environmentally benign chelating polymer(s). In this study, barite is selected
as the major working material due to its prevalence in scale deposits found in
petroleum processing pipes and associated equipment. The PI has established that
at a specific pH, there are multiple polymer species present in solution. The
behavior of these individual species and their cooperative influence on the rate
of dissolution is crucial to understanding the dissolution process. Dissolution
studies will be conducted in different pH regimes corresponding to a study of
the various dominating polymer ligand species in solution.

The GOALI component of this proposal will occur with Dr. Ian Collins, a Scale
Management Consultant in the Well Performance Team of the Upstream Technology
Group at British Petroleum in the UK. There are three aspects of the new BP
interaction: (i) BP researchers will provide technical information and "research
grade" and "field grade" barite samples for controlled hydrodynamic rotating
disk studies; (ii) specific conditions for dissolution experiments will be
developed in conjunction with BP researchers and actual field engineers to
insure relevance to current and future petroleum exploration activities; (iii)
the BP research staff will serve in an advisory role to the student researchers
on the projects. The PI will also continue to utilize the expertise of the
chemists at Donlar Corporation in the chemical reaction kinetics sequences for
the process.

Broader Impacts: Preliminary batch testing of barium sulfate in the presence of
thermal polyaspartates, indicate there is an inhibition of dissolution at
specific conditions. In the proposed research, The PI expects to see enhanced
dissolution of the barite, a common species in petroleum processing scale at
specific conditions of pH, shear, polymer concentration/type. This will
correspond to a specific combination of polymer conformation/adsorption
resulting in unique dissolution mechanism. There should be variations in the
behavior on pure minerals and for mineral composites that represent actual
industrial conditions.

In contrast to studies that seek to inhibit the formation of mineral scales on
piping and equipment, the PI's approach focuses on the dissolution of the
resulting scale. In this regard, the strategy is comprehensive in its study of
the chemistry of interaction, the interfacial phenomena and the transport
mechanisms (e.g., mass transfer, fluid flow) during the dissolution process; it
also utilizes industrially relevant configurations and chemistries to perform
the testing. This research could result in alternative environmentally benign
sequestering agents for the dissolution of mineral deposits. Specifically, the
prevalence of barite in scale deposits found in petroleum processing pipes and
associated equipment is a significant problem area; a green chemistry solution
that could benefit the economics of the process and the environment.