* 0333284
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Comparative Microbial Genome Analysis of the Human-Bacteroides Symbiosis
* BIO,EF
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Jeffrey Gordon, Washington University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2007
* USD 1,993,732.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Jeffrey I. Gordon and Richard K. Wilson of
Washington University in St. Louis to sequence the DNA of bacteria that normally
reside in the human intestine. The adult human is home to a vast number of
friendly bacteria: the total number exceeds the number of human cells in our
body. The largest collection of microbes resides in the intestine (10-100
trillion organisms). The number of bacterial genes embedded in the genomes of
this community of 500-1000 species is ~100 times greater than the number of
genes in our human genome. The products of these bacterial genes provide
essential metabolic capacities not fully evolved in our own genome, including
the ability to break down otherwise indigestible nutrients. The current
revolution in genomics provides an unprecedented opportunity to define how
components of the normal intestinal bacterial community modulate features of
human postnatal development and adult physiology. This grant focuses on a group
of bacteria known as Bacteroides that account for ~25% of the total microbial
population in the human intestine. The genomes of several members of Bacteroides
will be sequenced to determine how they have become such successful members of
the gut microbial community and to define their contributions to human biology.
The genome of a member of another group of bacteria, Eubacterium, evolutionarily
distant from Bacteroides but also prominently represented in the human
intestine, will be sequenced to identify features common to successful
symbionts. One assumption prompting this analysis is that our bacterial partners
have developed the capacity to synthesize novel chemical entities that help
establish and sustain their mutually beneficial relationships, and that
prospecting for these chemicals, and characterizing how they operate will
suggest new ways to maintain our health and vigor. In a dynamic, densely
populated ecosystem like the gut, exchange of genes between bacterial species
can have important effects on bacterial evolution and physiology (e.g.,
propagation of antibiotic resistance). Therefore, studying the genomes of gut
bacteria provides an opportunity to address general questions related to how
environment affects development of species, the definition and meaning of their
extinction within a community, and the mechanisms by which they cooperate to
process otherwise inaccessible nutrients. Studying the molecular strategies
employed by symbionts for defining scarcity in their environment, for managing
access to crucial resources when they are limiting, and for making decisions
about sharing goods to ensure societal stability may yield operating principles
important to environmental engineers, ecologists, economists, business managers,
and those who study, organize, and even govern our human communities.