* 0333002
* CAREER: Making Culture Visible: Using Technology to Foster Culturally Responsive Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2003,09/30/2005
* Nichole Pinkard, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2005
* USD 253,519.00

Contemporary views of learning (Cole, 1996; Gardner, 1991; Perkins, 1992; Saxe,
1991; Wertsch, 1991) have emphasized the importance of attending to the
interactions among learners their contexts, and tools they use to mediate their
interactions. However, in the transformation of these views of learning into
classroom instructional materials and practices under the banner of
constructivism little attention has focused on the dimensions of culture and
context that are influenced by the experiences of ethnicity, language variation,
or race (Lee, 1994). Attention to these cultural dimensions are of central
importance, particularly to learning in school contexts, considering the
increasing diversity of students in U.S. schools and the continued performance
gap between minority and majority. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on
understanding the complex interrelationship among culture, technology,
instruction, design and student engagement and cognitive gain. This CAREER
proposal seeks to provide an avenue for this exploration in the context of
designers', teachers', and students' use of the Lyric Reading Authoring Tool
(described below) and its products. Lyric Reader is a tool that enables
designers to build culturally responsive beginning literacy learning
environments that use oral text (i.e. song lyrics, playground chants) drawn from
children's cultural capital as sources of reading
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research will focus on the
development of a conceptual framework of the complex interrelationship among
culture, technology, instruction, design and student engagement and cognitive
gain by exploring the following questions: What are the cognitive and
motivational benefits of using culturally responsive learning environments with
emergent readers from diverse ethnic and language backgrounds? How can Lyric
Reader, a software-authoring tool, scaffold designers in the construction of
culturally responsive computer-based learning environments? In what ways can
accessibility to on-going assessment data about students performance in
culturally responsive learning environments influence teachers' design of
classroom learning supports and their perceptions and expectations of low
achieving, low income? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the exploration of these
three questions, this research hopes to contribute to an understanding of how
technology can support designers and teachers in drawing on the cultural capital
of all students. &lt;br/&gt;