* 0333417
* IGERT: Integrative Geographic Information Science Traineeship Project
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2011
* Michael Sheridan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2011
* USD 3,859,676.00

This IGERT project will continue the doctoral education and research training
program in Geographic Information Science (GIScience) at the University at
Buffalo, and expand it into new research areas. GIScience is an emerging
interdisciplinary field that seeks to understand the nature of geographic
phenomena and of geographic information, providing theoretical foundations for
Geographic Information Systems (GIS). GIScience seeks to formalize geographic
principles using logic and mathematics, to explore scientific, educational, and
policy-related uses of geographic information, and to elucidate the complex
relationships that individuals and society have with GIS. It also provides a
framework for scientific and engineering studies of physical and social
phenomena. GIScience underpins the multi-billion dollar GIS industry in the
United States, including its many applications relevant to national security and
to the economy, and to science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific core of the project focuses on research in three major interlocking
areas. The first research theme is basic geographic information science, which
includes ontology of the geographic domain, cognitive geography and geographic
cognition, human interaction with geographic information and technology, and
geographic information, institutions, and society. The second research theme is
geographic environmental science, which integrates spatial databases with
regional models to forecast the environmental effects of phenomenon such as
groundwater contamination and volcanic flows. Geographic social science is the
third research theme, and is based on the integration of spatial analysis and
spatial statistics with GIS, addressing topics such as the development of new
methods for the detection of hot spots in patterns of phenomena such as disease
or crime, and of better methods for intelligent highway systems. The educational
and training aspects of the program are centered on four core courses, including
a new required core course in ethics and professionalism. Students will also be
required to have competence in the use of GIS software, and a basic
understanding of the mathematical foundations of the field. The program also
includes cross-department research experiences, internships (including
international research internships), and an international summer school. The
international summer school will be open to early-career scholars in GIScience
from other US institutions, broadening the impact of the IGERT-funded graduate
research training beyond this institution. Over the next five years, the program
will have a new funding pattern: trainees will be funded for two years as NSF
Fellows, and for two years on university-based enriched assistantships. This is
an important step toward institutionalization, since toward the end of this
funding period we will argue for the long-term continuation of university
support. Five additional years of external support will allow completion of the
institutionalization of the program, producing a lasting effect on the culture
of graduate education within the participating departments and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity lies in
its attention to innovative research in environmental science, social science,
information science, and engineering. The project will continue to foster
interdisciplinary sharing of ideas and research methods, and continue to
influence the work of both faculty and students involved in the program. This
influence will extend well into the future as the trainees enter the workforce.
The broader impacts of the proposed activity will come from the integration of
social and natural science research to produce policy recommendations for
decision-makers. The program will develop broadly prepared Ph.D.s with
multidisciplinary backgrounds who will have a significant impact on the further
development of the field both nationally and internationally, in academia,
government, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline,
and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in
graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education
and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;