* 0333022
* SGER:      The Engineering Econometrics of Market Power in Electric Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Robert Thomas, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 12/31/2004
* USD 75,374.00

The high average prices and high volatility of prices in many restructured
markets for electricity have raised concerns about the abuse of market power by
generators. At the same time, information about the true costs of generation,
that was readily available under regulation, is no longer disclosed by
generators. Hence, it is becoming impractical to use a comparison of actual
prices with competitive prices as the basis for identifying either the potential
for or the use of market power. This proposal is about developing a new index or
metric capable of evaluating a generator's potential for market power that
doesn't rely on unavailable information or data. Unlike other indices in use by
economists, the new index carries with it engineering information about the
interconnecting network, its current topology, constraints and limitations. If
the index is as innovative as it appears to be, it should also be relevant to
identifying transmission bottlenecks of National interest and be able to assist
in identifying ways to relieve them.

With the restructuring of the electric power business from regulation to
markets, ways to monitor and evaluate the performance are essential. The new
FERC NOPR on Standard Market Design calls for ideas on market monitoring as well
as market mitigation procedures. Virtually all of the metrics in the literature
ignore the effects of market operation on the engineering, both planning and
operations. The new metric suggested here is innovative in concept and, if the
work is successful, it will provide the electric power industry with a new way
to evaluate performance and thus, will have a substantial impact on the
oversight of future electric power systems. Yet, the work is high risk because,
while the index looks attractive, the computational tools and the data needed to
compute it in real time are may impose intolerable limits. At present
engineering information is not a part of electric power market evaluations, a
major oversight at best. Successfully incorporating this information into a
sensitivity-based measure will have the broader impact of enhancing the
understanding of the importance of this type of information by economists and
engineers alike. The results of this work will be presented at various
interdisciplinary conferences. The information will also be integrated into the
course ECE551/AEM655 Power Systems Engineering and Economics, a course co-taught
by the PI, an engineer, and Professor Timothy Mount, an economist.