* 0333401
* IGERT: Achieving Environmental, Industrial, and Societal Sustainability via the Sustainable Futures Model
* EHR,DGE
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2011
* John Sutherland, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 07/31/2011
* USD 3,763,984.00

A rapidly increasing world population, over consumption of resources, and
contamination of the environment in which we live are jeopardizing the ability
of future generations to have the same quality of life that we enjoy. A proposed
Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) initiative
involving Michigan Technological University and Southern University at Baton
Rouge addresses this concern by establishing a multidisciplinary, inter-
institutional doctoral education program directed at Achieving Environmental,
Industrial, and Societal Sustainability via the Sustainable Futures Model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Sustainable Futures IGERT is to
educate/train and involve graduate students in the development of knowledge,
methods, and tools that promote and enable sustainability in terms of society,
environment, and industrial activity. Trained doctoral students and research
products produced by the IGERT will serve as catalysts for achieving
environmental, industrial, and societal sustainability, and institutionalizing
sustainability as a performance measure in industry and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The institutions will
collaboratively complement the strengths of each other to instill in each IGERT
trainee the multidisciplinary awareness to formulate valid engineering decisions
and public policy opinions toward cohesive and sustainable environmental,
industrial, and societal futures. This meta-disciplinary development approach
will advance the knowledge and understanding of Sustainable Futures (directed at
achieving the triple bottom line) with faculty and students participating in an
innovative program to educate and train the individual to research, understand,
and communicate new technology and new policy. Participants at Michigan Tech and
Southern University have demonstrated continuous commitment to accomplishing
these goals in their research efforts and educational
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Key features of the program
will promote the integration of research, training, and education of IGERT
trainees toward the discovery, formulation, and the social diffusion of
information through effective research, dissemination, and societal
institutionalization (K-gray) of the Sustainable Futures Model. This will be
accomplished through collaborative coursework, meetings, and interactive
research between the two campuses. International experiences and an internship
program will offer IGERT trainees practical and diverse approaches and
methodologies to facilitate knowledge growth, put into practice, and information
transfer to the larger society. The program will foster a commitment to
diversity by insuring that at least one third of the participating students are
from underrepresented groups including women, students of color from Southern
University as well as the Mid-western states that Michigan Tech traditionally
serves. In addition, an aggressive plan will focus on attracting Native American
representation from local and regional Indian Reservations near Michigan Tech.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;