* 0333403
* IGERT: Multidisciplinary and Comparative Program in Inequality &amp; Social Policy
* EDU,DGE
* 11/15/2003,09/30/2013
* David Ellwood, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 09/30/2013
* USD 3,748,404.00

The Inequality &amp; Social Policy program came into being in the very first
cohort of IGERT grants provided by the National Science Foundation. During our
initial award, we created a program that trained some forty young scholars to
understand the origins, patterns, and consequences of inequality, focusing
primarily on the American experience. For the renewal period, we seek support to
deepen our work on domestic trends and complement it with more explicit and
sustained attention to comparative patterns in Western Europe, where widening
gaps between the top and bottom of the income distribution have developed as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The European experience is particularly important
because it is evolving in the context of political and social institutions that
are dramatically different from the U.S., often designed to protect citizens
from economic insecurity, poverty, and material hardship. Hence, while both
regions experience bouts of unemployment, declining demand for low-skilled
workers, and rising rates of single parenthood, the consequences are often
different (in terms of poverty rates, segregation, and political participation)
because of institutional variation. The intellectual merit of this renewal lies
especially in challenge that comparative analysis poses to the frameworks,
methods, and findings we have developed to understand the domestic patterns of
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the research and training
we propose will be felt for years to come in the form of important new
scholarship on the critical social problems that emerge out of historic levels
of inequality, ranging from inequities in income and earnings, to gaps between
racial groups in educational attainment and political participation, to spatial
and geographic concentrations of disadvantage that affect employment, mobility,
crime, health, and patterns of family formation. These are topics of
considerable importance to the society we live in, and we encourage our students
and faculty to write both for the profession and for the broad public. The web
site we maintain receives over 2,000 hits per month, attesting to the broader
impact of the scholarship we are producing in the course of this training
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty percent of our trainees in the first five
years are minorities; over half are women. Nearly 30% of our faculty
participants are minorities. We expect this track record will continue and that
the renewal we seek will help us impact the diversity of the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students admitted into Ph.D. programs in
Economics, Political Science, Public Policy, Sociology or the newly created
joint doctoral programs in Government &amp; Social Policy and Sociology &amp;
Social Policy are eligible for the training program. Those accepted must
participate in the following core activities:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Three-term
Interdisciplinary Proseminar in In