* 0333162
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Life at the Land/Ocean Margin: Genomic Analysis of a Coastal Cyanobacterium
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Brian Palenik, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2007
* USD 475,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Brian Palenik of the University of California-
San Diego, Scripps Institution of Oceanography in collaboration with Dr. Ian
Paulsen, The Institute for Genomic Research, to sequence and analyze the
complete genome of a coastal marine cyanobacterium, Synechococcus sp. strain
CC9311. This photosynthetic microorganism represents a widespread, ecologically
relevant group that greatly contributes to the primary productivity of coastal
environments. The investigators have hypothesized that this cyanobacterium, and
coastal bacteria in general, have characteristic strategies for living in
coastal, compared to open ocean, marine environments. For example these bacteria
may have different or more protein pumps for excreting pollutants or toxic
metals due to the higher level of these compounds in coastal environments. Using
the genome sequence of CC9311 and comparing it to available genome sequences of
open ocean cyanobacteria will help reveal these
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information from this research will be
available for future use to develop tools for monitoring cyanobacterial
populations and their physiological status in coastal environments. Whether or
not these microorganisms are being affected by pollutants at a particular
coastal site can potentially be determined if genome information is available to
develop monitoring techniques. Thus this project will contribute to the larger
societal goal of monitoring coastal water quality. This project is also
synergistic with costal marine projects funded by the NSF Microbial
Observatories program. A broader impact of this project will be to communicate
the basic concepts of genomics, their application to marine science, and the
results of this research to the general public in the form of an exhibit at the
Birch Aquarium, a significant tourist attraction and an important institution
for science education in San Diego California. Training of future scientists
(one graduate student and one post-doctoral fellow) will also occur in the
emerging field of bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;