* 0333191
* Collaborative Research: FRG: Local Dynamic Origins of Relaxor Ferroelectricity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Ruyan Guo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 352,000.00

Our focused research group with members from the University of Pittsburgh and
Pennsylvania State University will attempt to understand the physical basis of
"relaxor" ferroelectricity. Our investigations will explore the boundary between
the relaxor phase and other parent phases. Both single crystal bulk materials
and MBE-grown thin films will be investigated. We will use novel measurement
techniques that simultaneously probe both spatial and temporal behavior of
relaxors. The proposed experiments will infuse much-needed empirical constraints
into theory. The impact of this work will be both fundamental and practical.
Relaxor behavior is prevalent in a wide class of ferroelectric materials, and is
poorly understood. At the same time, relaxor single crystals can exhibit large,
non-hysteretic strains &gt;1%, electromechanical coupling &gt;90% and
outstanding dielectric and polarization values, performance that far exceeds
most proper ferroelectrics. The cross-disciplinary nature of this research
effort, involving a strong coupling of physics and material science, will
enhance the experiences of students majoring in either discipline.
&lt;br/&gt;Our focused research group will attempt to understand the physical
basis of "relaxor" ferroelectricity. The behavior of relaxors is qualitatively
different from conventional ferroelectric materials, in terms of the frequency-
dependent response to electric fields and related properties such as the
piezoelectrically driven shape changes that occur. Our investigations will
explore the boundary between the relaxor phase and other parent phases. Both
single crystal bulk materials and MBE-grown thin films will be investigated. We
will use novel measurement techniques that simultaneously probe the behavior of
relaxors with high spatial and temporal resolution. The proposed experiments
will infuse much-needed empirical constraints into theory. The impact of this
work will be both fundamental and practical. Relaxor behavior is prevalent in a
wide class of ferroelectric materials, and is poorly understood. The cross-
disciplinary nature of this research effort, involving a strong coupling of
physics and material science, will enhance the experiences of students majoring
in either discipline.