* 0334587
* Particle Diffusion and Mixing during Silo Drainage
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Arshad Kudrolli, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 03/31/2008
* USD 304,556.00

Abstract CTS-0334587 A. Kudrolli, Clark University

Mixing and segregation in particulate flows will be investigated using
experiments with high-frame rate digital imaging and direct particle tracking.
Besides measuring diffusion of the particles near the side walls of a silo, the
PI proposes to also investigate the motion of the particles deep inside the silo
using index-matching fluids. The investigation will provide rigorous answers to
a problem that plagues the design of modular pebble-bed reactors, which is of
current interest to nuclear engineers. A central question is the amount of
diffusion among billiard ball sized fuel pebbles containing radioactive material
that are slowly cycled through a reactor. The study is important to many other
industrial systems where competition between mixing and segregation in
particulates is important.

In preliminary experiments conducted with MIT graduate student Jaehyuk Choi, the
positions of particles were tracked using high frame rate digital imaging over a
long period inside the silo as it drains. Although kinematic models formulated
in terms of packing geometry and void movement have served as one-parameter
descriptions of the mean flow of the grains inside a silo, they do not correctly
predict the mixing rate observed in the experiments. Other modeling approaches
derived from plasticity theory do not address diffusion and mixing rates. The PI
proposes to experimentally investigate diffusion rates not only as a function of
flow rates but also shear gradients that can be varied by changing the nature of
the orifice. Then the effect of the shape of the silo and the half angles of the
hopper will be studied. Discontinuity in the boundary condition and other
obstacles induces shock fronts which can enhance mixing. The effect of
segregation mechanisms on mixing rates will be investigated when two species
that differ in size or density are present.

The experiments will be part of a collaborative effort to understand slow
granular flow. In addition to the experiments, modeling and simulations with
Professors Martin Bazant and Ruben Rosales of the Applied Mathematics Department
at MIT will be performed. A new spot model incorporating the observed
correlation is being developed which complements this experimental study.
Applicability of new concepts such as \effective" temperature defined using the
fluctuation dissipation theorem to slow particulate flow will be tested. The
proposed activity will also involve significant educational and science outreach
components. A post-doctoral associate will be trained who is interested in
pursuing a career in an environment where undergraduate research participation
is encouraged. The proposed work will also impact the research of two female
graduate students. The grant will enhance summer research experience of
undergraduate students and help accomplish their honor thesis projects in the
laboratory. The PI also plans to continue speaking at neighboring high schools
to introduce the challenges posed by particulate technology from nano to macro
scale, and to excite interests in the sciences.

