* 0334733
* M-I Coupling: Incoherent Scatter Radar Measurements of Ion Upflow: Establishing Ionospheric Boundary Conditions for Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Mass Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Ennio Sanchez, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 04/30/2007
* USD 274,611.00

Spacecraft observations have established the general properties of ion outflows
for different solar and interplanetary wind inputs, seasons, and local times,
but they have not provided an understanding of what the ionospheric conditions
are that enables the most efficient ion extraction. This project will utilize
Incoherent Scatter radar (ISR) data along with satellite/radar conjunctions to
determine the altitude profiles of field-aligned ion number flux, electron
density, electron temperature, and ion temperature associated with ion outflow
events. The project will determine how the ion energization that produces ion
upflows in the F region of the ionosphere relates to energization processes that
produce ion outflows at higher altitudes. It will quantify the net upward ion
flux above the topside ionosphere as a function of external energy input (from
the convection electric field, particle precipitation and EUV irradiation) and
ionospheric boundary conditions. An expanded ISR database, spanning one solar
cycle, will be used to quantify statistically the same ionospheric parameters
and their vertical gradients as functions of particle precipitation, heat flux,
convection electric field, and solar illumination in the frame of reference of
auroral oval boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a strong societal
impact because it will bring space research one step closer to achieving a
predictive space weather capability. At the present time, MHD models of the
magnetosphere have a well-developed formalism to describe mass loading from the
solar wind, but they lack a formalism to describe mass loading from the
ionosphere. The statistical maps generated by this project will establish the
lower boundary condition for all ion extraction models, which in turn can be
coupled to upper boundary conditions from the MHD magnetosphere models to
produce a self-consistent picture of ionospheric mass loading of the
magnetosphere. The results will be made available on publicly accessible FTP and
websites at SRI International.