* 0334749
* SGER: Isolation of Allorecognition Genes from a Cnidarian (Anthopleura Elegantissima) Using AmpTrap Technology
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Jonathan Geller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 07/31/2005
* USD 81,000.00

SGER: Isolation of Allorecognition Genes from a Cnidarian (Anthopleura
elegantissima) using AmpTrap Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jonathan B.
Geller&lt;br/&gt;Moss Landing Marine Laboratories&lt;br/&gt;San Jose State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to distinguish self from non-self is
seen in many multicellular organisms, and is critical for dictating responses to
intraspecific and interspecific contact between individuals. Examples of these
responses include immune reactions to pathogens, induction of aggressive
behaviors or morphologies, mating behaviors and gamete fusion. Some form of a
self/nonself recognition system is seen in metazoans from Porifera to Chordata,
yet detailed knowledge at the molecular level exists only for vertebrate immune
systems and some gamete recognition systems. Geller will apply recent
developments in molecular technology to isolate allorecognition genes in one
well characterized cnidarian, the clonal sea anemone Anthopleura elegantissima.
Previous observations of aggressive responses toward non-clonemates by
individual Anthopleura indicate that allorecognition receptors are located on
tentacles and acrorhagi (specialized tentacles for aggression) and are membrane-
bound. This suggests a molecular cloning strategy: subtractive methods can
produce cDNA pools of acrorhagi-specific genes that are enriched for
allorecognition genes. Because an acrorhagi-specific cDNA pool will still be
complex, Geller will use the new cloning vector pAmpTrap to further enrich the
cDNA library for genes encoding membrane-bound proteins. These cDNAs will be
sequenced and evaluated by bioinformatics to eliminate clearly irrelevant genes.
Candidate genes will then be screened for polymorphism in an anemone population
(expected in allorecognition genes) by Southern blot analysis, and screened for
predicted structural features. This cloning strategy entails significant risk,
aside from the technical complexities of the proposed methods. First, the
project is based on inferences about allorecognition receptors in Anthopleura:
they are cell surface proteins; they are largely confined in their expression to
tentacles and acrorhagi; and they can be recognized on the basis of polymorphism
and predicted protein structures. Second, pAmpTrap has had limited prior
testing. For example, cloning will fail if the expressed allorecognition genes
have toxicity to the bacterial host. Despite intrinsic risks, success would
catalyze new research in several directions: Knowledge of allorecognition genes
in Anthopleura elegantissima will help make comprehensible the complexity of
dominance relationships among anemone clones. Variation in aggressiveness in the
genus Anthopleura and other cnidarians provide for combined genomic and
phylogenetic approaches to study the evolutionary ecology of aggression. Too,
isolation of allorecognition receptors in Anthopleura will further discovery of
allorecognition genes in other ecologically important cnidarians, such as
corals. Finally, features of the Anthopleura allorecognition system resemble the
receptor system found on mammalian natural killer cells. This could be an
example of convergence of the younger mammalian system upon the more ancient
cnidarian system. In that case, comparisons of independently derived cnidarian
and mammalian NK-like receptor systems provide a platform to study structural
and functional constraints on immunity-related molecules. Alternatively, the NK
cell receptors may indeed be ancient and have ancestry in basal metazoans. This
discovery would have profound implications for the antiquity of immune
systems.&lt;br/&gt;