* 0334288
* A Workshop to Discuss A CLEANER (Collaborative Large-scale Environmental Assessment Network for Environmental Research) Neuse River Basin in North Carolina
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Kenneth Reckhow, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 05/31/2005
* USD 50,016.00

0334288 Peirce CLEANER (Collaborative Large-scale Environmental Analysis Network
(EAN) for&lt;br/&gt;Environmental Research) discussions proposed during this
workshop will address gaps in fundamental scientific knowledge and engineering
approaches associated with different networking approaches and geographically
large environmental issues within the water, air, and soil domains as well as
issues that exist across these domains: sources, engineering controls,
multimedia transport and transformation, and effects. Thus the CLEANER approach
with its focus on a network (EAN) is justified by the need to address similar
environmental issues of broad geographical scale evolving scientific and
engineering complexity where current fundamental knowledge and models are
lacking and cyberinfrastructural supports are not available. Thus the objectives
of this workshop are to: (1) increase the understanding of how CLEANER concepts
can be implemented using an EAN in environmentally stressed areas; (2) extend
environmental scientific and engineering knowledge within the Neuse Basin case
study; and, (3) contribute to the research, teaching, and mentoring activities
of individual participants.&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will build on the
accomplishments of three previous CLEANER workshops. As a group the proposed co-
chairs have contributed to these previous workshops in leadership roles,
conducted research in the study of water, air, and soil pollution
interrelationships and control, and developed and applied new networks and
cyberinfrastructures to emerging problem areas: (1) Co-Chair: Prof. Jeff Peirce
of Duke University co-hosted NSF CLEANER Workshop III in February 2003 and was a
leader of the groundwater breakout session at Workshop 2 in October 2002; (2)
Co-Chair: Prof. Ken Reckhow of Duke University and Director of the Water
Resources Research Institute at NC State University co-chaired Workshop III;
and, (3) Co-Chair: Dr. Tom Prudhomme of the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications at the University of Illinois participated in Workshops II and III
and is an expert in networks and cyberinfrastructures and their applications to
emerging problem areas.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be organized into three
phases of activities: (1) prior to the workshop participants will be provided
working papers that discuss different CLEANER approaches as well as water, air
and soil quality data from the Neuse River Basin compiled by the Co-Chairs; (2)
during the workshop large and small group discussions will be structured around
the proposed agenda items and draft reports will be written; and, (3) after the
workshop the information will be disseminated to all participants and to NSF.
Participants with an understanding of the problems in the Neuse River Basin,
networks and cyberinfrastructures, as well as other environmentally stressed
regions across the nation have or will be recruited from academe, state and
federal research agencies, as well as from NSF with an emphasis on including
groups historically underrepresented in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;