* 0334825
* Particle Migration in Complex Viscous Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Joseph McCarthy, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 08/31/2008
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0334825&lt;br/&gt;J. McCarthy, U of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is focused on the migration of
non-neutrally bouyant particles in complex&lt;br/&gt;non-Stokesian closed flows.
This problem, important to issues ranging from materials processing to reactor
design, has not been studied either computationally or experimentally, to our
knowledge. The central hypothesis of the proposed work is that in these flows
the variety of migration forces -- centrifugal and gravitational buoyancy; a
variety of inertial lift forces (both with spin and without); and shear-induced
migration when multiple particles are present -- can lead to a rich variety of
asymptotic behavior. Furthermore, with recent advances in both experimental flow
visualization as well as multi-phase Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), we
believe that strong insight into particle migration in complex flows is now
possible. In this work, we focus on the migration behavior of non-neutrally
buoyant particles in two prototypical non-Stokesian closed flows: a cavity flow
and a mixing tank. Specifically, the research will examine the trajectories and
asymptotic locations of particles both computationally and experimentally, with
the ultimate aim of uncovering the competition between migration modes such that
control of asymptotic particle behavior may be
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the work lies in
integration of research and teaching, infrastructure development, and the
fostering of partnerships. During the course of the project training will be
provided for one full-time graduate student. Every effort will be made to
recruit students from underrepresented groups to participate in this endeavor.
Similarly, several undergraduate researchers will be involved in the form of an
independent study (thus integrating research and teaching without requiring
additional budgeted funds). The proposed work will enhance infrastructure
through the generation of both the experimental data (as a metric of comparison
for future work) as well as by comparing/validating several computational
techniques for modeling particle migration in complex flows. It will foster
partnerships by enabling future collaborative work between the PI and the
National Energy Technology Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposal lies in gaining a better fundamental understanding of the
migration forces relevant in complex viscous flows. At the completion of the
project we will have advanced discovery and understanding through (1)
establishing well-documented experimental results on particle migration in
complex flows (2) validating pseudo-continuum and discrete modeling tools for
examining these flows; and ultimately, (3) developing methodologies which
exploit competing effects within these systems to yield&lt;br/&gt;a rational
procedure for varying particle properties (size, shape, density), fluid
properties (density, viscosity), and flow field/geometry such that the discrete
elements within a flow migrate to well-defined predetermined
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;