* 0334388
* M-I Coupling: Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) Investigation of Field-Aligned Ionospheric Plasma Transport at Polar Latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2003,01/31/2005
* James Horwitz, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* kile baker
* 01/31/2005
* USD 281,994.00

This proposed project will utilize a combination of advanced modeling and
analysis of observations to investigate magnetosphere-ionosphere mass exchange
along high-latitude magnetic field lines. The Dynamic Fluid-Kinetic (DyFK) model
combines a moment-based fluid treatment for the 120-1000 km region with a
Generalized SemiKinetic (GSK) treatment of the region from 800 km altitude out
to several earth radii. The project will investigate the coupling of F-region,
topside and lower magnetospheric physical and chemical processes involved in the
outflow (and return downflow) of ionospheric ions along high-latitude magnetic
field lines. Two of the primary areas of the simulation investigation will be:
(1) The systematic and detailed simulation of the dynamics of the O+/H+
collisional-to-collisionless transition region, and (2) the investigation of
molecular ion production, loss and transport. Observational data from the
Dynamics Explorer-2 satellite, the DMSP spacecraft, and incoherent scatter
radars will be used to measure F-region/topside ionospheric parameters such as
field-aligned flows, ion and electron temperatures, and densities. The
observational data will be compared with the simulations to test the model
predictions. The project will support graduate student training and postdoctoral
researcher training. In addition, the results will have a societal impact by
advancing our ability to predict space weather.