* 0334843
* U.S.-Israel Planning Visit: The Political Economy of Israel's Water Sector Across Scales
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Richard Marcus, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2004
* USD 3,156.00

Access to clean water is poised to become the greatest natural resource
challenge of the 21st century. This study asks, "Who has the right to make
decisions about water resources when and why?" What is the role of the state,
the private sector, local government, and communities? In Israel the state
dominates the water sector. Should this serve as an example or warning for other
countries following the more common decentralized, and growing privatized, water
management route? What is the impact of such an approach on equitable access,
pricing, and maintaining resource sustainability? This planning visit grant will
be used by Dr. Richard Marcus (Yale University, Environmental Studies and
Political Science) to visit and collaborate with Dr. Moshe Schwartz (Ben Gurion
University, Jacob Blaustein Institute for Desert Research, Department of Man and
the Desert), interview water sector leaders, and further vet the research
question with Israeli academic colleagues. The findings will be used to inform
the research design of Dr. Marcus' multi-country collaborative effort to explore
the relationship between equity and sustainability in water resource governance.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Social scientists are just beginning to look beyond the
policy of simply seeking out more water to disaggregate the complex
institutional relationships governing specific water management cases, improve
efficiency, and consider demand. The larger project this planning visit informs
will begin the process of building on these efforts to extract cross-national
findings about the role of institution types, their constituents, and their
levels. In order to better inform water policy in the U.S., Israel, and myriad
other countries, we must better understand what sorts of institutions,
representing what interests, best govern the resource to ensure resource
sustainability and equitable enough access as to avert conflict. &lt;br/&gt;