* 0334623
* NSF IDM PI Workshop 2003
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* William Jones, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2004
* USD 140,650.00

The Information and Data Management Principal Investigators' Workshop (IDM03) is
held September 14 - 16, 2003 in Seattle, Washington. The objective of the annual
workshops is bringing together researchers and practitioners to discuss the
focus topics as well as to identify and elaborate on particular emphases for
future activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IDM03 Workshop is focusing on
bringing together IDM researchers as representatives of two communities; that
is, information management (often referred to as database management), along
with selected industry and government invitees, to: (1) cooperatively (i)
analyze and focus on the research and development issues of problems that are
fundamental in making progress towards this new challenge; (ii) specify areas
where major breakthroughs appear possible; (iii) identify needed collaborations
(e.g., inter-disciplinary, academic-industry); and (iv) identify research
initiatives and facilities needed to meet this and future challenges; (2) share,
provide demonstrations and interact with each other on the objectives,
contributions and challenges of major research activities funded by the IDM
Program and explore fruitful collaboration and synergism; (3) provide an
opportunity to NSF program officers, other funding agencies, and industry
representatives to learn more about the current research efforts and successes
of projects funded by IDM, and for such officers to share their program
highlights and concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IDM03 Workshop Web site
(http://www2.cs.washington.edu/nsf2003/) will contain reports on all projects
currently funded by the IDM Program, providing up-to-date project information
searchable by different criteria, including information relevant to NSF's
Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) goals (e.g., connections between
discoveries and their use in service to society). The IDM03 Workshop discussions
will result in a report that will help in formulating future directions of
research in IDM and related areas and will suggest promising modalities of
research in academia and industry with an aim to foster innovation as well as
technology transfer. The Web site will also include links to other relevant
material.