* 0334923
* ATOL: Collaborative Research: The Deep Scaly Project: Resolving Higher Level Squamate Phylogeny Using Genomic and Morphological Approaches
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* John Wiens, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 645,700.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. John Wiens of the State University of New York
at Stony Brook to study the evolutionary history of squamate reptiles (lizards
and snakes). With more than 7,700 species, squamates are the second largest
group of vertebrates after birds. Many critical questions in squamate evolution
remain unresolved, such as identification of the most primitive lineage of
squamates, the origin of snakes, and the relationships of venomous snakes to
other snake lineages. An international team of eight investigators from diverse
institutions (Brigham Young University, Field Museum of Natural History, San
Diego State University, State University of New York-Stony Brook, University of
Adelaide, University of Texas-Austin, and Yale University) will collaborate to
resolve squamate relationships. Anatomical data from living and fossil forms
will be combined with DNA sequences from 50 genes for 142 representative
squamate species. Anatomical data will be obtained using traditional methods and
new high resolution X-ray scanning techniques. DNA data will be generated by
incorporating new tools and databases from recent vertebrate genome projects.
Computer modeling will be used to determine how data from molecular and fossil
studies can best be combined to reconstruct evolutionary trees. Wiens will help
generate sequence data, anatomical data, and the web-site, and will be solely
responsible for computer modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Squamates are an
important model system in biology, and understanding their evolutionary history
is critical for a complete picture of vertebrate evolution and ecology. Venomous
snakes pose an important threat to human safety in many parts of the world, and
identification is critical for effective treatment. An innovative web-site will
allow snakebite victims and medical workers to identify the venomous snakes in
their area. Postdoctoral researchers and students will be involved in nearly
every aspect of the project, and thus the training of many future biologists and
educators will be supported.&lt;br/&gt;