* 0334836
* East Asia &amp; Pacific Advanced Study Institute:  New Frontiers of Functional Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Ramamoorthy Ramesh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 02/28/2005
* USD 17,601.00

&lt;br/&gt;0334836&lt;br/&gt;Ramesh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
participation in an East Asia and Pacific Advanced Science Institute (ASI) to be
held July 28 - August 2, 2003. The main collaborators are Professor Ramamoorthy
Ramesh at the University of Maryland in College Park and Professor Akihisa Inoue
at Tohoku University in Japan and Ms. Yuko Furukawa of the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS) in Japan. The seminar will provide an opportunity
for discussion of recent developments in various fields of materials science and
to promote international collaboration and cooperation in innovative research on
advanced materials. The program will focus on key issues associated with the
science and technology of advanced functional materials. Among the fields to be
addressed are magnetic and electronic memory storage materials. Nanomaterials is
currently one of the most dynamically developing fields of materials science.
Nanostructured materials is a relatively new field that features various types
of prospective substances demonstrating a wide range of superior properties.
Among them are materials with exclusively high mechanical, enhanced magnetic,
electronic and optical properties. Such properties have been made possible by a
very small structure unit (grain, particle, layer) size ranging from 1 to 100nm,
which is much smaller than those obtained in conventional metallic materials or
alloys. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Current topics of high interest, such as self
assemblies, spin electronics, wave functional materials (photonic crystals,
sonic crystals, and fractal photonics), advanced ferroelectric thin film
structures, will be addressed in the seminar. These recently emerging topics
show promise in becoming new fields of physics and material science. The
Advanced Science Institute is designed to provide opportunities for promising
researchers from the East-Pacific region to meet and interact in a professional
context, with the expectation that such interaction will stimulate life-long
interest in international research cooperation and encourage international
network building among them. The Institute will include about 40 promising
researchers who have obtained their doctoral degrees within the preceding 10
years. In addition, eminent senior researchers from around the world will
deliver lectures and guide workshops and interactive sessions. &lt;br/&gt;