* 0334084
* Second Workshop for High School Teachers of Mathematics and Science (June 4, 2003 in Denver, Colorado)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Bozenna Pasik-Duncan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2004
* USD 16,000.00

The intellectual merit of the proposed Workshop:&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
workshop is to enhance the cooperation among&lt;br/&gt;various control groups
and high school teachers of mathematics and science&lt;br/&gt;throughout the
United States and the world, to give attention to control and&lt;br/&gt;systems
ideas and technology, and to increase the general awareness of
the&lt;br/&gt;importance of control and systems technology and its cross-
disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;nature among high school teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;Control and Systems Science occurs in many different
disciplines and&lt;br/&gt;its applications occur in a wide variety of
technologies. It involves a variety&lt;br/&gt;of tasks, such as, modeling,
identification, simulation, planning, decision&lt;br/&gt;making, and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;Some application areas of control and systems include
transportation,&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing, communications, processing industries,
and financial&lt;br/&gt;markets. The basic control systems science influences
and impacts a diverse&lt;br/&gt;range of study, such as, biology, physics,
chemistry, economics, and&lt;br/&gt;medicine.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the proposed Workshop:&lt;br/&gt;The need of modern industry for well-trained
systems scientists is&lt;br/&gt;growing and changing, due to the marketplace
pressures and the advances in&lt;br/&gt;technology. Future generations of our
students will have to be broadly&lt;br/&gt;educated to cope with cross-
disciplinary applications and rapidly changing&lt;br/&gt;technology. The
backgrounds of our students are changing too. They are&lt;br/&gt;better prepared
to work with modern computing technologies. Thus the time&lt;br/&gt;is ripe for
major renovations in mathematics and science education in high&lt;br/&gt;school.
It is important to develop a cross-disciplinary set of
examples,&lt;br/&gt;demonstrations and laboratory exercises that illustrate
systems and control&lt;br/&gt;across the entire spectrum of mathematics and
science. We will share with&lt;br/&gt;high school teachers our successful
control stories, existing tools and&lt;br/&gt;experiments. There is much to be
gained by the sharing of educational&lt;br/&gt;experiences and practices.