* 0334352
* REU Site Director's Workshop, September 25-26, 2003,  Arlington VA
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Richard Foust, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2004
* USD 89,632.00

Northern Arizona University will organize a workshop for NSF-REU project
directors. The dates for the workshop are September 25 and 26 2003; the workshop
will be held at NSF in Arlington VA. The overarching goal for the workshop is to
provide a venue for PIs to discuss issues related to the implementation of REU
sites. The objectives for the workshop are: (1) share ideas on best practices;
(2) discuss issues pertaining to program implementation (recruitment, student
development, and student tracking); (3) discuss assessment of program success,
and; (4) provide networking opportunities for PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
agenda for the workshop will be determined by a planning committee consisting of
the following individuals: Dr. Richard Foust, Northern Arizona University; Dr.
Robyn Hannigan, Arkansas State University; Dr. Robert Powell, Avila University,
and; Dr. Danielle Gray, Emory University. Approximately 90 REU program site
directors are expected to participate in the workshop. NAU will develop a web
site for the workshop to provide 24-hour up-to-the-minute information for the
workshop participants. NAU will also provide support for the processing of
reimbursements to participants. A final report will also be produced and
distributed to REU PIs and other interested
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Point-of-contact for the workshop is Dr.
Richard D. Foust, Jr., at 928-523-7077 or
Richard.Foust@nau.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;