* 0334057
* SGER: Stochastic Radiative Transfer Through Inhomogeneous Cloud Fields Produced by a 3-D, High-Resolution Numerical Atmospheric Model
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Dana Veron, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 01/31/2005
* USD 37,709.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will address the development of
improved cloud parameterizations for Global Climate Models (GCMs). This is one
of the top priorities of the climate research community. The difficulty in
creating cloud parameterizations that give accurate results across a wide range
of regions, times, and climate regimes is that the underlying dynamical
processes are unresolved at current GCM grid scales. In addition, many important
physical processes, of which radiative transfer is among the most important, are
nonlinear with respect to the unresolved cloud spatial distribution. One
promising current strategy for addressing these issues is to explicitly predict
these subgrid distributions inside each GCM grid cell. However, developing,
testing, and refining such "statistical cloud schemes" are in their earliest
stages. In particular, the impact of spatially variable cloud fields on model
radiative transfer has not been well quantified. The radiative consequences of
using the more realistic representations of cloud water spatial variability that
would be produced by a statistical cloud scheme and the potential gains and
tradeoffs of such a strategy are major unanswered questions. More generally,
much additional work is needed on the problem of radiative transfer through an
inhomogeneous cloud field, a problem that has important implications for
understanding atmospheric and climate system processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of the motivation for this study comes from the
opportunity to combine two powerful tools for investigating cloud variability
and radiative transfer and to apply the combination to the scientific issues
discussed above. These tools are: (i) a state-of-the-art, high-resolution, 3-D
numerical atmospheric model; (ii) a state-of-the-art stochastic radiative
transfer model that can accurately represent shortwave fluxes through a highly
variable cloud field. This project has three major objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. To
quantify, for a number of case studies, the impact of the atmospheric model's
realistic, high- resolution cloud distributions, compared to more idealized or
more homogeneous ("GCM-like") distributions, on the shortwave fluxes predicted
by the stochastic radiative transfer model;&lt;br/&gt;2. To link differences in
this impact to differences in synoptic regime, atmospheric dynamical processes,
and cloud type;&lt;br/&gt;3. To begin developing and testing a valuable tool
that we expect to have important applications for cloud parameterization
development and fundamental research into the problem of radiative transfer
through a cloudy atmosphere: namely, the methodology of coupling output from a
high- resolution, 3-D atmospheric numerical model with an advanced radiative
transfer model capable of accurately capturing the effects of cloud spatial
heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts on the climate research
and modeling communities will be the useful insights into the impact of smaller-
scale cloud variability on GCM-scale radiative fluxes, when and where the
representation of such variability might be needed or desirable, and the
dependence of this impact on the underlying resolution of the cloud field and
the cloud-producing dynamics and thermodynamics. As such, the work speaks
directly to the goals of the U.S. Climate Change Science Program, a Presidential
initiative focused on providing the scientific basis for environmental and
energy policymaking.