* 0334984
* Femtosecond Laser Microfabrication and Packaging of Integrated Optical Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 10/31/2006
* USD 306,000.00

The dynamic nature of future optical networks requires high levels of
integration, fast response times, and adaptability of the optical components.
Laser micromachining circumvents the limitations of planar integration, making
three-dimensional integration possible and allowing dense packaging of optical
devices. Femtosecond micromachining is material independent, allowing devices to
be manufactured in any transparent substrate. Oscillator-only machining has
several advantages over amplified femtosecond laser machining: easy control over
the size of the structures without changing focusing, polarization-independent
structures, lower initial investment cost and higher-speed manufacturing. These
advantages make oscillator-only machining feasible for commercial applications,
and the group is working on a number of integrated optical devices with
immediate industrial applications. By controlling the cross-sectional size of
the waveguides, the group will produce periodically modulated waveguides that
can serve as Bragg gratings. By controlling the three-dimensional geometry of
waveguides written into an electro-optic material, they will manufacture
cascaded Mach Zehnder filters capable of dynamic filtering of optical signals.
Applying this technique to magneto-optical materials, they will manufacture
monolithic Faraday isolators. By selecting a rare-earth doped glass substrate,
they will produce an integrated amplifier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technique
provides one of the first viable fabrication technologies for three-dimensional
integrated optics. In addition to producing a number of commercially viable
integrated optical components, the proposed research will contribute to the
understanding of the interaction between intense laser fields and transparent
materials. The results from this proposed work are therefore directly relevant
to materials science, plasma physics, and applications of short laser pulses in
biological studies and laser microsurgery. The members of the group, nearly half
of which are female, are also heavily involved in a number of outreach and
education programs, extending the impact of the research beyond the university
to K-12 students, teachers, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;