* 0334427
* The Role of the Precipitation Mass Sink in Tropical Cyclone Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Gary Lackmann, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 11/30/2007
* USD 224,720.00

During heavy precipitation, significant quantities of water vapor are removed
from the atmosphere to the surface, resulting in a hydrostatic pressure
reduction due to the decrease of mass in the overlying column. The
representation of this precipitation mass sink is either non-existent or
incomplete in current atmospheric models because water vapor mass continuity is
not explicitly coupled to the total mass continuity or pressure tendency
equations. For tropical cyclones in which precipitation rates may exceed 200 mm
per day, the pressure-equivalent mass removal is not negligible, on the order of
20 hPa. The pressure decrease due to precipitation would be partially
compensated by horizontal mass convergence. However, this convergent inflow may
be critical to moisture transport and vorticity generation, especially in the
presence of strong rotation. The initial hypothesis to be tested is that the
pressure reduction due to the removal of atmospheric mass by precipitation is a
first-order dynamical process in tropical cyclones. A second, related hypothesis
is that including the mass sink effect explicitly in numerical weather
prediction models will improve their ability to accurately predict tropical
cyclone genesis, intensity, and track.

The focus of the research will be on understanding the physical mechanism of the
precipitation mass sink as it relates to tropical cyclone dynamics. The
Principal Investigator will isolate the important mechanisms by undertaking a
series of numerical model experiments that selectively include and exclude the
mass sink terms in the governing equations.

The specific objectives of this project are to: 1. Develop and test a numerical
model that includes both water loading and precipitation mass sink effects in
the model continuity, pressure-tendency, and momentum equations. 2. Conduct a
thorough observational data analysis for Hurricane Lili (and/or other cases)
including in-situ aircraft data, remotely sensed data (radar and satellite) and
dropsondes. The observational analysis will allow detailed evaluation of
numerical model simulations. 3. Conduct a series of sensitivity experiments on
Hurricane Lili or other cases. The analysis will include mass, moisture, and
momentum budgets. Storm-relative budgets for a cylindrical volume moving with
the storm will isolate the relative importance of water loading and the
precipitation mass sink to tropical cyclone dynamics. A centerpiece of the
analysis will be a potential vorticity (PV) diagnosis, including budget
computations and piecewise inversions. 4. Formulate a conceptual model for
tropical cyclogenesis and intensification that accounts for the role of the mass
sink mechanism.

The impacts of the research include i) potentially improved numerical forecasts
of tropical cyclone formation, intensification, and track. ii) Improved
understanding of the role that precipitation plays in the dynamics of tropical
cyclones.