* 0335133
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Analytical and Computational Methods Related to the Linearized Boltzmann Equation
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Charles Siewert, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 15,000.00

This U.S.-Brazil award will support Dr. Charles E. Siewert, North Carolina State
University in a cooperative research effort with Dr. Liliane B. Barichello at
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Their project
concerns the general area of rarefied-gas dynamics, focused on solving the
Poiseuille-flow problem, the thermal-creep flow problem, and the Couette-flow
problem as defined by the linearized Boltzmann equation for rigid-sphere
interactions and the Cercignani-Lampis boundary condition applied at the two
surfaces that contain flow. The work will be based on analytical discrete
ordinates method and the use of a Legendre expansion in terms of the speed
variable. This is an important project in which the PIs consider the use of the
Cercignani-Lampis boundary condition to define the classical problems of
Poiseuille flow, thermal-creep flow and Couette flow in plane channel.

The results of this research could help implement new analytical and
computational methods with applications to nanotechnology, a priority area for
both NSF and the Federal Government. Coupled with ever-improved computing
machines, it also has the potential to define an improved standard of analysis
and design of mechanical systems, as evidenced by the PIs' discussions with
engineers in the U.S., Brazil, Japan and Greece about their work. Specific
possible applications include micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS).