* 0335501
* Studies in Moduli Theory and Birational Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Dan Abramovich, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 205,450.00

Abramovich will continue studying problems in moduli theory, in
&lt;br/&gt;particular (1) the moduli stacks of twisted stable maps, reductions
&lt;br/&gt;of moduli of principal bundles in characteristic p, Gromov-Witten
&lt;br/&gt;theory of stacks, foundational problems on stacks, and (2) moduli
&lt;br/&gt;spaces of Bridgeland-Douglas semistable objects in the derived
&lt;br/&gt;category of a variety. Abramovich will also continue
studying&lt;br/&gt;problems in birational geometry, in particular (1) the
strong&lt;br/&gt;factorization conjecture and the toroidalization conjecture,
and &lt;br/&gt;(2) perverse point sheaves and their moduli as a tool for
construction &lt;br/&gt;and study of certain Mori flips and
flops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of study of this project lies within
algebraic geometry, the&lt;br/&gt;branch of mathematics devoted to geometric
shapes called algebraic&lt;br/&gt;varieties, defined by polynomial equations.
While algebraic geometry&lt;br/&gt;has contributed applications in coding,
industrial control, and&lt;br/&gt;computation, the topics of this project are
more closely related to&lt;br/&gt;applications in theoretical physics, where
physicists consider&lt;br/&gt;algebraic varieties as components of the fine
structure of our&lt;br/&gt;universe. This is especially true with the first
topic, moduli&lt;br/&gt;theory. This theory studies a remarkable phenomenon in
which the&lt;br/&gt;collection of all algebraic varieties of the same type is
often&lt;br/&gt;manifested as an algebraic variety, called a moduli space, in
its own&lt;br/&gt;right. Thus in algebraic geometry, the metaphor of thinking
about a&lt;br/&gt;community of "organisms" as itself being an "organism" is not
just a&lt;br/&gt;metaphor but a rigorous and quite useful fact. Sometimes a
collection&lt;br/&gt;of algebraic varieties manifests itself as a slightly more
general&lt;br/&gt;object, called a stack, rather than a variety. Such stacks are
a&lt;br/&gt;central object of study of this project. The other topic studied
in&lt;br/&gt;this project is birational geometry, which is devoted to a
certain&lt;br/&gt;abstract relationship, called birational equivalence, among
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;varieties, which lies at the foundation of algebraic
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;