* 0335301
* NRT:  Unified Networking Research Testbed for the Next Generation Optical Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Jonathan Heritage, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed project explores a two-tier signaling approach with optical label
switching (OLS) technique that offers the following desired properties: (a)
accommodates signals of any protocol/format, (b) achieves ultra-low latency for
transporting high burst-rate packets, (c) requires no network or packet
synchronization, (d) interoperates with both circuit-switched and packet-
switched traffic, and (e) automatically detects and restores network failures.

The project focuses not on prototyping and testbed creation but on the design,
simulations, analysis of new optical networking technologies. In particular, the
project investigates novel ways to incorporate intelligence in the optical nodes
and in the management system to make the network more resilient, robust, and
efficient. The tasks and sub-tasks of the project are listed below:

Task 1. Next Generation Networks (NGN) architecture and protocol studies
Simulate and design MPLS restoration and optical protection algorithms Emulate
New Unified Optical Networking with optical packet, burst, frame, cell switching
Design protocols for providing differentiated Class of Service and on-demand
QoS.

Task 2. NGN network control, management, and signaling Design a signaling
architecture which allows rapid but optimized routing of packets Implement NC&M
which makes intelligent judgements based on the network condition. Investigate a
method for auto-detection and auto-recovery of a fault in the network

Task 3. NGN network element design and optical technologies Design a scalable
switch architecture for the IP/WDM network elements. Implement the most
effective contention resolution and congestion control method.

