* 0335005
* The Interface Between Internal and External Knowledge: R&D Laboratories as Integration Entities
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Laura Cardinal, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 12/31/2007
* USD 99,594.00

Abstract: This study focuses on fundamental research on the management of
corporate R&D. There is a great deal of variance in the effectiveness of basic
research (discovery of new ideas and relationships) and innovation
(commercialization) . The variance is both between firms and within firms that
have multiple R&D labs. The research is designed to test organizational theories
linking effectiveness of R&D to coordination, communication, and cooperation to
division of specialized knowledge labor. The more specialized the division of
labor, the greater the information coordination needs. The knowledge sources are
both within firm (primarily cross-functional) and external (disciplinary,
patents, and public science).

This study will be the first, pilot stage of an eventual large scale field study
of corporate R&D laboratories. The broad objective is to model how firms balance
and integrate the needs for internal information flows and tight coordination
with access to external public knowledge and information. For product innovation
it is important to have tight coordination in order to incorporate and integrate
information and knowledge spread out across various functional areas such as
manufacturing and marketing. Basic research requires sources of knowledge
external to the firm that are substantially dependent on discipline knowledge
and public science. In terms of broad impact, this research specifically targets
the effectiveness of corporate R&D, which is critical for technological
advancement at multiple levels: national, industrial, and organizational. This
line of research also should be informative for management of university
technology transfer, such as spin-outs, and government R&D, such as DARPA
projects. The investigator is committed to continue incorporating valid research
into educational materials and curricula.