* 0335101
* Novel passive and active photonic crystal and high index-contrast structures for broadband communications
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Jerome Moloney, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2007
* USD 551,667.00

Abstract, Proposal 0305101: Jerome Moloney, University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Novel passive and active photonic crystal
structures for broadband communications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to
launch a combined experimental/theoretical/simulation investigation of active
and passive photonic bandgap components that will enable optical functionalities
on the chip scale and in the fiber form. The research is organized in the
following areas, (1) On the theoretical side, we will implement fully vectorial
3D Maxwell solvers coupled to the relevant material equations. The latter will
include rigorously computed active/passive material models and will help in a
predictive way in the design of the components; (2) on the experimental side, we
we will employ the extensive nanophotonic and fiber fabrication capabilities
that currently exist at UA and Stanford to make photonic band gap structures and
test them. Er-doped photonic crystal fibers will be fabricated and used in
developing active devices, such as lasers. The large gain per unit length of
these devices will allow fabrication of arrays of such lasers on a chip.
Wavelength conversion arrays, needed for optical networking, will also be
another subnject of investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this research will be not only be in enhancing the broadband communication
access but also in integration of research into our education and educational
outreach activities and diversity programs. The faberication of chip scale
optical components will bring novel devices to the market and to the hands of
the customer. The research also help in educating a skilled work force in the
nationally sensitive communication area. We will also start an outreach program
with the native Americans and specially the Navajo Nation by developing
educational opportunities for high school and community college teachers from
this Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;