* 0335569
* SGER: Black Carbon Aerosol Measurements in the Coastal STRatocumulus Imposed Perturbation Experiment (CSTRIPE) Program
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Gregory Kok, Droplet Measurement Technologies
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/2004
* USD 65,082.00

This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project involves measurements
of aerosol black carbon on a particle-by-particle basis using the Single
Particle Soot Photometer (SP2) during the Coastal STratocumulus Imposed
Perturbation Experiment (CSTRIPE). Airborne measurements for CSTRIPE will be
made from the Office of Naval Research Center for Interdisciplinary Remotely-
Piloted Aircraft Studies (ONR/CIRPAS) Twin Otter research aircraft over three
weeks in July 2003 off the coast of Monterey, California. Flights will also be
performed over the heavily polluted San Joaquin Valley, California continental
area to examine black carbon emanating from smoke and urban/industrial plumes.
Particulate black carbon is highly absorptive, and suspected to be a major
determinant of the radiative forcing due to haze and cloud layers. Results will
improve our understanding of the microphysical and optical properties of
transported aerosol layers and their influence on climate. Broader impacts of
this project include a unique and interesting data set available to a wide range
of researchers interested in the impact of highly absorbing black carbon on the
radiative properties of aerosols and clouds, with potentially far-reaching
implications for climate. The project also involves collaborations with
researchers at private and public academic institutions in the U.S and Mexico,
including hands-on graduate student participation.