* 0335131
* Mineralogic and Isotopic Studies of Cu-Ni Sulfide Mineralization Associated with the Duke Island Ultramafic Complex, Southeastern Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Chusi Li, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

The Duke Island complex is one of more than thirty ultramafic bodies of
Cretaceous age located in the Alaskan panhandle. Recent drilling operations
detected large volumes of low-grade massive and disseminated sulfide
mineralization hosted within an olivine-clinopyroxenite body. Assays show a
maximum of 1.95% Cu, 0.25% Ni, and 1 gram/ton combined Pt + Pd. Prior to this
discovery, Alaskan-type ultramafic complexes were considered poor prospects for
Cu-Ni-platinum group element (PGE) sulfide deposition. PGE mineralization
appears to be primarily associated with chromite-rich occurrences in dunitic
portions of the complexes, and most of the PGEs are housed in alloys,
tellurides, or antimonides. For these reasons the complexes are thought to have
formed in very low fS2 environments. Alaskan-type complexes are thought to have
formed in compressive regimes related to subduction processes. Very few large
magmatic Cu-Ni-(PGE) sulfide deposits are associated with subduction zones, and
an analysis of the tectonic and petrologic environments of the Duke Island
complex suggests that immediate country rocks are sulfide-bearing and probably
served as feeder systems for arc-related volcanic activity. Thus the complex may
represent an excellent target for the localization of Cu-Ni-(PGE) mineralization
in a tectonic environment that in the past may have been overlooked in terms of
sulfide potential. &lt;br/&gt;Detailed petrographic, electron-microprobe, PGE,
stable isotopic, and Re/Os isotopic studies of the sulfide mineralization will
be undertaken to evaluate its petrogenetic evolution. Drill cores collected in
2001 and 2003 will be available for our project. Geochemical studies will assess
the nature and causes of sulfide liquation and separation from a silicate magma
(and if this process occurred at all), the source of sulfur involved in the
mineralization, the overall nature of country rock contamination in the ore-
forming processes, the possible importance of hydrothermal processes in sulfide
genesis, and the source and evolution of Os (and potentially related metals) in
the sulfide system. Preliminary analyses indicate that interaction with country
rocks has been important in sulfide formation, and that hydrothermal processes
may have played a significant role as well. Results of this study will be
applicable not only to other Alaskan-type complexes, but will offer an
interesting comparison in terms of tectonic environments relative to other
world-class Cu-Ni-(PGE) deposits.&lt;br/&gt; Broader implications of the
proposed research include the educational opportunities presented to both
graduate and undergraduate students who will be involved in the field and
analytical portions of the research. Collaboration with industry partners will
be imperative for the success of the research. Quaterra Resources will provide
access to drill cores and chemical analyses, and will provide field
transportation in Alaska. Results from this study will have an impact on further
exploration and potential economic development in southeastern Alaska, and will
be important for the assessment of limited Ni and PGE resources in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;