* 0335185
* EIN:  Collaborative Research: End-To-End Provisioned Optical Network Testbed for Large-Scale eScience Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Nageswara Rao, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 09/30/2007
* USD 773,500.00

This proposal is a comprehensive effort to develop the infrastructure and
networking technologies to support a broad class of eScience projects and
specifically the Terascale Supernova Initiative. The proposed work will build a
high-performance, experimental, optical network infrastructure that supports:
(a) on-demand provisioning of end-to-end high-speed circuits, (b) stable
transport to sustain control and streaming operations, and (c) middleware and
application software to support data transfers, visualization, steering and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Through a vertical integration
of these components, the researchers plan to demonstrate how a large-scale
eScience application, such as TSI, can fully exploit the benefits of optical
networks. The team consists of optical networking researchers, transport-layer
and middleware researchers, and radio-astronomy scientists. Successful
completion of this project will allow the Awardee to determine the benefits and
costs of creating a backbone high-speed shared circuit-switched network along
the same lines as the two packet-switched Internet2 backbone networks, Abilene
and vBNS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Due to the broad spectrum of
target eScience applications, the project should have a broad societal impact.
Given the diverse team of researchers on this project, results should be
disseminated in various research communities rapidly and increase the level of
interest in this approach. This project significantly leverages various
resources at the universities and ORNL. Students from these universities will be
provided access to computational and network resources at ORNL, in terms of
supercomputers and high-bandwidth links. Also, this work will be used to provide
projects to students from DOE educational programs, which support undergraduate
and graduate students from universities across the country. This project will
specifically include summer students from ORNL's Research Alliance for
Minorities program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;