* 0335343
* Workshop on Emerging Geoenvironmental Engineering Technologies for Pollution Control and Remediation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Krishna Reddy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2005
* USD 28,018.00

Traditionally, geoenvironmental engineers have been responsible mainly for
characterizing contaminated sites, designing in-situ barriers and landfills, and
characterizing the use of waste materials. Recently, geoenvironmental engineers
have expanded their involvement in risk assessment and remediation of
contaminated sites, designing and monitoring barrier systems to contain
difficult contamination, such as non-aqueous phase liquids (NAPLs), and
developing environmentally benign large-scale reuse of waste and recycled
materials. In addition, innovative waste management strategies, such as
bioreactor landfills, end-uses of closed landfills, and subaqueous waste
containment, are being developed. Such an expanded scope of geoenvironmental
engineering requires a broader multi-disciplinary knowledge, particularly
hydrogeology, geochemistry, microbiology, as well as economics and public
policy. Geoenvironmental engineers are also challenged to utilize rapidly
developing technologies such as sensor technologies, nanotechnologies, and
information technologies into the practice of geoenvironmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this workshop is to bring together
geoenvironmental researchers, practitioners and other interested persons to
review the recent advances in technology and understanding, as well as identify
the technical challenges in the design, operation and monitoring of
geoenvironmental systems. The specific objectives of the workshop
are:&lt;br/&gt; To summarize the current state-of-the art and the state-of-
practice of geoenvironmental engineering.&lt;br/&gt; To identify the specific
roles of geoenvironmental engineers.&lt;br/&gt; To identify gaps in knowledge of
the current geoenvironmental systems.&lt;br/&gt; To explore how emerging
technologies, such as sensor technologies, nanotechnologies and information
technologies may be utilized for geoenvironmental systems.&lt;br/&gt; To
identify and prioritize research needs in geoenvironmental systems.&lt;br/&gt;
To identify geoenvironmental educational needs.&lt;br/&gt; To facilitate
collaboration among researchers and practicing
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will involve participants with
different backgrounds from academia, government agencies, and engineering
practice. An effort will be made to include a diverse group of professionals,
including under-represented minorities, and also educators from small colleges.
A workshop webpage and a workshop e-mail discussion list will be set up to
enable an exchange of ideas before and after the workshop towards the
development of a coordinated plan specifically designed to solve subsurface
pollution problems. The workshop proceedings will be posted on the workshop
website and relevant web sites.&lt;br/&gt;