* 0335272
* NRT:  National Radio Networking Research Testbed (NRNRT)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* James Roberts, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,852,560.00

The radio frequency (RF) spectrum is a significant national, natural, and
renewable resource.&lt;br/&gt;Recently, a number of themes have converged to
cause significant reconsideration of how radio&lt;br/&gt;frequency spectrum is
managed in the United States and elsewhere. The important themes
are:&lt;br/&gt;advances in radio system engineering; end-user interest in mobile
access to information;&lt;br/&gt;requirements of national defense and homeland
security; recognition that spectrum is woefully&lt;br/&gt;under-utilized; and
proposals to dramatically re-architect the modes and mechanisms for
using&lt;br/&gt;radio frequency. While for many decades building radios has been
relegated to radio engineers,&lt;br/&gt;new ways to communicate while on the
move and new mobile services are emerging. Building&lt;br/&gt;mobile networking
devices and services requires integrating multiple disciplines
including:&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetics, circuit design, signal processing,
network protocols, and service development.&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of multiple
mobile communication devices and the urge to always be connected&lt;br/&gt;is
driving research and investment in new communications services and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher proposes to establish a National
Radio Network Research Testbed (NTNRT) to support&lt;br/&gt;research and
development of new radio devices, services, and architectures and to provide
a&lt;br/&gt;facility for the research community to test and evaluate their
systems. The NRNRT consists of&lt;br/&gt;(1) a field deployed measurement and
evaluation system for long term radio frequency data&lt;br/&gt;collection and
experimental facility for testing and evaluating new radios, (2) an
accurate&lt;br/&gt;emulation/simulation system incorporating long-term field
measurement for evaluating new&lt;br/&gt;wireless network architectures,
policies, and network protocols, and (3) experiments with&lt;br/&gt;innovative
wireless networks that integrate analysis, emulation/simulation, and
field&lt;br/&gt;measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.1 Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Good systems result from a balanced combination of
innovation, solid design and analysis, and&lt;br/&gt;test and evaluation. The
proposed effort seeks this balance. The fielded measurement
and&lt;br/&gt;evaluation system will provide a comprehensive dataset for future
design and analysis as well as&lt;br/&gt;a place to test prototype systems. The
accurate emulation system will utilize the collected data to&lt;br/&gt;improve
analysis of innovative radio devices, protocols, and services. Finally, the
wireless&lt;br/&gt;networking experiments will demonstrate innovative services
and validate the testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.2 Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NTNRT will provide a significant resource to the
wireless networking research and&lt;br/&gt;development community. First, it will
generate a database covering long-term utilization and&lt;br/&gt;propagation
characteristics of the RF spectrum that will further understanding of the
resources&lt;br/&gt;available for wireless networks. Second, it will provide a
facility to test and evaluate new radio&lt;br/&gt;networking devices and
systems. And third, it will provide information and techniques
necessary&lt;br/&gt;to produce high quality emulation/simulation of emerging
wireless devices and systems.&lt;br/&gt;The information gathered and systems
demonstrated and evaluated during this project will&lt;br/&gt;provide crucial
input to discussions at the national level concerning the future
spectrum&lt;br/&gt;management and policies that are required for ubiquitous high
performance wireless networks.