* 0335238
* International Workshop on Theoretical and Algorithmic Aspects of Sensor, Ad Hoc Wireless, and Peer-to-Peer Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Jie Wu, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen M. O'Hara
* 05/31/2005
* USD 22,200.00

In recent years, mobile computing has enjoyed a tremendous rise&lt;br/&gt;in
popularity and has been used in various sectors of the society.
&lt;br/&gt;Sensor networks, Ad hoc wireless networks, and Peer-to-peer networks
&lt;br/&gt;(simply called SAP networks) play a central role in the development
of &lt;br/&gt;emerging network paradigms. These three networks are characterized
by &lt;br/&gt;their ad hoc nature without infrastructure or centralized
administration.&lt;br/&gt;Unlike infrastructured networks, including cellular
networks, where nodes &lt;br/&gt;interact through a centralized base station,
nodes in an SAP network&lt;br/&gt;interact in a peer-to-peer fashion. As a
result of the mobility (including &lt;br/&gt;join/leave the network) of their
nodes, SAP networks are characterized by &lt;br/&gt;dynamically changing
topologies. The applications of SAP networks range &lt;br/&gt;from civilian
(file-sharing) to disaster recovery (search-and-rescue),&lt;br/&gt;and military
(battlefield).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Workshop on Theoretical
and Algorithmic Aspects of Sensor, &lt;br/&gt;Ad hoc wireless, and Peer-to-peer
Networks brings an international forum on &lt;br/&gt;the recent development on
theoretical and algorithmic aspects of three related &lt;br/&gt;fields. The
workshop seeks to bring together different research disciplines&lt;br/&gt;to
initiate a comprehensive technical discussion on theoretical and
&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic approaches to three related fields. The objective of the
&lt;br/&gt;workshop is to identify several common theoretical and algorithmic
approaches &lt;br/&gt;that can address issues related to SAP networks. The
central topic of the &lt;br/&gt;workshop revolves around the following two
questions: What are the central &lt;br/&gt;technical issues in SAP networks?
What are the possible solutions/tools&lt;br/&gt;available to address these
issues? After identifying areas for research, &lt;br/&gt;the next focus of this
workshop is on future research challenges. This &lt;br/&gt;workshop seeks a
broad impact through a mix of theoretical researchers and
&lt;br/&gt;practitioners (from local industry) and by helping to stimulate
collaborations. We believe that theoretical progress on the research topic in
the workshop will&lt;br/&gt;have a long-term impact on SAP networks. A major
theme of the workshop&lt;br/&gt;is the integration of research and education. It
is addressed through &lt;br/&gt;participation of graduate students, especially
from regional universities&lt;br/&gt;in South Florida, which have a high
percentage of Hispanic and Black students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;