* 0335615
* SENSE Workshop:  Sample Environments for Neutron Scattering Experiments in Tallahassee, FL, September 24-26, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Linda (Lee) Magid, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2005
* USD 38,580.00

This project is a workshop on Sample Environments for Neutron Scattering
Experiments (SENSE). It is action-oriented, with the goals of (1) exploring the
science drivers that impact issues concerning the development of advanced sample
environments for neutron scattering - primarily focused on the Spallation
Neutron Source (SNS) - and (2) developing a roadmap to address these needs.
Scientists who are new to the use of neutron scattering are encouraged to attend
a tutorial session at the beginning of a companion NSFCHEMBIO workshop targeted
at the chemistry and biology communities. The SENSE workshop proper begins with
a plenary session to consider the science case for advanced sample environments;
that is, environments that provide control of the sample temperature, pressure,
magnetic-field environment, and chemical environment. The workshop continues
with a series of parallel oral presentations on scientific research and on the
technical aspects of leading sample environments worldwide. This is followed by
user-focused interactive sessions. The SENSE workshop also includes a tour of
the NHMFL and joint sessions with the parallel NSFCHEMBIO workshop. Because the
SENSE workshop is intended to launch the development of a science-driven roadmap
for national sample-environment initiatives, it concludes with summaries by the
workshop section chairs and "concept teams" and the identification of follow-up
action items. In addition to engaging experts in the field, the SENSE workshop
is involving the broader community, specifically including graduate students,
postdocs, and junior faculty members, as well as scientists who are new to the
technique of neutron scattering. Two of the plenary lecturers are women, and the
organizers are also reaching out to several HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutrons
with low energies are useful probes of the properties of matter, being
especially responsive to structural and dynamical properties on spatial scales
ranging from atomic dimensions to micro-meters. These are scales characteristic
of, for example, polymers, grains in metals and alloys, and living cells.
Neutrons also provide unique probes of magnetic properties on similar scales.
The properties of materials depend upon conditions in their environment,
however. For example, the ambient temperature, pressure, and magnetic-field
environment all affect the properties of physical materials. This is obvious
near the melting or freezing point of a substance. Similarly, the properties of
living cells are affected by temperature, pressure, and the chemical
environments in which they find themselves. Up to this point, however, it has
not generally been possible to provide sample environments that allow wide-
ranging control of such parameters. The purpose of this workshop is to explore
the needs of the various scientific communities for advanced sample environments
and to develop a plan of action to enable them to be realized. This project is
especially timely now, as the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) approaches
completion at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in 2006. &lt;br/&gt;