* 0335739
* Teaching for the Future: Science and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* D. Carl Freeman, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 05/31/2010
* USD 394,000.00

This project is a collaborative effort among Wayne State University's (WSU)
Colleges of Education and Science and Detroit Public Schools to provide a
program of campus courses, online hybrid courses, and classroom teaching
experiences to certify 25 new mathematics and science teachers for Detroit
Public Schools. Our program objectives are: 1) recruit mathematics and science
teacher candidates from WSU's baccalaureate programs and mid-career changers
from local industry, 2) provide a quality two-track teacher certification
program for our candidates, and 3) induct, monitor, and mentor our teacher
candidates through the program and their early years of teaching. This project
actively recruits teacher candidates of underrepresented groups, and those in
science and mathematics areas where there is the greatest teaching need,
specifically higher-level mathematics and the physical sciences. The project
employs best practices of our NCATE-approved certification program and of two
successful alternative teacher certification programs currently in place at WSU,
the Alternative Pathways to Teaching (APT) and Limited License to Instruct (LLI)
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this initiative, the project: 1)
forms and supports cohort groups led by College of Education faculty and links
candidates with in-school mentor teachers to guide their field experiences and
induction and provide continued support in the profession; 2) introduces
candidates to teaching by placing them in a DPS classroom two days a week in
their first or second year where they will engage in observations and selected
teaching experiences with a mentor teacher; and 3) places teacher candidates in
paid faculty positions in DPS in year two or three of their certification
program, to be applied toward tenure within the
District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation is pursued to assess the project's
effectiveness in attracting, preparing, and retaining our teacher candidates,
and facilitates collecting demographic data on, and tracking of our
scholarship/stipend recipients as they fulfill their teaching obligation in the
Detroit Public Schools. Dissemination of findings and best practices of this
project occurs through research and scholarly publications and presentations at
professional conferences.