* 0336450
* Core Measurements at Summit, Greenland Environmental Observatory
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* Roger Bales, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Sanford
* 08/31/2010
* USD 943,382.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;OPP #: 0336450&lt;br/&gt;PI: Roger Bales&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Core Measurements at Summit, Greenland Environmental
Observatory&lt;br/&gt;Program: Arctic Research Support and
Logistics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 5-year project supports continuing and
expanding the collection of long-term measurements of the Arctic atmosphere,
snow and other Earth system components at the Summit Greenland Environmental
Observatory (GEOSummit), located at an elevation of 3100 m on the Greenland ice
sheet. A core suite of measurements has been collected at GEOSummit since 1993
and this project provides for the continued operation of GEOSummit as long-term
site for year-round disciplinary and interdisciplinary measurements and
research. The location provides a compliment to lower-elevation sites and a
Northern Hemisphere analog to South Pole station. Measurements include baseline
meteorology, radiation, tropospheric chemistry, snow properties and snow
chemistry, some measurements in cooperation with NOAA-CMDL and measurements
initiated by individual investigators. Measurements are aligned with the
objectives of the World Meteorological Organization's Global Atmospheric Watch
(GAW) program. The atmospheric gas-phase and aerosol species being studied are
all either sensitive indicators of anthropogenic impacts on regional and global
atmospheric change, or are important chemically coupled species whose
concentrations may be strongly influenced by changes in the Arctic, including
changes in snow/ice surface temperatures, ice/snow cover, and atmospheric
circulation. Related chemical measurements in the snow provide the needed link
to investigate feedbacks between Arctic climate change, air-snow exchange, and
atmospheric composition. Recent evidence indicates that important atmospheric
chemical constituents undergo temperature-dependent exchange with ice/snow, and
that some species are photochemically transformed and/or produced within the
sunlit surface snowpack. Understanding arctic environmental change requires a
quantitative understanding of the environmental controls (e.g., temperature,
radiation, humidity, ozone concentration) on air-snow feedbacks, as well as the
impact of these processes on the entire Arctic atmosphere. Because changes in
Arctic atmospheric circulation are cyclic over 4-5 year or longer times, long-
duration measurements are needed to understand circulation and to place observed
changes in a long-term perspective. Data and results will be shared via the
National Snow and Ice Data Center data archive&lt;br/&gt;