* 0336738
* Collaborative Research: Molecular, Biochemical and Signal Transduction Analysis of a Phytotoxic Root-Root Communication Process Mediated by (-)-Catechin in the Rhizosphere
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Simon Gilroy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2007
* USD 250,547.00

&lt;br/&gt;The soil surrounding a plant root, known as the rhizosphere, is a
unique physical, biochemical and ecological environment. The rhizosphere is to a
large extent controlled by the root system through chemicals secreted into the
surrounding soil. These root secretions (exudates) may play symbiotic or
defensive roles as a plant communicates with its environment, ultimately
developing a positive or negative response to the other elements in its
rhizosphere. An example of negative communication is provided by the Asian
native Centaurea maculosa L. (spotted knapweed).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Centaurea
maculosa Lam. (spotted knapweed) is one of the most invasive and destructive
introduced weeds in North America, particularly in the fields and pastures of
the northwest U.S. Although it has long been proposed that spotted knapweed
achieves its dominance through secretion of a plant-toxic chemical
(allelochemical), no such chemical had been identified until last year, when it
was determined that an exudate of spotted knapweed roots is indeed toxic to
other plants. The active "ingredient" of this chemical is composed of racemic
catechin, a 50:50 mixture of (+)-catechin and (-)-catechin. Although
(+)-catechin is widespread throughout the plant kingdom, both (-)-catechin and
the racemic form are extremely rare. Further, the anti-plant part of the exudate
was entirely due to (-)-catechin, while (+)-catechin was inactive. Conversely,
(+)-catechin was active against certain bacteria, while (-)-catechin was not.
(-)-Catechin was found to be toxic against Arabidopsis and a variety of crop
plant species and was also toxic to C. diffusa (diffuse knapweed), a close
relative of spotted knapweed. (-)-Catechin did not affect seedlings or seed
germination of C. maculosa itself. In Arabidopsis thaliana, spotted knapweed's
toxic chemical triggers a rapid cascade of stress responses which kill cells in
the root meristem and elongation zone and ultimately lead to the death of the
entire root system. The proposed research will shed light on the molecular and
biochemical interactions that occur in conjunction with this negative
communication process in the subterranean part of this plant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Specifically, the proposal will examine the negative
control exerted by (-)-catechin in the rhizosphere of C. maculosa using the
following aims: 1) to understand the toxic chemical processes initiated by
(-)-catechin in Arabidopsis roots, 2) to understand the mechanism by which C.
maculosa detoxifies (-)-catechin, and 3) to clone the gene(s) involved in
(-)-catechin production. The interaction of (-)-catechin with plants such as
Arabidopsis is an event that occurs under natural soil conditions, and thus has
biological relevance. In addition, this research will provide the broader
benefits of training two postdoctoral scholars, one graduate student and
undergraduates in a multidisciplinary research atmosphere. Furthermore, the
research outlined has practical implications to both U.S. agriculture and to
preserving plant diversity of the Western U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;