* 0336405
* SGER: Development of High-Precision Neodymium Isotope Mass Spectrometry to Search for Crust-Mantle Differentiation on Early Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Mukul Sharma, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 29,865.00

EAR-0336405&lt;br/&gt;Sharma&lt;br/&gt;A major ambiguity remains in ascertaining
whether the silicate portion of the Earth underwent differentiation during the
first 500 million years of its history-a time for which there is no extant rock
record. The evidence of early crust-mantle differentiation event(s) may be
present in Archean rocks in the form of 142Nd anomalies produced from the decay
of short-lived 146Sm (half-life = 103 million years), which was present at the
time of formation of the Earth. The expected level of excess in 142Nd is about
+30 parts per million (ppm) and, therefore, a 1-sigma uncertainty of 5 ppm or
better is needed to resolve the anomaly. To accomplish this technically
challenging task, we will use a new generation thermal ionization mass
spectrometer (Triton) recently installed at Dartmouth.&lt;br/&gt;Initial
measurements of standards on Triton have shown that it is capable of measuring
anomalies in 142Nd exceeding +10 ppm. We will develop a standard operating
procedure (SOP) to mitigate/eliminate possible ion optical artifacts in order to
obtain Nd isotope results that are precise and accurate at 5 ppm (1-sigma) or
better. Following the development of the SOP we will examine ten early Archean
rocks from Isua, Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed study
include teaching and training of a highly motivated graduated student, Rasmus
Andreasen, and development of new techniques of accurate and super-precise
measurements of Nd isotopes using thermal ionization mass spectrometry. Also,
the study is expected to provide new and profound insights into the history of
early Earth differentiation. The unprecedented external reproducibility of Nd-
isotope measurements will open up new avenues of investigations in diverse areas
of earth and planetary sciences.&lt;br/&gt;