* 0336686
* A Proposal for a Workshop on Design, Modeling, Fabrication and Characterization of Nanotube-Reinforced Composite Materials for Multifunctional Applications: Tallahasse, FL
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Hsu-Pin (Ben) Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 01/31/2005
* USD 19,710.00

fTo enhance academic exchanges and university-industry cooperation in the
research of carbon nanotube-reinforced composite materials, the Florida Advanced
Center for Composite Technologies (FAC2T) at the Florida A&amp;M
University/Florida State University College of Engineering will host a workshop
on Design, Modeling, Fabrication and Characterization of Nanotube-Reinforced
Composite Materials for Multifunctional Applications. The workshop will be held
at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Tallahassee, FL. Approximately
50-60 invited participants from academic institutes, research laboratories,
industrial companies and governmental agencies are expected to attend this one
and a half day workshop to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Stimulate and exchange ideas for using
nanotubes as reinforcement in making multifunctional composite materials and
structures, 2. Promote, facilitate and develop partnerships in nanocomposite
research, 3. Define research goals, determine business opportunities, identify
technical challenges and develop a 5-year technology roadmap, 4. Identify
methods for reducing costs to make the processing affordable for more commercial
applications, and 5. Identify further applications for use of nanocomposites in
addition to space and aerospace structural safety, medicine, sensors and energy
savings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This workshop will significantly enhance the
field of nanotechnology and manufacturing. Information from the workshop will be
disseminated via a website and papers, potentially leading to annual workshops
to further advance these developments. These developments promise to lead to
optimizing nanotubes and manufacturing processes for producing lightweight,
exceptionally strong composites that can be used in a host of applications,
including space and aerospace structural safety, medical applications and energy
savings. &lt;br/&gt;