* 0336435
* CFD Models for Liquid-Phase Chemical Reactors: Validation of PDF and Large-Eddy Simulations Using Stereo PIV and Reactive PLIF Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* James Hill, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2009
* USD 412,011.00

Research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macroscopic models based on computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) have potential for improving reactor design in the chemical
process industries. Better reactor design can also lead to reducing pollution by
producing less toxic byproducts. Numerous chemical processes involve fast
chemical reactions for which the product distribution is affected by turbulent
transport. For these systems, using CFD effectively depends on the development
and validation of micromixing models needed to describe the complex interactions
between turbulent mixing and chemical reactions at the sub-grid scale.
Commercial CFD codes have shortcomings related to model development and
validation that must be overcome before CFD can reach its full potential for
developing environmentally benign, commercially efficient chemical technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will focus on developing CFD models for turbulent
liquid-phase chemical reactions. They plan to obtain experimental data for
turbulent flow field and concentrations fields inside the liquid phase for two
canonical reactor geometries under carefully controlled operating conditions
using simultaneous stereo-particle-image velocimetry (SPIV) and reactive planar
laser-induced fluorescence (RPLIF). On the modeling side they will develop CFD
models for turbulent reacting flows based on large-eddy simulation (LES) of the
flow and probability density functions (PDF) for the chemical species. These
models contain well-defined unclosed terms that will be extracted from SPIV and
RPLIF data for two canonical turbulent flows: a confined planar jet and a
confined sudden-expansion planar jet. More generally, the knowledge gained in
this project will enhance the state of the art in measurement techniques for
simultaneous velocity and reacting scalar statistics using SPIV and RPLIF in
liquid-phase turbulent flows.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have a long history of recruiting students from
underrepresented groups to become involved in their research. These outreach
activities are facilitated by many institution-wide minority and women
recruitment programs at Iowa State University. K-12 students will be invited to
work in the PI's laboratory as summer research interns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reduction of pollution and toxic byproducts caused by
poor product selectivity is a critical step towards the development of
environmentally benign, commercially efficient chemical technologies for the
production of fuels, materials, chemicals and pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;