* 0336423
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Modern Agrobiodiversity Issues and Their Relevance to the Study of Prehistoric Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2005
* Patty Jo Watson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2005
* USD 11,569.00

Modern agricultural biodiversity is the product of thousands of years of farmer
experimentation and informal breeding. Archaeology is uniquely positioned to
investigate questions surrounding the initial domestication of plants and the
subsequent creation and maintenance of crop biodiversity. Currently, however, a
lack of suitable methods prevents archaeologists from successfully exploring
issues of biodiversity via the archaeological record. Under the supervision of
Dr. Patty Jo Watson, Angela Gordon will combine information from agronomy with
fieldwork in Mexico to test one means of identifying biodiversity in the
archaeological record.

The project focuses on Chenopodium berlandieri, a high-protein crop domesticated
prehistorically in Mexico and eastern North America. It is a domesticate today,
however, only in Mexico. The eastern North American domesticated chenopod is
known only from the archaeological record; by the time of European contact, it
was no longer grown. Various Chenopodium species have been domesticated or
heavily exploited in many regions around the world, primarily for the nutritious
seeds.

In the central Mexican highlands, huazontles and quelites de trigo, both forms
of domesticated C. berlandieri, are grown for the immature flowering heads and
the greens, respectively. Farmers maintain distinct varieties for each of these
use-types and, in west-central Mexico, also maintain a red-seeded variety that
is used as a grain. Ms. Gordon will study how Mexican farmers maintain these
distinct varieties, and will gather multiple samples of each for comparison.
Through microscopic examination of differences in seed morphology, she will
create a key to the different use-varieties. While it has always been assumed
that the eastern North American chenopod was grown for its high-protein seeds,
this key will allow archaeologists to identify other uses from the
archaeologically recovered seeds.

The Mexican chenopods offer an exciting opportunity to examine modern
biodiversity of this crop species while also providing an excellent analog for
understanding the extinct eastern North American crop. In addition, this
research will provide archaeologists with a new method for examining crop
biodiversity via the archaeological record.

This research will also gather valuable information about chenopod cultivation
and biodiversity before it is too late. Subsistence farmers around the world are
the primary guardians of agricultural biodiversity. As farming becomes
standardized and mechanized in the developing world, agricultural biodiversity
is lost. Minor crops, such as the Mexican chenopods, are particularly vulnerable
because global economic priorities create incentives for farmers to give up
traditional subsistence crops in favor of cash crops for market or export. In
most cases, traditional knowledge and biodiversity are lost. This research will
ensure that some of this knowledge and biodiversity is recorded.