* 0336402
* DDIG:  Reproduction & Prenatal Care in Arizona Prehistory: An Examination of Patterns of Health in Perinates & Children at Turkey Creek, Point of Pines, & Grasshopper P
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,09/30/2005
* Jane Buikstra, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 09/30/2005
* USD 10,000.00

This research examines prenatal health and disease in the late prehistoric
Southwest (circa AD 1200-1540) at three aggregated East-Central Arizona sites:
Grasshopper Pueblo, Point of Pines Pueblo, and Turkey Creek Pueblo. The close
proximity of the sites and the common settlement pattern facilitates an
examination of changes in prenatal health care in response to aggregated living
communities. Reproduction and pregnancy have not been intensively studied in the
prehistoric record. Additionally, research on prehistoric babies has been
underrepresented until recently because of the difficulties associated with
studying small, less well-preserved skeletal remains. However, the health of
fetuses and newborns is dependent on the health of their mothers. Therefore,
skeletal remains and teeth of fetuses and newborns provide a means of testing
for changes through time in the health of pregnant women. This project proposes
to advance discovery and understanding of our knowledge of pregnancy and
prenatal health of babies and mothers by studying three well preserved
archaeological samples.

An understanding of prenatal health care in the prehistoric Southwest will
facilitate an understanding of how Native American infant mortality and prenatal
health care of mothers has changed over time in the Southwest by contributing to
the understanding of historical and cultural differences in maternal care. In
addition, information regarding the occurrence and appearance of different
diseases in fetal and infant skeleton can be directly applied to osteological
studies of infant remains or forensics in the United States.