* 0336393
* Discrete and Computational Geometry Workshops at MSRI
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Robert Megginson, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 07/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

During the Fall semester of 2003 the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
(MSRI) in Berkeley, California will sponsor a special program in Discrete and
Computational Geometry. The organizers for this semester-long program are Jesus
De Loera (University of California at Davis), Herbert Edelsbrunner (Duke
University), Jacob E. Goodman (City University of New York), Janos Pach (New
York University), Micha Sharir (Tel Aviv University), Emo Welzl (ETH Zuerich),
and Guenter Ziegler (Technische Universitaet Berlin). The program will have many
activities, including public lectures, research for undergraduates, mini-
courses, weekly seminars, and three workshops. This award provides funding to
help cover lodging and travel expenses for participants in the workshops.

The Introductory Workshop is designed to introduce a broad range of computer
scientists, mathematicians, scientists working in related fields, and others
interested in the topics of the program to current research in these areas. The
second workshop, on Mathematical Foundations of Geometric Algorithms, is
intended more as a forum for researchers in computer science and mathematics to
discuss their recent work with other active researchers. This workshop will
focus on the design and analysis of geometric algorithms, and on the
mathematical and algorithmic techniques needed to make these algorithms
efficient. The third workshop, on Combinatorial and Discrete Geometry, will
study discrete geometric objects (polyhedra, geometric graphs, sphere packings,
tilings, lattices, and so forth) and their combinatorial structure, stressing
the connections between discrete geometry and algebra, combinatorics, and
topology.

The Introductory Workshop in particular will extend the impact of the program
well beyond the core of recognized researchers in this particular area. MSRI's
Human Resources Advisory Committee established the introductory workshops in
1992 as a vehicle for making the material of MSRI's major programs available to
a broad scientific audience, particularly women and minorities who are still
much too underrepresented in the scientific enterprise. Through outreach
activities such as a special weekend on geometry at Howard University in
September 2002, MSRI has recruited participants from underrepresented groups to
participate in its 2003-04 programs and particularly the introductory workshops,
and will work with these participants to help make the material of the workshops
useful for their endeavors at their home institutions. The PI and co-PI for this
grant have already recruited several participants for these workshops who are
from historically Black colleges and universities, and who have expressed a
strong interest in bringing material from these workshops into contact with
students in their undergraduate research programs and classrooms.