* 0336571
* Generating Enthusiasm for Math and Science
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Victoria Geisler, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2008
* USD 877,093.00

Generating Enthusiasm for Math and Science (GEMS) aims to recruit first-year
academically talented students who have not chosen a major, and to positively
introduce them to the sciences and mathematics. In addition, participation of
first-year declared STEM majors in many of the same activities is expected to
reduce the traditional attrition among this group of students. Providing
enhanced academic and career advising and mentoring of these students, along
with a first year summer research experience, is intended to increase the
probability that these students will be retained and will become successful in
one or more of the STEM disciplines. Great attention is being paid to the
selection of students so they represent gender and ethnic diversity. In the
first semester, students are taking an innovative course, Frontiers in Science
and Technology, that exposes them to the excitement of the STEM disciplines, as
well as an enhanced pre-calculus or calculus course with peer-lead team learning
groups. During the second semester, students begin a science sequence (biology,
chemistry, computer science, geology or physics) and continue in math. During
the summer, following successful completion of their first year, students are
eligible for a paid summer research experience upon successful completion of the
required courses. These activities are expected to: (1) Enlarge the talent pool
of STEM majors by recruiting more students of both sexes and of all ethnic
backgrounds; (2) Generate enthusiasm for math and science in selected first year
students who have not chosen a major; (3) Provide enhanced academic and career
advising, as well as mentoring by STEM faculty; (4) Reduce the attrition of all
undergraduate STEM majors; (5) Improve all students' success in key mathematics
and introductory science courses, which can act as barriers to success in the
STEM disciplines; (6) Enhance first year-science and math courses; (7) Support a
summer research experience that inducts students into the scientific community,
greatly influencing their major selection and generating interest in continuing
research; (8) Provide opportunities for STEM students to serve as teaching
assistants early in their careers. The intellectual merit of this project lies
in developing an undergraduate education model that removes barriers to STEM
careers, as identified by a wide body of research, while simultaneously
identifying and recruiting talented, undecided students to experience this
barrier-free environment. The findings are expected to shed light on the extent
to which a discovery based interdisciplinary seminar, math intervention, and
undergraduate research in the first-year of college positively influence
students to engage and to persist in STEM degree programs. The cohort of GEMS
students impacted during this project will serve as a dataset for publication
and for refinement of future STEM recruiting and retention efforts. The broader
impact of the project is the applicability of the model to other undergraduate
institutions. The GEMS program results and the course material generated from
the Frontiers in Science and Technology seminar will be made available to other
institutions. The project expects to increase the number of graduating STEM
majors each year by 25%.