* 0336469
* SGER:     Complex Pelagic Interactions in the Southern Ocean:     Deciphering the Antarctic Paradox
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2003,09/30/2004
* Thomas Frazer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 09/30/2004
* USD 27,086.00

The primary goal of the proposed multidisciplinary project is to quantify,
examine, model&lt;br/&gt;and validate the complex interactions, involving
direct, indirect and feedback effects,&lt;br/&gt;that regulate the planktonic
food web in the coastal waters of the Southern Ocean with the&lt;br/&gt;aim of
elucidating the causes underlying the low phytoplankton biomass and
production&lt;br/&gt;despite the high nutrient availability there. In
particular, the project will evaluate&lt;br/&gt;the feedback mechansisms induced
through the role of ammonium, largely released by&lt;br/&gt;aggregations of
herbivorous zooplankton present in the Southern Ocean, krill
specifically,&lt;br/&gt;on the resistance to UV stress by the phytoplanktonic
community and, in particular,&lt;br/&gt;effects on the nitrogen incorporation
rates, both ammonium and nitrate, and the subsequent&lt;br/&gt;development of
phytoplankton blooms. The project will not only address the
problem&lt;br/&gt;experimentally, but will also consider the complex
interactions in the context of the&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous landscape, dominated
by small parcels of water, that provides the scenario&lt;br/&gt;on which the
complex interactions occur. This project will be conducted through
a&lt;br/&gt;shore-based (Juan Carlos I) operation in 2004 and a subsequent
oceanographic cruise (R/V&lt;br/&gt;Hesp rides) in 2005.