* 0336771
* Collaborative Research: Climate Process Team on Low-Latitude Cloud Feedbacks on Climate Sensitivity
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Minghua Zhang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/2007
* USD 304,294.00

This grant will support a collaborative research project among eight research
groups and three modeling centers working as a Climate Process and Modeling Team
(CPT). It's a focused effort aimed at better representing processes affecting
low-latitude cloud feedbacks in climate models, by involving experts on the
details of cloud, turbulence and convection processes more directly into
parameterization development. The first research goal is to fully understand the
very different response of subtropical boundary layer cloud in the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community Atmospheric Model (CAM) and the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory's (GFDL) atmospheric general circulation
model (GCM) to CO2 doubling. The second more ambitious goal is to analyze cloud
feedbacks from tropical convective cloud regimes, which intimately couple
parameterizations of microphysical, convective, radiative and turbulent
processes. These goals will be achieved by a closely coordinated scientist core
group working with three modeling centers. They will use diagnostic studies
based on a suite of regional and global observations, single-column analysis and
modeling efforts, GCM sensitivity studies and parameterization-swap tests using
the NCAR CAM, GFDL's atmospheric GCM, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) Goddard Space Flight Center's GCMs, and
'superparameterization' simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated
broader impacts of the CPT are to (1) reduce uncertainty in climate model
projections of future climate change, a basic US need for rational formulation
of national and international adaptation and regulatory strategies and energy
policy. It should also (2) improve the physical basis of leading US climate
models as well as fostering collaborations that sustain future improvements in
these models, benefiting the entire spectrum of US climate science research.