* 0336517
* Developing Effective Engineering Pathways
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Francisco Hernandez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Scott Grissom
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,000,000.00

The project Developing Effective Engineering Pathways (DEEP) is creating
pathways from Silicon Valley schools through Foothill and De Anza Community
Colleges (FH/DA CC), to the University of California at Santa Cruz (UCSC). The
goals are to: 1) motivate and support students in order to increase the total
number of community college students completing science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) courses and transferring to four-year programs; and 2)
create effective supports for underrepresented minority students completing
engineering degrees.

To build these pathways, the project is creating linkages through collaborative
coursework, specialized counseling, summer bridge activities, innovative online
tutoring, Cyber Mentoring, business internships, and course-taking
opportunities. Strong faculty-to-faculty relationships are being developed
across institutions through planning meetings, a Virtual Faculty Lounge for
online discussions and a series of interactive projects and activities to engage
faculty across campuses. UCSC is creating a residential Learning Community of
Engineers (LCE) and providing internships with businesses. Graduate students are
working with undergraduates to develop technology exhibits at museums.

The project's objectives are to achieve by year five the following annual
outcomes: An increase in total Foothill and De Anza Community College STEM
enrollments by 1245 and underrepresented minority students enrollments in STEM
by 151; An increase in the number of Foothill and De Anza Community College
students applying to the University of California by 107 and by 20 those
enrolling in engineering at UCSC; An increase by 208 FH/DA CC STEM students
applying to UC system and by 50 those applying to UCSC; Establish a baseline and
increase by 100% the number of underrepresented minority students at FH/DA CC
transferring to engineering programs at UCSC; Increase by 56 per year the total
number of underrepresented minority students completing a B.S. in engineering at
UCSC; and Increase by 200 the total numbers of students completing their B.S. at
UCSC.

The Intellectual Merit: The project is studying the effect of the learning
community on success of transfer students, particularly Latino students. The
evaluation design is measuring the impact of innovative use of technology and
evaluating the essential components of the learning community. The project team
has a deep knowledge of mathematics and engineering content, and pedagogy and
experience in supporting underrepresented minority students.

The Broader Impact: The project is disseminating information about a replicable
model for other community colleges and universities to use in partnerships that
create effective pathways and establish learning communities for supporting and
retaining underrepresented students in STEM majors and engineering.