* 0337736
* Determination of Hydrogen Content of D/H Ratio of Nominally Anhydrous Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* George Rossman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2007
* USD 233,298.00

Eiler&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0337796&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators plan to develop an apparatus for measuring the abundance and
isotopic composition (D/H ratio) of trace hydrogen contained in mg-sized samples
of nominally anhydrous minerals, and apply that method to various mantle
materials that are believed to be important to the Earth's water budget. It is
expected that this method will have accuracy and precision comparable to
conventional vacuum extraction of hydrogen from solids, but will be applicable
to samples approximately 1000 to 10,000 times smaller. This new technique is an
improvement over previous ones and it will be designed to provide absolute
measurements of the amounts of hydrogen in nominally anhydrous minerals. Several
methods exist for measurements of relative differences in hydrogen content of
minerals, and two of these (FTIR and SIMS) are more convenient and/or have
better spatial resolution than the measurement the investigators will develop.
However, FTIR and SIMS are dependent on reference materials having known water
contents. The scarcity of such materials is a major limitation to this field.
This new technique, once developed, will be used to expand the suite of inter-
laboratory standards that are the foundation of studies of nominally anhydrous
minerals. By coupling measurements of H abundance and isotopic composition, the
PIs will be able to conduct isotopic labeling experiments that clearly separate
surface and dissolved (and perhaps other) contributions to total water contents
of analyzed samples. They will also survey the water contents of mineral species
that have not been previously studied by FTIR or other methods (principally due
to the lack of standards). Preliminary work with hydrogen isotope analyses of
small samples by this laboratory indicates that it is possible to dramatically
improve our knowledge of the D/H ratios of nominally anhydrous mantle minerals,
and thereby constrain the role of such minerals as reservoirs for the Earth's
water budget. Some of the main broader impacts of this research will be in the
enhancement of analytical infrastructure for hydrogen isotope analyses that
could be passed to the community, and in the education and training of students
in the field of geochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;