* 0337650
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Hydrological linkages between landscapes and streams:  Transferring reach and plot scale understanding to the network and catchment scales
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Brian McGlynn, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2009
* USD 222,003.00

0337650&lt;br/&gt;McGlynn&lt;br/&gt;How can plot-scale measurements of the
hydrologic processes that link hillslopes to riparian areas be scaled up to
whole catchments? How can reach-scale measurements of groundwater-surface water
mixing in riparian and hyporheic zones be scaled up to entire stream networks?
How can we transfer our small-catchment scale understanding to larger portions
of the landscape or other catchments? What is the nature of hydrologic process
scaling? These questions highlight our current inability to scale-up
understanding of hydrological processes studied at the plot or reach scale to
larger catchments. Answering them requires integrated, multi-scale approaches
that combine landscape-level topographic analysis, process-based field
investigations, and catchment-scale integration to identify the factors
controlling the hydrologic connectivity between source areas generating runoff
and the flow paths that link source areas to streams. &lt;br/&gt;This research
will combine novel landscape and topographic analysis techniques with plot and
reach-scale field research to provide context for field investigations, to
develop a method for scaling process understanding to the catchment scale, and
ultimately to transfer this understanding to other catchments for comparison and
catchment classification. Three primary methods will be used: (1) landscape
analysis to elucidate catchment scale patterns and organization and as a method
to scale-up process study results to the landscape scale, (2) hillslope-riparian
plot scale studies to determine first-order controls on connections and
disconnections among dominant landscape units, and (3) reach scale process
studies on stream-hyporheic zone dynamics to determine landscape controls on
exchange and in-stream transport. Landscape analysis will then be used to link
internal catchment dynamics to catchment outlet observations. Comprehensive
uncertainty analysis of field tracers and landscape data will be incorporated
into empirical and landscape analysis modeling. We will compare results of these
empirical approaches to theoretical hydrologic and geomorphologic scaling
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research will be
manifested in the development and application of a method for linking process
scale studies to the catchment and landscape scales. The broader impacts include
graduate and undergraduate student involvement from study design through data
collection, analysis, and presentation. Teacher training and linkages between
research and K-12 education and the general public will be made through
collaboration with the Big Sky Institute (BSI) for Science and Natural History
and through the BSI Society and Science Graduate Fellows Program. In addition,
this research will result in widely available landscape analysis software and a
methodology for linking field measurements to the landscape scale. This will
provide critical site context to inform stream and watershed restoration
projects undertaken by federal and state land management and consulting agencies
throughout the intermountain west and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;