* 0337701
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Turbulence-Ignition Coupling
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Volker Sick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 19,000.00

0337701&lt;br/&gt;Sick&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Volker Schmidt and students
from the University of Michigan in a collaboration with Ulrich Maas of the
Institute for Technical Combustion at the University of Stuttgart, Germany. The
focus of the collaboration will be to produce a reliable numerical description
of ignition processes that accommodates timescales covering many orders of
magnitude and many chemical species and their related reaction rates. Initiating
combustion is a critical step for both performance and safety related issues in
many technical devices. An important example is the spark-initiated combustion
used in reciprocating internal combustion engines. There, ignition and
subsequent flame development and propagation are controlled by the highly
complex interaction of physical parameters like turbulence, temperature, and
pressure with chemical parameters, such as the composition of the mixtures. The
expertise in laser-based imaging techniques at the University of Michigan and
the expertise in multi-dimensional modeling of ignition processes that includes
detailed chemical kinetics at the University of Stuttgart, when combined in the
framework of an international exchange of students and scientists, will improve
our understanding of the complex interaction of turbulence and ignition
chemistry. Velocity and equivalence ratio measurements in an optical direct
injection engine performed at the University of Michigan will assist
improvements to simulation tools at the University of Stuttgart. In addition,
involving students from both partner institutions will enhance the educational
experience for those students beyond their current focus in their respective
research projects and will allow them to study in a foreign country; this is
almost a must in today's global research and business environment. Students will
learn skills that they then can implement in their research projects at their
home institutions. Substantial synergy is expected from this mutual training
arrangement for both groups. Joining forces will enhance the outcome of the
separate research efforts and is expected to result in significant progress of
our understanding of turbulence-ignition coupling and our ability to simulate
it.&lt;br/&gt;