* 0337094
* Experimental Study of Water Leakage from Melt Inclusions in Quartz During Laboratory Heating
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Robert Bodnar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 12/31/2007
* USD 226,191.00

Glassy, silicate melt inclusions trapped in igneous minerals contain samples of
the melt that was present in the magma chamber beneath an active volcano. These
inclusions provide one of the best tools available for determining water
concentrations in magmas, and have been used to determine the volatiles present
in magmas. Moreover, because the solubility of water in silicate melts as a
function of P, T and X is well known, the pressure at trapping may be estimated
from the water content. A basic assumption required to use melt inclusions to
understand processes in magma chambers is that the inclusions have not lost or
gained components following trapping. While this assumption is generally valid
for most melt components, it is known that water (or hydrogen) diffuses through
most minerals very easily and can be lost from (or gained by) inclusions
following entrapment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a systematic
study using both natural and synthetic silicate melt inclusions to identify
those laboratory heating techniques that are most likely to preserve the
original water content of the melt inclusions. Natural and synthetic silicate
melt inclusions will be characterized before heating to determine the size,
shape, and distance from the crystal surface or fracture, and then heated by one
of several techniques, followed by Raman analysis of the melt to determine the
water content. These results will be used to develop a protocol for selecting
and homogenizing crystallized silicate melt inclusions that will minimize water
loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include the training
of both graduate and undergraduate students in modern experimental and
analytical techniques. An important outreach component of this project involves
the establishment of the Roedder Digital Library. The library will include
digital images of all the fluid inclusions that Dr. Roedder has published over
his 68-year professional career. These images will be made available for
educational and research usage through the worldwide web and become an important
resource for those teaching and conducting research in a broad range of earth
science areas.&lt;br/&gt;