* 0337201
* The Linkage between Copper Speciation and Nitrogen Cycling in Stratified Lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Gaboury Benoit, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2008
* USD 230,915.00

0337201&lt;br/&gt;Benoit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scarce metals can have a
disproportionate influence on biogeochemical cycles by limiting growth or
function of key planktonic species or assemblages. It is already known that Fe
limits primary productivity in high-nitrate, low-chlorophyll regions of the
world's oceans, with potentially important consequences for global carbon
cycling. Largely unexplored is the question of limitation in fresh water
environments by micronutrient metals. This proposal is for preliminary research
to investigate the influence of dissolved Cu speciation (and consequent
reactivity and bioavailability) on denitrification by bacteria in stratified
lakes. We propose to study this specific example as a starting point to explore
the much broader general question of the influence of trace metals on major
aquatic biogeochemical cycles. This system is targeted because of: (1) the well-
studied speciation of Cu and its low bioavailability in some fresh waters, (2)
the essential nature of Cu for bacterial enzymes that effect denitrification,
(3) the utility of stratified lakes as natural, large-scale batch reactor
experiments, and (4) existing circumstantial evidence that Cu can limit
denitrification in lab cultures, and that denitrification intermediaries (esp.
N2O) build-up in many stratified lakes. While such systems represent a logical
starting point, the results of this research could have much broader
implications on the topic of micronutrient limitation in fresh waters, including
lakes, rivers, and ground waters.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; The
proposed research will have broader impacts in three separate ways. (1)
Promoting Teaching, Training and Learning: Lakes are especially well-suited as
examples for teaching principles of geosciences, because they are familiar
systems in which chemical and physical processes are clearly and simply
expressed. Yale's Environment School is home to about 220 masters students who
are often going on to careers in environmental policy and management, rather
than science, but are eager to obtain an understanding of the fundamental
principles of environmental science. The proposed research provides an ideal
opportunity for teaching and training this group. Results will be incorporated
into the curriculum of three courses: Biogeochemistry and Pollution, Methods of
Field Environmental Analysis, and Aquatic Ecology. In addition, two master's
students receiving Research Assistantships from the School will be directly
involved in the research. (2) Broadening Participation of Underrepresented
Groups: The two most likely candidates for the PhD student supported by this
project are both women. Either would play a major role in the research if
selected. (3) Benefits to Society: This research addresses the possible linkage
of two environmental chemical issues of considerable importance to public
welfare: trace metals and the nitrogen cycle. Metals have generally been of
interest because of possible harmful effects in lakes and streams. Here we
consider whether they may also function as limiting micronutrients. The nitrogen
cycle involves a number of issues of societal concern, including eutrophication
(from excess NO3-), N2O as a greenhouse gas, acid deposition (HNO3), and
perturbations caused by human intervention (50% of global N fixation is
estimated to be industrial).&lt;br/&gt;