* 0337253
* Evolutionary Dynamics of Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 148,640.00

This project involves the study of subduction zones which are the sites for
plate tectonic driving forces and most of the volcanic activity and geological
hazards found around the world. Unfortunately, our understanding of subduction
zone processes is still poorly developed. One of the principal reasons is that
multiple processes, such as solid deformation deep in the earth and fluid
migration associated with magmatism, are intimately coupled together. It is
likely that what we see observationally results from a fine dynamic balance. The
investigators and their collaborators will develop dynamic models for the
evolution of subduction zones, from initiation to their transition into
maturity. Recent numerical advances in modeling combinations of material
behavior have allowed the investigators to make significant progress toward
understanding subduction initiation. They will build upon these advances to
develop a more complete quantification of the conditions and forces needed to
successfully initiate subduction. By following the &lt;br/&gt;evolution of a
subduction zone from its initiation into maturity, the group will assess how
features developed during inception influence mature subduction. They will also
couple fluid migration with mantle &lt;br/&gt;deformation. While fluid migration
pathways have been examined previously, in this project, fluid migration will be
included in dynamic models with deformable slabs, hence allowing the feedback
between fluids and slab dynamics to be fully expressed. Though much of the work
involves modeling, the models will provide tangible &lt;br/&gt;predictions that
will be used to test hypotheses through comparisons to both geological and
geophysical observations. There are several broader impacts of the proposed
research, including the training of &lt;br/&gt;scientific manpower through
support of a postdoctoral scholar and wide dissemination of computer animations
of subduction dynamics on the internet Finally, this work will enhance
scientific infrastructure by being a test bed for the GeoFramework system, which
will be used to facilitate integration of plate reconstructions into geodynamic
models. In the future, GeoFramework will be a system to enhance scientific
discovery by allowing non-specialists to use advanced computational tools to
interpret geophysical and geological
&lt;br/&gt;data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Send a message to our press
officer at &lt;mailto:cdybas@nsf.gov&gt;cdybas@nsf.gov.&lt;br/&gt;