* 0337751
* Collaborative Research: The Maud Rise Nonlinear Equation of State Study (MaudNESS)
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* James Morison, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,269,207.00

This project is an investigation into one mechanism by which deep ocean
convection can evolve from stable initial conditions, to the extent that it
becomes well enough established to bring warm water to the surface and melt an
existing ice cover in late, or possibly even mid-winter. The specific study will
investigate how the non-linear dependence of seawater density on temperature and
salinity (the equation of state) can enhance vertical convection under typical
antarctic conditions. When layers of seawater with similar densities but strong
contrasts in temperature and salinity interact, there are a number of possible
non-linear instabilities that can convert existing potential energy to turbulent
energy. In the Weddell Sea, a cold surface mixed layer is often separated from
the underlying warm, more saline water by a thin, weak pycnocline, making the
water column particularly susceptible to an instability associated with
thermobaricity (the pressure dependence of the thermal expansion coefficient).
The project is a collaboration between New York University, Earth and Space
Research, the University of Washington, the Naval Postgraduate School, and
McPhee Research Company.&lt;br/&gt;The work has strong practical applications in
contributing to the explanation for the existence of the Weddell Polynya, a
300,000 square kilometer area of open water within the seasonal sea ice of the
Weddell Sea, from approximately 1975 to 1979. It has not recurred since,
although indications of much smaller and less persistent areas of open water do
occur in the vicinity of the Maud Rise seamount. &lt;br/&gt; The experimental
component will be carried out on board the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer between July
and September, 2005.&lt;br/&gt;