* 0337622
* Structure of the Tibetan Crust and Upper Mantle and Its Geodynamic Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Nikolai Shapiro, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 239,053.00

This research will study the large-scale structure of the crust and upper mantle
beneath Tibet and&lt;br/&gt;investigate its geodynamic implications. Two
features of a preliminary 3-D seismic model motivate this work and define the
primary questions that the work proposes to address.First, a coherent 3-D
pattern of high and low speed anomalies in the mantle underlies the Tibetan
plateau. What geodynamic processes can account for this pattern? Second, strong
mid-crustal radial anisotropy characterizes the Tibetan crust, and preliminary
analysis implies coherent, period-dependent azimuthal anisotropy. Which models
of the development of finite strain in the Tibetan crust are consistent with
these observations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will improve the current
seismic model and investigate its geodynamical implications.&lt;br/&gt;The model
will be improved by adding more surface wave dispersion measurements and by
introducing new kinds of measurements into the inversion; e.g., crustal and
mantle overtone measurements and receiver&lt;br/&gt;functions. The inversion
generates an ensemble of acceptable models, rather than a single best-fitting
model, thereby producing meaningful uncertainty information needed to test
hypotheses. Several geodynamic scenarios that may explain aspects of the pattern
of velocity anomalies in the upper mantle&lt;br/&gt;beneath Tibet will be
investigated, including; the underthrusting of Indian lithosphere,
southwestward&lt;br/&gt;thrusting of Asian lithosphere, and the detachment or
convective removal of Tibetan lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the relation
between inferred crustal anisotropy and three models of the development of
finite&lt;br/&gt;strain in the Tibetan crust will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student will receive training at
the interface between seismic tomography and&lt;br/&gt;geodynamics. The seismic
models will be placed in a form that is useful in the classroom. Collaborators
in this effort include researchers at the Digital Library for Earth Systems
Education (DLESE, www.dlese.org) and UNAVCO, who are also part of the GEON large
scale information technology research project (www.geongrid.org). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;