* 0337688
* Collaborative Research: Seasonal Biogeochemical Processes in the Ross Sea: A Modeling Approach
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Walker Smith, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 02/28/2007
* USD 181,248.00

The Ross Sea is an oceanographic system with several unusual characteristics,
including being the most&lt;br/&gt;biologically productive in the Antarctic,
having elevated bird and mammal stocks, having relatively
simple&lt;br/&gt;phytoplankton composition, having annually consistent sea ice
changes dominated by polynyas, having&lt;br/&gt;seasonally low iron
concentrations, and being perturbed by large icebergs calved from the Ross Ice
Shelf at&lt;br/&gt;various intervals. A number of research programs have studied
various oceanographic processes in the Ross&lt;br/&gt;Sea, but a comprehensive
synthesis of circulation and biogeochemical processes remains lacking.
The&lt;br/&gt;overall goal of this project is to develop coupled circulation and
biological models that will allow us to&lt;br/&gt;understand nutrient and carbon
cycling in the Ross Sea, as well as to assess the interaction of
circulation&lt;br/&gt;and biological processes on biogeochemical fluxes and
distributions in space and time. This effort builds on&lt;br/&gt;our existing
fine resolution circulation model (with nutrients) and our analysis of
historical nutrient data for the Ross Sea.&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary
research team will address six research questions: (1) What are the conversion
pathways and rates of exchange of heat, salt, macronutrients and iron?, (2) What
are the effects of icebergs B19 and C15 on local circulation in the southwest
corner of the Ross Sea, and does the presence of these icebergs (and those that
might form in the future) affect circulation underneath the Ross Ice Shelf and
the formation of High Salinity Shelf Water?, (3) What is the contribution of
warm oceanic water to polynya formation?, &lt;br/&gt;(4) Why does the Ross Sea
polynya phytoplankton bloom begin at the end of October, which
is&lt;br/&gt;significantly before other blooms at the same latitude?, (5) Are
there regional differences in the fate of primary production within the Ross Sea
and if so, what causes these differences?, and (6) What regulates the seasonal
transition, from a light- to iron-limited system? &lt;br/&gt;To address these
questions, observations of water properties, water movement, ocean
color,&lt;br/&gt;nutrient concentrations and other biogeochemical variables to
test the results of the models will be gathered. Specific products will be
developed from these data (e.g., T/S volumetric census, volumetric fluxes of
heat and nutrients, total primary production and others) to compare to the model
solutions. The research team will modify the circulation model to include the
cavity beneath the Ross Ice shelf, dynamic sea ice, better atmospheric forcing,
tides and iron; furthermore, an existing bio-optical model will be included as
well, with multiple phytoplankton classes and their iron dependence. A vertical
and time (z,t) dependent model will be used to adjust both physical and
biological parameters. An adjoint-based data assimilation model will be
developed to obtain an optimal set of parameters based on previous observations
in the Ross Sea. The 1-D model will be included in the a regional ecosystem test
bed activity along with appropriate model code, forcing&lt;br/&gt;and
observations. As a result of this study, the investigators will be able to
extend the limited observations to understand the biogeochemical linkages in the
Ross Sea, and will specifically address the effect of large icebergs on
circulation and biological processes and the effect of iron on primary
production and phytoplankton taxonomic composition. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to graduate education at the College of William and Mary and Old
Dominion University through support of a graduate student and the use of these
results in graduate classes. A &lt;br/&gt;Postdoctoral scholar will receive get
expanded training in biological physical interaction in ocean models. Computer
animations which will illustrate basic processes in the Ross Sea will be made
available on a web page and will be used for public presentations at the
Virginia Science Museum in Richmond, VA. &lt;br/&gt;