* 0337618
* The Antarctic Investigations of Upper Atmospheric Disturbances over the South Pole Station
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Gulamabas Sivjee, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 03/31/2009
* USD 201,950.00

This proposal is for renewal of long-term aeronomical investigations of solar-
terrestrial disturbances in the near-Earth space environment over the South Pole
Station (SPS). Such disturbances modulate the composition, thermodynamics and
dynamics of the middle atmosphere and thermosphere over SPS in Antarctica. It is
proposed to continue operating the electro-optical, remote-sensing instruments
at SPS to investigate: (1) source(s) and propagation of Antarctic F-region
patches and their relation to the polar cap drizzles and the F-region dynamics;
(2) changes in the Antarctic E-region O/N2 ratio in the center of the night-
sector of the austral auroral oval compared to those in the sun-aligned auroral
arcs in the polar cap region; and the heating and dynamics associated with these
polar E-region compositional changes; (3) Antarctic middle atmosphere
disturbances generated by Stratospheric Warming Events (SWE); and energetics of
the coupling among the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) regions with the
stratosphere through enhanced gravity waves in SWE; (4) Antarctic thermospheric
response to Solar Magnetic Cloud/Coronal Mass Ejection (SMC/CME) events; and
related changes in O2 atmospheric infrared band emissions above 150 km height;
and (5) effects of the Joule heating on the thermodynamics of the Antarctic
F-region; changes in kinetic temperature of the Antarctic F-region during Joule
heating. Data for studies of all these five aeronomic processes will come from
two sets of remote-sensing instruments: (1) auroral emissions brightness
measurements from the sun-synchronous Meridian Scanning Photon Counting
Multichannel photometer; and (2) airglow and auroral emission spectra recorded
continuously during austral winter the high-resolution Infrared Michelson
Interferometer and Visible/Near-Infrared CCD spectrographs. From about March
through September of each year, such polar studies are only feasible at SPS
since the Arctic stations are continuously sunlit. Changes in airglow
temperature, from different MLT heights, permit studies of the dynamical effects
of planetary, tidal and gravity waves propagating in the MLT regions as well as
non-linear interactions among these waves. Like-wise, coupling of different
atmospheric regions over SPS, through enhanced gravity wave activities during
SWE that lead to a precursor as mesospheric cooling, can be investigated through
the observed changes in MLT kinetic air temperature and density.

