* 0337737
* Hyper-Insulated Instrumentation System to Support Year-Round Research in Polar Regions
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Anthony Hansen, Magee Scientific Company
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2007
* USD 74,425.00

Year-round scientific research in Polar Regions is seriously challenged by the
ambient environment. Extreme low temperatures, six-month darkness, high winds,
and icing, create substantial problems for remote instrumentation stations to
operate unattended for a year or more. Consequently, many research projects
experience loss of data or the simple inability to acquire data over extended
areas or periods of time, leading to substantial temporal and geographical gaps
in our knowledge of these critical regions. The ability to deploy an
instrumentation package that could survive these conditions and gather data
unattended for one or multiple years would help to fill these gaps.
Additionally, the risks and logistical costs of accessing a remote site even on
a yearly basis can be very considerable in some cases, depending on location.
The availability of instrumentation support capable of operating for multiple
years would allow the research community to plan data-gathering networks that
could be supported at a reasonable cost and with less risk. This type of system
could also support year-round research at locations that have well-developed
summer camps, yet which are unoccupied and inaccessible during the winter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support to build and test a 'Hyper-
Insulated Instrumentation System', an enclosure which synthesizes a number of
recent developments in an innovative manner. It will contribute to the polar
regions scientific research infrastructure by providing a warm, powered
environment for an instrumentation payload, with a 'passive' design endurance of
10,000 hours when buried in a shallow snow pit at -60 (more or less) C.
Insulation will be provided by a large-capacity metal dewar flask as now used in
biotechnology for preserving samples in liquid nitrogen; thermal storage will be
provided by the latent heat of fusion of 150 liters of specially-formulated
paraffin oil; electrical energy will be supplied by lithium-ion batteries as
recently developed for military applications. The addition of solar panels will
offer multi-year operation, by recharging the system electrically and thermally
during the summer. An 'Iridium' modem will provide communications to report on
system status and transmit summaries of scientific data stored on solid-state
memory. The system will be designed for transportation to remote field sites by
helicopter or 'Twin Otter' aircraft, and handling by no more than two people.
The system will be developed and tested with one year-long deployment at South
Pole Station in Antarctica. For testing purposes the system will be equipped
with an array of temperature probes as commonly used for glaciology research,
but the system will be explicitly designed to be able to accommodate almost any
'payload package' of data-gathering equipment. An undergraduate engineering
student will be involved with aspects of the thermal and data-communications
design and field testing of the equipment and the project will constitute a
large part of the student's undergraduate
thesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;