* 0337811
* U. S.  Participation at the High Performance Computing Workshop in Parallel Finite Element Analysis; September 1-5  2003; Manchester University, UK
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Boris Jeremic, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2004
* USD 62,595.00



CMS-O3378 1 1 PI: Institution: Title: BorisJeremic University of California at
Davis "U.S. Participation at the High Perfonnance Computing Workshop in Parallel
Finite Element Analysis 1st-5th September 2003, Manchester University" Abstract:
This award will support a group of U.S. researchers to participate in the
Workshop on High Performance Computing in Finite Element Analysis at the
University of Manchester (UM), England. The workshop will be held from 1st to
5th September 2003, at the Computer Services for Academic Research (CSAR) center
of the UM. The workshop participants will represent researchers from Europe,
Japan and the U.S. The main objectives of the workshop for the U.S. participants
are: (a) The development of collaborations amongst U.S. participants and the
participants from Europe and Japan; and, (b) The development of research needs
in the area of high performance, parallel computing (HPPC) in the general area
of Civil Engineering. A group of approximately 24 participants will represent
experienced researchers as well as learners and graduate students working in the
area ofHPPC. The learners represent researchers who have done some work or have
a great need for HPPC. The Intellectual Merit of the proposed participation at
the workshop is in allowing the advancement of knowledge and understanding on
cun-ent state of the art and in defining the future research needs in the area
of high perfonnance, parallel computing within civil engIneenng. The Broader
Impact of the proposed participation at the and leaming among a diverse group of
participants. is promoting teaching workshop