* 0337334
* Is the Southern Farmington Canyon Complex a Late Archean/Early Proterozoic Accretionary Complex?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* John Shervais, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2006
* USD 68,412.00

One of the fundamental questions in the planetary evolution of Earth centers on
when modern style plate tectonic processes, driven by the sinking of dense
lithospheric plates, became the dominant mode of thermal convection and crustal
deformation. This project examines rock assemblages in the Wasatch Mountains of
northern Utah that may represent a late Archean to early Proterozoic
accretionary complex that formed by subduction of oceanic plates beneath the
western margin of North America. These rocks, part of the southern Farmington
Canyon complex, were modified by a later collisional event circa 1700 Ma and are
now represented by amphibolite grade gneisses. The southern Farmington Canyon
complex contains blocks of mafic metavolcanic rock (amphibolite, pyroxene
amphibolite, garnet amphibolite), ultramafic rock, and quartzite - some of which
may represent metachert associated with mafic metavolcanic rocks - in a matrix
of quartzo-feldspathic gneiss with a chemical composition similar to greywacke.
Radiogenic isotopic studies yield old Neodymium model ages and Archean inherited
zircon components which suggests that this accretionary complex formed on the
southwestern margin of the Wyoming craton, in conjunction with a coeval
continental margin arc represented in part by the northern portion of the
Farmington Canyon complex (orthogneiss, migmatite, pegmatite). This contintental
margin arc apparently collided with the volcanic Santaquin arc during Middle
Proterozoic time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand the geologic
evolution of this area, we are conducting geologic mapping and geochemical
analysis of parts of the Farmington Canyon complex south of Farmington and north
of Salt Lake City. Sampling is focused on the amphibolites (metabasalts),
quartzites (metacherts), and ultramafic rocks (mantle tectonites?). Whole rock
geochemical studies for major and trace element concentrations are being carried
out in order to establish the protoliths of the metamorphic rocks and the
tectonic setting in which they originated. Detailed paleo pressure-temperature
investigations of garnet-clinopyroxene amphibolites are being used in order to
determine if an earlier episode of high-pressure metamorphism is preserved in
any of the mafic blocks. This study is providing critical information bearing on
the nature of Archean/Mesoprotoerozoic tectonic events along the western margin
of the ancient North American continent. &lt;br/&gt;