* 0337046
* SGER: Development of Technology for Remote Monitoring of Contact Processes in Animal Populations and Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Michael Miller, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2006
* USD 49,984.00

Climatic Variation and Disturbance Interactions in Subalpine Rocky Mountain
Forests Veblen, Thomas T. University of Colorado at Boulder

Climate change is expected to exacerbate disturbances to forested landscape
through impacts on frequency of fire and insect outbreaks. This project will
address the need for an improved understanding of the spatial and temporal
nature of such disturbances, the role of climate variability on forest dynamics,
and the significance of these landscape legacies in altering forest
susceptibility to future disturbance. Specifically, this work will examine how
forest disturbances vary in relation to broad environmental gradients in
southern Rocky Mountain forest ecosystems. Key questions to be addressed in this
research include: what climatic conditions are conducive to fire and lethal
insect outbreaks across topographic and broad climatic gradients; how does
topographic variability affect the nature and rate of forest recovery following
fire and insect outbreaks and future susceptibility to disturbance; and how do
landscape legacies resulting from major previous disturbance by fire and insect
outbreaks affect the subsequent frequency, spread, and/or severity of
disturbances? This project will contribute new knowledge to how disturbance
processes in forested landscapes respond to climatic variation in spatially
heterogeneous environments. Methodologically, the research will combine detailed
tree-ring analyses of disturbance and climatic variation with GIS-analyses of
the spatial interactions of past disturbance events in relation to topographic
setting. This multi-scale empirical analysis will elucidate the relative roles
of fine- versus coarse-scale constraints on disturbance processes. The results
of the project will be of importance to forest resource planning and management
in National Parks and National Forests in Colorado. In particular, legacies left
in the landscape by prior disturbance by fire and insect outbreaks need to be
considered when planning for the spread and severity of future disturbance
events.