* 0337656
* Physiological and Molecular Mechanisms of Stress Tolerance in a Polar Insect
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* David Denlinger, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 03/31/2008
* USD 334,582.00

Polar terrestrial environments are often described as deserts, where water
availability is recognized as one of the most important limits on the
distribution of terrestrial organisms. In addition, prolonged low winter
temperatures threaten survival, and summer temperatures challenge organisms with
extensive diel variations and rapid transitions from freezing to desiccating
conditions. Global warming has further impacted the extreme thermal and hydric
conditions experienced by Antarctic terrestrial plant and arthropod communities,
especially as a result of glacial retreat along the Antarctic Peninsula. This
research will focus on thermal and hydric adaptations in the terrestrial midge,
Belgica antarctica, the largest and most southerly holometabolous insect living
in this challenging and changing environment. &lt;br/&gt;Overwintering midge
larvae encased in the frozen substrate must endure desert-like conditions for
more than 300 days since free water is biologically unavailable as ice. During
the summer, larvae may be immersed in melt water or outwash from penguin
colonies and seal wallows, in addition to saltwater splash. Alternatively, the
larvae may be subjected to extended periods of desiccation as their
microhabitats dry out. Due to their small size, relative immobility and the
patchiness of suitable microhabitats, larvae may thus be subjected to stresses
that include desiccation, hypo- or hyperosmotic conditions, high salinity
exposure, and anoxia for extended periods. Research efforts will focus in three
areas relevant to the stress tolerance mechanisms operating in these midges:(1)
obtaining a detailed characterization of microclimatic conditions experienced by
B. antarctica, especially those related to thermal and hydric diversity, both
seasonally and among microhabitat types in the vicinity of Palmer Station,
Antarctica; (2) examining the effects of extreme fluctuations in water
availability and effects on physiological and molecular responses - to determine
if midge larvae utilize the mechanism of cryoprotective dehydration for winter
survival, and if genes encoding heat shock proteins and other genes are
upregulated in larval responses to dehydration and rehydration; (3)
investigating the dietary transmission of cryoprotectants from plant to insect
host, which will test the hypothesis that midge larvae acquire increased
resistance to desiccation and temperature stress by acquiring cryoprotectants
from their host plants. &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide outreach to both
elementary and secondary educators and their students. The team will include a
teacher who will benefit professionally by full participation in the research,
and will also assist in providing outreach to other teachers and their students.
From Palmer Station, the field team will communicate daily research progress by
e-mail supplemented with digital pictures with teachers and their elementary
students to stimulate interest in an Antarctic biology and scientific research.
These efforts will be supplemented with presentations at local schools and
national teacher meetings, and by publishing hands-on, inquiry-based articles
related to cryobiology and polar biology in education journals. Furthermore, the
principal investigators will maintain major commitments to training graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars, as well as undergraduate students by
providing extended research experience that includes publication of scientific
papers and presentations at national meetings. &lt;br/&gt;