* 0337626
* Collaborative Research: Mapping Crustal Tectonic Structure using Seismic Anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Nikolas Christensen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2006
* USD 114,524.00



MAPPING CRUSTAL TECTONIC STRUCTURE USING SEISMIC ANISOTROPY

Seismic anisotropy has been observed to correlate with aligned cracks in the
shallow crust and inferred to be related to lattice-preferred orientation (LPO)
of olivine due to mantle flow. However, anisotropic behavior due to structural
layering or inherent foliation of crustal material is not as well studied even
though metamorphism and deformation are fundamental expressions of plate
convergence and have the potential to pervasively structure the crust and
influence wave propagation at regional scales. Regional foliations and
compositional alignments are produced by deformation and metamorphism associated
with tectonic processes and should result in "anisotropic terranes" detectable
by seismic methods. Thus the identification and mapping of anisotropy within the
crust can serve as a proxy for the presence and spatial extent of tectonic
deformation.

We examine a three-dimensional exhumed regionally-foliated antiformal structure
located at Nanga Parbat, Pakistan, to test our hypothesis that regional
deformation and metamorphism result in crustal anisotropy and that this
anisotropy can be observed in the recorded seismic wavefield and used as a proxy
to map subsurface rock fabric. For our study we use an existing data set
collected by the NSF-Continental Dynamics Nanga Parbat project (NSF
EAR-9418849). We have identified 365 high-quality local earthquakes which were
recorded within a temporary 56 short-period/broadband array. The combination of
local earthquakes/stations provides internal illumination of the Nanga Parbat
antiform. Using this data set, our research objectives are to: (1) quantify the
observations of seismic anisotropy in the seismic data, (2) develop techniques
to systematically analyze the anisotropic signatures recorded in the seismic
wavefields (interpretive tomography), (3) calibrate these observations using
petrophysical properties directly measured from Nanga Parbat rock samples, (4)
use Christoffel anisotropy theory and synthetic seismograms computed by 3D
anisotropy wave propagation code for verification of our analyses, (5) develop a
set of tools that can be used to help design field experiments to measure the
anisotropic wave field through complex 3-D structures, and (6) determine Vp, Vs,
and Vp/Vs ratios to better constrain geodynamic modeling of crustal deformation.
These objectives allow us to understand the relationship between seismic
anisotropy and crustal tectonic deformation.