* 0337525
* SBIR Phase I:      Dye Co-Sensitizer Combinations for Increasing the Efficiency of Dye-Sensitized Titania Nanoparticles in Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Russell Gaudiana, KONARKA TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,636.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a critical understanding of the underlying mechanism affecting the
efficiency of dye-sensitized titania solar cells (DSSC). This understanding is
pivotal to the advancement of the technology and could help move the solar
industry forward by overcoming cost and weight barriers. DSSC technology in
general has experienced low efficiencies due in part to the back transfer of
electrons from the titania to an oxidized dye species on the surface of the
titania before the electron can reach the electrode, producing current. In this
proposal a simple means of alleviating this energy wasting pathway by anchoring
aromatic amines, known as co-sensitizers or donors, at low concentration along
with the sensitizing dye to the surface of the titania nanoparticles will be
investigated. A significant increase in the cell efficiency due to an increase
in current when these species are present on the surface in combination with the
dyes has been observed. Since these results contradict other work on aromatic
amines used as either co-adsorbed species on titania, or as adducts to the
sensitizing dye molecule itself, a study of the effects of structurally modified
co-sensitizers on redox potential, photon to electron conversion efficiency, and
kinetics of the electron transfer is needed to understand the photophysics of
the mechanism.

The commercial applications of this project will be in solar cells. DSSC
technology holds the greatest potential for low cost photovoltaics due to the
inexpensive materials used and the ability to manufacture in volume using roll-
to-roll processes. The DSSC technology will be lightweight and flexible as well,
two attributes that literally open up new applications including molded plastics
that conform to the exterior of consumer electronic devices and flexible fibers
that can be woven into fabrics.

