* 0337091
* A physical record of the circumpolar circulation of the Southern Ocean - late Miocene to Pleistocene
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* David Rea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2007
* USD 132,559.00

This work will increase our understanding of how deep-ocean circulation has
changed with respect to important climate changes of the late Cenozoic. Today,
deep waters of the three oceans blend in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC)
as they are continually transported from one ocean basin to the next one east.
This flow, now about 100 to 150 million cubic meters per second, is responsible
for most of the heat and nutrient transport among the deep Atlantic, Indian and
Pacific Oceans. The ACC also isolates Antarctica from the warmer world to the
north and its surface waters provide moisture to the continent. As such, a
carefully constructed history of this flow would significantly increase our
understanding of late Cenozoic global change. We propose to develop a detailed
physical record of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current that spans the last 9 Myr.
To achieve this we will apply the methods developed in studying deep-sea drift
deposits elsewhere to the drift sediments recovered by ODP Leg 178 on the
Pacific margin of the Antarctic Peninsula. Data generated by the scientific
party of Leg 178, along with our preliminary information, suggest that these
deposits are a faithful monitor of ocean-wide events. The primary tool of our
analysis will be the anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (AMS) which is a
quantitative measure of the fabric--or degree of alignment--in a sediment. We
and others have shown that stronger currents result in more pronounced fabrics.
Other data to be generated will include: the grain-size distribution of the
terrigenous sediment component, which allows discrimination between drift-
related sediments and distal turbidites; the weight percent of terrigenous
sediment in each sample, and by difference in this two-component deposit, the
amount of opal; the mass accumulation rate of these components; and by orienting
the fabric information to the magnetic field vector recorded in the same sample,
the direction of the flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational impact of this
work centers on the graduate student for whom this research will provide a Ph.D.
thesis project, but also involves undergraduates in hands-on research.
&lt;br/&gt;