* 0337221
* Collaborative Research: Geodynamic Evolution of an Active Arc-Continent Collision, Eastern Sunda Arc, Indonesia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Ronald Harris, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2006
* USD 136,850.00

Arc-continent collision has played a key role in the assembly of continents
throughout geologic time and currently poses a significant threat to society as
a major source of large earthquakes and explosive volcanic eruptions. However,
the fundamental geodynamics of arc-continent collision is poorly understood and
lacks quantification. This is due in part to the lack of detailed measurements
of deformation patterns at a range of temporal scales, which is only possible
from active arc-continent collisions. &lt;br/&gt;This study is using a
multidisciplinary approach to construct a 3-D mechanical model of the active
eastern Sunda arc-continent collision. The aim of the investigation is to
measure the accumulation and distribution of strain throughout the collision
zone by a combination of methods that sample a wide range of temporal and
spatial scales. Oblique collision in the region provides a rare opportunity to
examine an evolving orogen at different stages of development. In addition, the
abundance of well-preserved flights of uplifted coral terraces fringing most
islands provide local and regional strain markers capable of recording
deformation patterns over time scales of 10^4 to 10^6 years. This is the
temporal range least represented in previous studies of this and other actively
deforming plate boundary zones. &lt;br/&gt;This project is addressing a series
of fundamental geodynamic questions about strain partitioning, such as: where
(and how) is plate convergence from the trench transferred to the back arc
during progressive arc-continent collision and subduction polarity reversal? Are
there discrete lateral-slip faults that link zones of opposing convergence? If
so, how does this connective system propagate with the collision? What
proportion of the rate of convergence (7-8 cm/yr.) is localized along faults
versus ductile structures of the accretionary zone? Is the collision zone
segmented into discrete, rigid blocks? If so, what is the nature of the block
boundaries and how do they evolve? How is plate boundary reorganization
represented at different temporal scales?&lt;br/&gt;Integrated geodynamic
investigations involving structural geology, geomorphology, and finite element
modeling are being used to address these questions. Comparing models with
measurements of the GPS velocity field and deformational features, such as
active faults and warped coral terraces, demonstrates a variety of tectonic
processes that result from the redistribution of deformation into continental
regions along preexisting and newly forming geologic structures. This broad
transition in rheological behavior between subduction and collision provides new
perspectives into differences between continental deformation and rigid-plate
tectonics. The distribution of strain away from the trench into the forearc and
backarc regions causes the eastern Sunda arc to accrete to the underthrust
Australian continental margin and activate new plate boundary segments. Models
of this process help better understand these common geodynamic patterns in terms
of a time-dependant rheology, and provide a detailed test of theories for the
temporal distribution of strain throughout a arc-continent collision zone.