* 0337860
* Track 1, GK-12  Groundwork Education in Mathematics and Science
* EHR,DGE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Linda Jewell, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 05/31/2008
* USD 2,018,034.00

2. Project Summary Title: Groundwork Education in Mathematics & Science (GEMS)
Institution: University of Louisville PI/co-PIs: Christine Rich (PI), Wiley
Williams (Co-PI), LeeAnn Nickerson (Co-PI), Linda Jewell (Co-PI) Number of
Fellows per year: 9-graduate/3 undergraduates Setting: Urban NSF Supported
Disciplines Involved: Mathematics, Chemistry, Physics, and Geosciences

Narrative Summary: The University of Louisville GEMS program is exploring
strategies for improving the quality of science and mathematics education at six
Title I elementary schools in the Jefferson County Public Schools (JCPS) by
instituting a job-embedded professional development program that partners
elementary teachers and STEM graduate or undergraduate students in the
classroom. Fellows, teachers, university faculty, and JCPS specialists in
mathematics and science form an inclusive learning community committed to the
development and implementation of inquiry-based teaching methods aligned with
state and national standards. Twelve Fellows and twenty-four teachers, assembled
into 6-member School Teams, use NSF-supported curricula in science (FOSS, DSM
II, and STC) and Investigations in Number, Data, and Space as the primary focus
for laying a scientifically and pedagogically sound groundwork for presentation
of STEM concepts to students in grades 3-5. Fellows receive preparatory training
to familiarize them with state and national standards, current mathematics and
science methods, and state assessments. School teams train together in hands-on
summer workshops that emphasize cooperative strategies for melding curricular
content with teaching practices that best foster student learning. Biweekly
seminars and mentoring support provide new learning opportunities and sustained
professional development throughout the academic year.

The intellectual merit of GEMS resides in its research-based approach to
integrating into the JCPS elementary schools an effective model for professional
development that increases student interest and learning in mathematics and
science. Fellows improve their communication skills as they devise level-
appropriate methods for effectively conveying content to both teachers and their
students. Benefits to elementary teachers include content resource support from
both the Fellows and the university faculty, an improved ability to teach using
inquiry-based learning and, the opportunity to make presentations and assume PD
leadership roles in their school. Elementary students in the chosen schools
benefit from content-enriched, inquiry-based instruction aimed at improving
their performance on Kentucky's high-stakes assessments.

A broader impact is that the university, and in particular science and
mathematics faculty in the College of Arts and Sciences, benefit by expanding
partnerships with local school districts. Another broader impact is potentially
far-reaching: GEMS proposes a model of collaboration among STEM researchers and
STEM educators at both the institutional and school level to advance the
teaching and learning of science and mathematics. That collaborative and diverse
partnership is already reflected by the composition of GEMS leadership. The
recruitment and selection strategies for Fellows and teachers are aimed at
ensuring that School Team composition is equally inclusive and diverse. Finally,
GEMS is structured such that participants at every level can be actively engaged
in GEMS research and educational activities including training, classroom
teaching, project evaluation and outcome dissemination. This project is
partially supported by funds from the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.