* 0337635
* Investigations of Upper Atmosphere Dynamics and Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling using a SuperDARN Radar at South Pole Station
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2011
* John Hughes, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 01/31/2011
* USD 1,218,384.00

The Super Dual Auroral Radar Network, or SuperDARN, is an international
collaborative experiment for observations of plasma convection in the Earth's
ionosphere. By observing ionospheric plasma motion, a multitude of geophysical
processes can be studied. These processes range from E-region plasma
instabilities, to the relationships between auroral luminosity and electric
fields, to the global-scale convective response to changes in the solar wind and
interplanetary magnetic field. Each of these areas of study contributes to the
overall goals of space physics: developing an understanding of the coupling of
energy from the solar wind into Earth's upper atmosphere and its effects on man
or manmade systems. Currently, SuperDARN covers nearly 15 hours of local time in
the northern hemisphere, and close to 12 hours in the southern hemisphere. As
the network has grown and demonstrated its potential, the number of scientist
working with SuperDARN data has increased annually as has the number of
scientifically significant publications. Addressing many of the goals, however,
requires larger-scale coverage. Specifically, the continuous monitoring of
convective flows requires radar observations that circumscribe the magnetic
poles. The radar proposed for South Pole Station, along with the other new
radars currently being proposed by our international collaborators for other
locations on the Antarctic continent, will achieve this goal in the southern
hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;Under the proposed program, the HF radar will be
constructed Amundsen-Scott South Pole station. Data from the radar will be used,
in conjunction with data from the rest of the SuperDARN network and the wealth
of other space physics instruments in Antarctica, to study a variety of topics,
including: responses of global convection to solar wind and IMF changes, plasma
entry into, and exit from, the polar cap, and the accompanying response of the
magnetotail, magnetospheric cusp response to changes in the solar wind, the
motions of plasma patches through the polar cap, mesospheric winds, and
thermospheric gravity waves. In addition, by establishing global-scale coverage
in the southern hemisphere, the radar will help addressing questions about
geomagnetic conjugacy, and the differences caused by the asymmetry of solar
illumination. There are two main areas of broader impact in this proposal.
First, as an international network of radars, SuperDARN fosters collaboration
among member nations. There are currently eight nations that support SuperDARN
work in Antarctica. It plays an important role in space physics research
programs in each of these nations. The international cooperative scientific
effort fostered under this program will have broad societal impacts. Another
broader impact aspect of this proposal is its contribution to the education of
the next generation of space physics scientists. Over the lifetime of the
program, it will contribute to the education of a number of students and
postdoctoral fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;