* 0337006
* Anisotropy Changes during Phase Transformation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Hans-Rudolf Wenk, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 287,314.00

When rocks are deformed or subjected to temperature and pressure changes in the
earth, the orientation of crystals that compose the rock changes. These
orientation changes, known as texture, are recorded by seismologists in the form
of directionality (anisotropy) of seismic wave speeds and have been documented
for large parts of the earth. This proposal addresses the changes in macroscopic
anisotropic properties and tries to explain them based on microscopic
mechanisms, both through experiments at high temperature and pressure and by
modeling. Of particular importance are phase changes when minerals transform
into different structures. With the advent of new instrumentation such as the
new neutron diffractometers at Los Alamos and diamond anvil cells at synchrotron
sources, it has become possible to investigate changes in anisotropy of bulk
samples during deformation, recrystallization and phase transformations in real
time, at a wide range of temperature and pressure conditions. Preliminary
studies revealed that often a close orientation relationship exists between
parent and daughter phases that depends on structural similarities and the
stress state imposed by neighboring grains. Materials of primary interest in
this proposal are quartz (and implications for metamorphic rocks to interpret
the ancient stress field), fcc-bcc metals (as a complex model system to
investigate detailed mechanisms, with relevance for the core) and the olivine-
ringwoodite-perovskite+periclase transformations (essential to explain
anisotropy in the mantle). The first two will be investigated with neutron
diffraction at high temperature at LANSCE (and later perhaps at SNS). The last
system will be studied with diamond anvil cells at APS and ALS. Results from
these experiments, together with other available data, will be used to model the
development of texture and anisotropy in the lower mantle. Anisotropy, texture
and phase transformations are issues that go far beyond geophysics and results
from this research will have direct impact on materials science. Methods of
quantitative macroscopic texture analysis with neutrons and X-rays as well as
microscopic analysis with synchrotron beams and electron microscopy that are
being developed can be applied to such diverse materials as metals, high
temperature superconductors and bones where crystal orientation is critical for
functionality.

