* 0337621
* Geochemistry of Siderophile and Chalcophile Element in the Earth: Studies on the Distribution of These Elements in Natural and Synthetic Samples
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* William McDonough, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 12/31/2007
* USD 269,936.00

The process by which the Earth differentiated into a metallic core, a rocky
silicate shell, and a liquid/gas envelope is poorly understood. Isotopic studies
show that this process began during planetary accretion and ended within a few
tens of millions of years. The distribution of elements between the core and
surrounding silicate mantle and crust likely occurred under a range of
conditions (temperature, pressure, and gas fugacity) and in a variety of
settings, including small planetary bodies accreted into the Earth. The
integrated result of these conditions is recorded in the current distribution of
elements between the core and silicate Earth. By characterizing the composition
of these two reservoirs and determining how elements partition themselves
between metals and silicates with experiments, we can understand the mechanisms
by which the core formed.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this three-year study will
include analyses of the siderophile (iron-loving) and chalcophile (sulfur-
loving) elements in mantle samples (peridotites and pryoxenites), mantle-derived
magmas (primitive basalts, komatiites and some of their mineral phases),
meteorites (particularly pallasites: asteroidal samples from their core-mantle
boundary that are composed of iron metal mixed with olivine crystals) and
experimental charges that have been synthesized under specific pressure,
temperature and redox conditions. Data for the peridotites, pyroxenites and the
magmas will be used to establish the composition of the silicate Earth, which is
the primitive mantle composition prior to its differentiation into a crust and
mantle system. The meteorite studies will help to establish the fractionation
behavior of elements at low pressures and temperatures under various redox
conditions. Data from the experimental studies will provide distribution
coefficients for elements between minerals and melts, which will further
constrain the conditions of core formation. All of these studies will have a
broader impact on student mentoring, as well as providing research opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students. The analytical methods have
applications in science, industry, medicine, and government and will serve these
students well into their careers.&lt;br/&gt;