* 0338162
* Engineers and Teachers Working for Mathematics Success
* EHR,DGE
* 02/15/2004,06/30/2013
* Laura Bottomley, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2013
* USD 2,137,098.00

This Track 2, GK-12 project builds upon a very successful partnership between
the College of Engineering at N.C. State University and the science curriculum
branch of Wake County, N.C. Public Schools, who together have launched a major
science reform effort in the county.

The Intellectual Merit of the proposal includes: tracking Fellow progress to
degree and subsequent career path and having engineering and math Fellows work
together with partner teachers to develop and implement inquiry-based math
activities that are designed to enhance math instruction for all students.

The Broader Impact of the project is high. The program serves as a model for
schools across the state of North Carolina with the techniques and activities
developed becoming part of the program being used as a model by other states.
The Fellow/teacher teams develop lesson plans and teaching techniques that are
distributed: via the web, through distance education, through presentations at
education, and engineering and evaluation professional conferences and related
publications.

Outcomes from Prior Project: This project has resulted in the preparation of a
county-wide science reform effort to change to inquiry-based science teaching in
every school in the county of over 100,000 students. The GK-12 Fellows model has
been adopted by the Introduction to Engineering class as a semester-long design
project option, and the teaching of this class has been changed to include more
inquiry-based presentation on the part of the university instructors as well. A
handbook was developed for interpreting science to hearing impaired students, as
well as a suggested standardized list of STEM related signs to be used county-
wide. All participating Fellows have gone on to pursue opportunities for
outreach during their professional careers.

This project is receiving partial support from the Directorate for Engineering.

Title: Track 2, GK-12 Engineers and Teachers for Mathematics Success
Institution: North Carolina State University PI/Co-PI: Laura J. Bottomley
(Engineering), Karen Hollebrands (Education), and Elizabeth Parry (Science
Surround) Partner School District: Wake County Public Schools Number of Fellows
per Year: 5 graduate students, 15 undergraduate students Target Audience: Grades
3-8 Setting: Urban and rural NSF Supported Disciplines: Engineering,
mathematics, science