* 0338463
* US-France Cooperative Research: Damage and Localization in Rocks
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* John Rudnicki, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2008
* USD 17,000.00

0338463&lt;br/&gt;Rudnicki&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award supports
U.S.-France cooperative research on localization and damage in rocks. The U.S.
and French investigators, John Rudnicki at Northwestern University and Yves
Gueguen at the Ecole Normale Superieure in Paris, will conduct axisymmetric
compression experiments on three rock types: sandstone (typical of hydrocarbon
reservoirs), shale (being considered for the French nuclear waste repository)
and limestone (to examine the effects of the calcite phase). In addition, the
simultaneous measurements of elastic wave speeds will provide information about
the relation of macroscopic stress strain behavior and the evolution of
microstructural damage. These experimental observations provide the basis for
modeling to predict both shear and compaction localization of rocks. The U.S.
investigator brings to the project expertise in engineering and deformation of
and failure of rocks. This is complemented by the French investigator's work in
modeling transport properties of rocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The onset and
evolution of localized deformation remains a fundamental problem in
understanding the behavior of the earth's crust. Localized deformation, in the
form of faults and shear zones for example, control the mechanical strength of
the crust and strongly affect the transport of fluids. The project will further
understanding of mechanisms that produce weakening and eventually failure in
geomaterials. This has implications for understanding faults in the earth's
crust and the mechanics of earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
jointly supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). NSF provides support for visits to
France by the U.S. investigator and students. The CNRS covers expenses for
travel to the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;