* 0338385
* Magma Genesis Beneath Continents
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Julia Bryce, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 10/31/2004
* USD 28,772.00

Bryce&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207939&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental basalts provide the
broadest insights into the nature and origin of the continental lithosphere but,
because they may represent a mixture of contributions acquired during melt
formation, transport from the source region, evolution in a magma chamber, and
eruption, the chemical identities and the relative roles of these processes are
topics of debate. Isotopic and chemical studies of melt inclusions in
phenocrysts of mafic lavas provide a means to examine and quantify contributions
from these processes before exotic melts have been mixed away during melt
aggregation and magma storage. The focus of the proposed work is to investigate
these contributions in the 0-8 Ma alkali basalts of the Cima volcanic field of
eastern California. Mantle xenoliths contained within the lavas demonstrate that
the mantle at shallow levels beneath Cima is compositionally heterogeneous and
that the lavas had a limited residence time in crustal chambers. Accordingly,
the large variations in Pb isotopic compositions observed in magmas of the Cima
suite most likely reflect signatures acquired during their formation and
transport through the mantle, rather than from assimilation of continental
crust. The proposed study will combine in situ techniques (e.g., electron and
ion microprobe) to characterize the major, trace, and Pb isotopic compositions
of melt and mineral inclusions in olivine and other phases from mafic (MgO &gt;
6 wt. %) Cima lavas. Our results will address whether the compositional and Pb
isotopic variety of melt inclusions trapped in continental lavas is even greater
than that observed in the suite of lavas that contain them, from which we can
better delimit the nature and origin of compositional domains in the mantle at
levels deeper than those sampled by xenoliths. The results from this project can
be combined with ongoing studies of the isotopic and compositional variability
of melt inclusions trapped in oceanic basaltic phenocrysts to improve our
understanding of the processes significant in the generation of basaltic
magmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;