* 0338153
* Track 1, GK-12: Improving STEM content for K-6 grades in coastal rural schools in Oregon
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2007
* Alan Shanks, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 11/30/2007
* USD 1,554,632.00

Title of Project: Track 1, GK-12: Improving STEM content for K-6 grades in
coastal rural schools in Oregon. Institution: Oregon Institute of Marine
Biology, University of Oregon PI/Co-PI: Drs. Alan Shanks and Janet Hodder Number
of Fellows per year: 9 graduate fellows, 2 undergraduate fellows School District
Partners: Coos Bay and North Bend School Districts Target Audience of the
Project: K-6th grade Setting: Rural Coastal, low socioeconomic status NSF
Supported Disciplines Involved: Science and Mathematics, Natural Resources

This proposal will provide support to two rural school districts in meeting the
challenges of the Oregon standards based education reform in science and math.
By building on a partnership we have already developed with the school districts
we will permanently enhance Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) education in these districts. We will use Oregon Institute of Marine
Biology (OIMB) graduate and undergraduate GK-12 Fellows to provide targeted
instruction to elementary students (grades K-6), and professional development to
teachers in STEM content. STEM education will be enhanced through the
presentation of marine and aquatic sciences utilizing and building upon the
Marine Activities, Resources, and Education (MARE) curriculum developed at the
University of California Berkeley.

The intellectual merit of this proposal includes our goal to permanently improve
teacher's understanding of science content, and their use of inquiry and the
scientific method to teach STEM subjects. Summer workshops will familiarize
Fellows with the MARE curriculum and provide practical pedagogic knowledge for
teaching in K-6 classes, and an understanding of the Oregon based standards
system. A MARE Lead Teacher cadre will be developed in each school district that
will act as mentors for the fellows and as support for other teachers in the
district. These teachers will participate in summer "training" workshops for the
Fellows. A second series of summer institutes for additional teachers will
strengthen the working partnership between fellows and teachers, and improve the
teacher's knowledge of science and scientific inquiry. To accomplish the later
goal, teachers in the summer institutes will design and carry out scientific
inquiries in the marine habitats of Coos Bay. They will design investigations,
collect and analyze data, and prepare a work sample appropriate for assessing
the investigation. Fellows will meet weekly with the GK-12 coordinator and OIMB
faculty to discuss project implementation and direction and provide
opportunities for additional training. They will also meet regularly with the
GK-12 Coordinator and Lead Teachers from each school to assess progress. A
"decision-oriented" evaluation using both qualitative and quantitative analytic
techniques will provide participants with formative evaluations to facilitate
decision-making and will be used to analyze project data and draw summative
conclusions.

The broader impact of this project includes the development of a more permanent
University/K-12 relationship; the development of teaching, communication, and
team-building skills by the GK-12 Fellows; the opportunity for Fellows to gain
knowledge and experience of the K-12 teaching community; and the formation of
working partnerships with faculty, Fellows, and teachers. Teachers and their
students will accrue a number of benefits including up to date scientific
information, experiences with real science via inquiry-based investigations, and
exposure to working scientists. In addition all participants will strengthen
their connection with the community in which they live. This project is
partially supported by funds from the Directorate for Geosciences.