* 0338346
* Collaborative Research:      Collection of Marine Geophysical Data on Transits of the Nathaniel B. Palmer
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Steven Cande, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 06/30/2009
* USD 286,263.00

This project will utilize the R/VIB Nathaniel B. Palmer's transit cruises to
collect marine geophysical data on targets-of-opportunity in the southern
oceans. Because the Palmer generally traverses regions only sparsely surveyed
with geophysical instruments, this project represents a cost-effective way to
collect important new data. The work's focus is expanding our knowledge of plate
motion histories for the Antarctic and surrounding plates. The ultimate goals
are improving global plate reconstructions and gaining new insight into general
plate kinematics and dynamics and lithospheric rheology. Only slight deviations
from the straight routes are required, and we expect to operate on one cruise
per year over the three years of the project. The first cruise from New Zealand
to Chile will survey a flow line of Pacific-Antarctic plate motion along the
Menard fracture zone, which crosses the East Pacific Rise at ~50 S latitude.
Swath bathymetry, gravity, magnetics, and a small amount of seismic reflection
profiling will be collected to determine the exact trace of the fracture zone
and its relationship to the associated gravity anomaly seen in shipboard and
satellite radar altimetry data. These observations are critical for precise
plate reconstructions, and will provide GPS-navigated locations of a major
fracture zone near the northern end of the Pacific-Antarctic boundary. These
data will be used in combination with similar data from the Pitman fracture zone
at the southwestern end of the plate boundary and magnetic anomalies from
previous cruises near the Menard fracture zone to improve high-precision plate
reconstructions and evaluate the limits of internal deformation of the Pacific
and Antarctic plates. The science plan for cruises in following years will be
designed once transit schedules are set. In terms of broader impacts, we plan to
teach an on-board marine geophysics class to graduate and undergraduate students
on two cruises. The class consists of daily classroom lectures about the
instruments and data; several hours per day of watch standing and data
processing; and work by each student on an independent research project. We
expect to accommodate 15 students per class, including participants from
primarily undergraduate institutions with high minority enrollments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;