* 0338196
* RUI:     Improving Acoustic Estimates of Antarctic Krill Populations
* GEO,OPP
* 10/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Joseph Warren, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 07/31/2006
* USD 440,000.00

Antarctic krill are a vital link in the food web of the Southern Ocean. In
addition to serving as prey for the higher trophic levels (birds, pinnipeds,
whales), they are also harvested commercially by several different nations. As a
part of this management strategy, numerous acoustic surveys of the krill stock
are conducted annually. While acoustic methods provide several advantages over
other sampling techniques, the conversion of acoustic backscatter information to
numerical abundance of animals is a difficult problem. This project seeks to
improve the accuracy of acoustic surveys of Antarctic krill by using a small-
boat survey to collect acoustic, meteorological, hydrographic, and video
observation data. By utilizing the United States Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (AMLR) Program's chartered research vessel, this project will sample
off- and on-shelf regions around Livingston Island focusing on two submarine
canyons which flank Cape Shirreff, Antarctica. An array of five spar buoys will
be constructed and deployed in these waters to collect long (weeks to months)
time-series of ADCP and acoustic backscatter data. These data, along with the
hydrographic information from the small-boat survey, will be used to determine
whether Upper Circumpolar Deep Water is traveling up the submarine canyons and
increasing the productivity of this region. The spatial and temporal variability
of this influx of deep water will be determined to understand the forcing
functions which control the abundance of krill in these waters. The results from
this work will improve the ability of scientists and fishery managers to use
acoustic data to estimate krill abundance. Furthermore, the importance of near-
shore krill populations, and the factors that control their distribution and
abundance, will be better understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
also improve the undergraduate educational experience of students at one of the
PI's home institutions, which is an RUI. These students will not only
participate in research projects involving data analysis, but instrumentation
used in this project will be deployed off shore and will provide students with
access to modern oceanographic sampling methods and allow them to experience the
benefits and complications of collecting real-world data. These data will be
utilized in several courses at the college, and the pedagogical materials
developed in this endeavor will be placed on a web site for educators elsewhere
to use. The buoy data will also be freely available on-line. &lt;br/&gt;