* 0338664
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Efficient Solar Cells Based on the Liquid Crystal-Inorganic Nanocomposite
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Igor Levitsky, Emitech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,816.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to study and
develop novel, highly efficient photovoltaic cells based on composite material
from nanostructured semiconductors and liquid crystals. The proposed approach
has a number of advantages over existing technologies in the rapidly developing
area of organic/plastic photovoltaics including easy processing using cost-
effective techniques enabling the fabrication of large area solar cells onto
flexible substrates, and a very fast charge transport due to the quasi-1D
structure of the liquid crystal and continuous (bulk) medium of the
semiconductor. The characteristic size of nanostructures filled with organics is
comparable with the exciton diffusion length. Such a design provides 100% light
harvesting without exciton loss due to remote interface area. The bicontinous
network between the nanopatterned semiconductor and the organic component
provides an enormous interface surface, thereby significantly increasing the
charge separation. Nanocomposites can easily be integrated with other
optoelectronic devices. Composite fabrication offers a large variety in the
selection of organic components and does not require the lattice matching that
strongly reduces material choice for semiconductor heterostructures. Such
nanocomposite material should demonstrate superior photovoltaic properties
providing a good chance to obtain 10% of energy conversion, still unachieved
with organic solar cells.

The commercial application of this project is in solar cells. Cost-effective
processing, light weight, flexibility and robustness of the composite solar
cells make them extremely attractive for various applications used by industry,
the military and in research, e.g., security systems, offshore platforms,
emergency power systems, and space applications.