* 0338247
* Track 2 GK-12: Collaborative to Advance Teaching, Technology and Science in (CATTS)
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Stephen Pompea, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2009
* USD 2,112,283.00

PROJECT SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;Title: Track 2 GK-12: Collaborative to Advance
Teaching, Technology and Science in (CATTS) &lt;br/&gt;Institution: The
University of Arizona; &lt;br/&gt;PI/co-PIs: S. Seraphin, M. Hall-Wallace, J.
Knight, S. Pompea, J. Watkins &lt;br/&gt;Max. Number of Fellows/year: 9 graduate
on grant; 9 undergraduate on funds from partners; 15 through Certificate in
College Teaching Program &lt;br/&gt;Teachers/year: 10, yrs 1-3; 4, yrs
4-5&lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: Tucson Unified, Amphitheater, Sunnyside,
and Flowing Wells &lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: all grades K-12&lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Urban school districts having 56% - 100% minority enrollment &lt;br/&gt;NSF
supported disciplines involved: all STEM disciplines &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project develops new methods and models of
graduate education with an emphasis on teaching and outreach and will provide
data concerning how teacher-scientist partnerships develop, evolve, and impact
teaching and learning. The project creates: (1) opportunities for teachers to
work with fellows outside the classroom on team building and professional
development; (2) a culture at the university that supports and promotes
education and outreach training; and (3) program sustainability by weaving CATTS
into the institutional fabric of the university and partner school districts.
Activities and policies implemented to develop strong partnerships between the
GK-12 Fellows and teachers, the cornerstone of the initial GK-12 program, are
based on an analysis of the following sources from the current project: journal
writings, surveys, interviews and classroom observations of Fellows and
teachers. This Track 2 project includes a new partner, a program recently
inaugurated at the university, the Certificate in College Teaching, and adds a
new dimension to the current evaluation efforts, examination of the impact of
CATTS on the attitudes and activities of university faculty, with an emphasis on
the Research Advisors of the Fellows. The new certificate program provides
university students with the opportunity to develop their college level
teaching, mentoring and outreach skills and will provide institutional support
for maintenance of CATTS. The research focus on faculty reflects lessons learned
from the first four years experience; a key to the process of establishing the
value of outreach in a research-oriented university is to involve, as much as
possible, the wide spectrum of STEM faculty who work with the
Fellows.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project broadens
participation of underrepresented groups, both in the schools served and the
Fellows recruited. Partner schools serve an ethnically (from 56-100% minority)
and economically (from 56-80% receiving free or reduced lunches) diverse group
of students, including a Native American charter school. Over 20% of the Fellows
classify themselves as belonging to racial or ethnic minorities; while only 1-4%
of the STEM students at the university are so classified.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes from Track 1: There have been benefits for
Fellows, teachers and university personnel. All-former Fellows indicate they
plan to continue their collaborations with schools in their professional
careers, and many are already doing so. Of those who have graduated, two have
taken academic jobs in science departments that include responsibilities for
teacher preparation and both cite their experience in CATTS as critical for
gaining the job. More than 80% of the 90 teachers participating in CATTS report
increases in their use of inquiry and the amount of science they teach in their
classroom. Informal and formal follow-up indicates they are doing so. The new
curriculum and teaching techniques adapted educational materials created through
as many as twelve different NSF projects at the University of Arizona. The
project provided the infrastructure needed to involve a select group of faculty
in outreach for the first time (approximately 30% of the faculty sponsors) and
changed the attitudes of a number of research-