* 0338101
* Collaborative Research: Paleohistory of the Larsen Ice Shelf: Phase II
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Laurence Padman, Earth and Space Research
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 03/31/2008
* USD 123,198.00

The Larsen Ice Shelf is the third largest ice shelf in Antarctica and has
continued a pattern of catastrophic decay since the mid 1990's. The proposed
marine geologic work at the Larsen Ice Shelf builds upon our previous NSF-OPP
funding and intends to test the working hypothesis that the Larsen B Ice Shelf
system has been a stable component of Antarctica's glacial system since it
formed during rising sea levels 10,000 years BP. This conclusion, if supported
by observations from our proposed work, is an important first step in
establishing the uniqueness and consequences of rapid regional warming currently
taking place across the Peninsula. Our previous work in the Larsen A and B
embayments has allowed us to recognize the signature of past ice shelf
fluctuations and their impact on the oceanographic and biologic environments. We
have also overcome many of the limitations of standard radiocarbon dating in
Antarctic marine sequences by using variations in the strength of the earth's
magnetic field for correlation of sediment records and by using specific organic
compounds (instead of bulk sediment) for radiocarbon dating. We intend to pursue
these analytical advances and extend our sediment core stratigraphy to areas
uncovered by the most recent collapse of the Larsen B Ice Shelf and areas
immediately adjacent to the Larsen C Ice Shelf. In addition to the core recovery
program, we intend to utilize our unique access to the ice shelf front to
continue our observations of the snow/ice stratigraphy, oceanographic character,
and ocean floor character. Sediment traps will also be deployed in order to
measure the input of debris from glaciers that are now surging in response to
the ice shelf collapse. This proposal is a multi-institutional, international
(USAP, Italy, and Canada) effort that combines the established expertise in a
variety of disciplines and integrates the research plan into the educational
efforts of primarily undergraduate institutions but including some graduate
education. This is a three-year project with field seasons planned with
flexibility in order to accommodate schedules for the RVIB L.M. Gould. The
Antarctic Peninsula is undergoing greater warming than almost anywhere on Earth,
perhaps associated with human-induced greenhouse effects. Our proposed work
contributes to understanding of these changes where they are occurring first and
with greatest magnitude and impact upon the environment.