* 0338124
* Post-doctoral/graduate research and training program in philosophy of biology
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Daniel McShea, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2008
* USD 296,334.00

This proposal seeks support from STS under the category of small grants for
training and research (SGTR). The Duke Center for Philosophy of Biology will
employ the grant in a structured program for a series of post-doctoral fellows
and advanced graduate students in selected areas of inquiry at the intersection
of biology and the philosophy of science. The Center will recruit and support
one-year post-doctoral fellows from among young investigators and scholars who
propose a research topic the Center considers promising and for which it can
provide appropriate support. &lt;br/&gt; The philosophy of biology is one of the
most fertile and exciting areas of contemporary intellectual interest. Both
evolutionary and molecular biology have been subject to great ferment and
advance over the last two generations. Both have raised profound epistemological
and methodological questions, with answers that have implications for both
biology and philosophy. As a result the philosophy of biology is an area of
inquiry in which biologists and philosophers are both making significant
contributions. Center members have worked on a variety of problems on the
intersection of these two disciplines. At present they are particularly
concerned with issues raised by the integration of evolutionary and
developmental biology. One PI's work requires the articulation of evolution'
conceptual and theoretical reliance on variation with development's assiduous
focus on the individual and avoidance of variation. Another PI is exploring
alternatives to the causal and explanatory autonomy of functional biology, and
examining areas in which biological and chemical processes provide competing
explanations of phenomena in molecular developmental biology. A third PI's
theoretical work on constraints shaping actual terrestrial evolution now demand
an identification of general rules governing the emergence of, and organization
of parts, in higher level individuals. A final PI's continuing interest in the
relationship between developmental and evolutionary modules bears on all three
of the topics just identified. It is therefore anticipated that over the period
of the grant, post-docs and graduate students will be selected for their
qualifications to participate in these related lines of research on the
foundations and integration of evolutionary and developmental biology.
&lt;br/&gt;Candidates chosen for the post-doctoral fellowship will spend the
fellowship period pursuing research on the topic identified in their
application. The post-doc will participate in the Center's Research Seminar,
offer a graduate seminar in the selected topic, and collaborate with the three
graduate student fellows who will also devote the fellowship year to the
selected topic of research. The work of the post-doc and the graduate students
will eventuate, among other things, in a conference for biologists and
philosophers, organized by the Center on the topic selected. Post-doctoral
fellows will also be invited actively to participate in the seminars, colloquia
and other activities of the Duke Center for Genome Ethics Law and Policy, and
other institutions in the Research Triangle in order to enhance public awareness
of the implications of biological advances for normative issues in research and
experimentation, health-care policy, and industrial regulation. The Center for
Philosophy of Biology will work closely with the Duke Office of Graduate Student
Affairs to actively recruit minorities for participation in this program.
&lt;br/&gt; Expected scientific and infrastructural outcomes of this project
include a) the advancement of the research frontier at the intersection of
philosophy and biology, particularly concerning development, evolution, and
their interrelation; b) the improved skills of post-docs to pursue this
research, and to teach it at the graduate level; c) enhanced preparation of
advanced graduate students in areas of inquiry on which they will be expected to
pursue their dissertation-research, and therefore more timely progress towards
degree; d) benefits to research-programs of biology and philosophy faculty-
members of Center through collaboration with post-docs and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt; Many features of the research topics described in the proposal (and
others the Center may treat) have potential importance to issues of considerable
public interest. For example, among the likely pay-offs of work devoted to
clarifying the relation between development and evolution is a more effective
diagnosis of the defects of intelligent design theory. Similarly, if
polynucleotide sequences can be shown to have a distinctive and irreplaceable
role in heredity and development, then the consequent impossibility of
"inventing around them" will make patenting (even functionally annotated)
polynucleotide sequences difficult to justify. Through active collaboration with
the Duke Center for Genome Ethics Law and Policy, with the NC School of Science
and Math, the North Carolina Biotech Center, the Center for Philosophy of
Biology will strive to communicate and contextualize research on the
intersection of philosophy and biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;