* 0338713
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Flows of Electrically Conducting Fluids in the Presence of Strong Magnetic Fields
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Oleg Zikanov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2007
* USD 12,000.00

0338713&lt;br/&gt;Zikanov&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Oleg Zikanov and
students from the University of Michigan-Dearborn in a collaboration with Andre
Thess of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of
Ilmenau, Germany. The project will advance understanding of turbulent and
laminar flows of electrically conducting liquids affected by magnetic fields.
Primary attention will be paid to anisotropic manetohydrodynamic turbulence and
interface instability in shallow two-layer systems of electrically conducting
liquids. Those subjects are important for continuous casting of steel and
production of primary aluminum in the electrolytic reduction process. The
benefits of the collaborative activities stem from the coordination of moderate
and high magnetic field experiments in Ilmenau and high-performance direct
numerical simulation and large eddy simulation calculations in Dearborn. The
expected results include, numerical support for the design of experiments and
evaluation of measured results, and use of experimental data for verification of
numerical models and evaluation of empirical model constants. The international
dimension of the research will have significant impact on the research
environment at both institutions and will positively affect the career
development of junior faculties, post-doctoral researchers and students involved
in the project.&lt;br/&gt;