* 0338093
* U.S.-Australia Workshop on Strengthening Collaborations in High Performance Computing and Applications Research, October 2-4, 2003, Gold Coast, Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Robert Pennington, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 07/31/2004
* USD 44,592.00

0338093&lt;br/&gt;Nandkumar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of eleven US computer scientists and a graduate student in a
workshop with Australian counterparts to discuss desirable characteristics and
capabilities of Grid supercomputing and areas for future collaboration that will
benefit from these advanced capabilities. The co-organizers of the meeting are
Dr. Radha Nandkumar and Dr. Daniel Reed, Director of the National Center for
Supercomputer Applications (NCSA) located at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, and Dr. John O'Callaghan of the Australian National
University, who is Executive Director of the Australian Partnership for Advanced
Computing (APAC.) The workshop will be held following the annual meeting of APAC
in Queensland, Australia, which will be attended by representatives of all
significant supercomputer user groups among Australian academic institutions as
well as the CSIRO. The U.S. participants will come from the NCSA and other NSF
TerraGrid sites. Australia has recently begun a Grid initiative. This workshop
provides the opportunity to define future complementary development activities
that will ensure that the grid infrastructures being built in the U.S. and
Australia can support and provide a testing ground for interoperability. It will
catalyze joint projects and demonstrations and enhance the benefits of grid
computing by sharing and integrating the intellectual resources of the two
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
important outcome of the workshop will be to strengthen connections among the
supercomputer and grid users of Australia and the U.S. This stronger
relationship will facilitate international research opportunities for graduate
students and postdoctoral/early career scientists of the two countries. It will
also leverage the expertise of the two research communities to promote the
solution of complex truly global scale problems in a variety of scientific and
engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;