* 0338283
* Track 1, GK-12: Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12 Optics and Photonics Education
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Eli Duryea, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,824,991.00

The faculty of the School of Engineering, the College of Arts and Sciences, and
the College of Education at the University of New Mexico, in partnership with
the Albuquerque Public Schools, are jointly implementing a Track 1 Graduate
Teaching Fellows in K-12 Optics and Photonics Education program with the
objective of improving math, science and engineering education at the 6-12 level
by capitalizing on the unique existing strengths in optical science and
engineering education, research and training in New Mexico, emphasizing the
interdisciplinary field of modern optics and photonics.

The intellectual merit of this program is seen in its response to increasing
local needs for qualified technicians, educators, engineers, and scientists in
the fields of optics and photonics. In addition the project provides advanced
and innovative inquiry-based science and math education for K-12 students,
through the integration of specific optics and photonics topics into their
studies of science and mathematics.

The broader impacts of this program are reflected in the benefits accruing to
each of the participants. Specifically, the K-12 students gain increased
knowledge of optics and interact with scientists and engineers; the K-12
students and the GK-12 Fellows improve their communications skills; the
participating K-12 teachers become better qualified in a variety of STEM topics
and have access to more educational resources; schools gain a better-qualified
teacher workforce and higher student achievement scores. University benefits
include enhanced collaborations among the various colleges involved, recruitment
incentives attracting high quality graduate students, and a better prepared
freshman population.

This project is receiving partial support from the Directorate for Engineering.
Title: Track 1, GK-12: Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12 Optics and Photonics
Education Institution: University of New Mexico PI/Co-PI: Charles B. Fleddermann
(PI), Elias J. Duryea and M. Elizabeth Everitt (Co-PIs) Partner School
Districts: Albuquerque Public Schools Number of Fellows per Year: 10 graduate
students Target Audience: K-12 students Setting: Urban NSF Supported
Disciplines: Engineering, mathematics, physical sciences, biology and chemistry