* 0338442
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Study of the Liquid Immiscibility of Core Materials at High Pressure and Temperature
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 09/30/2007
* USD 7,500.00

0338442&lt;br/&gt;Fei&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award supports
U.S.-France cooperative research on the evolution of liquid immiscibility of
materials at high pressure and temperature in the Earth's core. The U.S.
investigator, Yingwei Fei of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, and French
investigator, Chrystele Sanloup of the Universite Pierre et Marie Curie in
Paris, will investigate iron systems through multi-anvil experiments by in situ
measurements of density and structure of liquids. The in situ measurements will
take place at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) in Grenoble,
France. The proposed research is aimed at understanding differentiation of the
Earth and the composition and structure of its liquid core. The results will
advance understanding on the origin of the magnetic field and impact research in
petrology, mineral physics, geochemistry, seismology and geodynamics. The
project takes advantage of access to unique facilities in France and x-ray
techniques utilized by the French investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS) jointly support this project. NSF provides funding for
visits to France by the U.S. investigator. The CNRS will cover the costs of the
French investigator's travel to the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;