* 0338121
* Collaborative Research:     The Biogeochemistry of Dissolved Organic Matter in Pony Lake, Ross Island
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Penney Miller, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 05/31/2008
* USD 83,509.00

Dissolved organic matter (DOM) is a significant chemical component in aquatic
systems because it acts as an important carbon source for microorganisms,
absorbs harmful radiation in sunlight, is able to complex metals, and can
participate in important biogeochemical reactions. This study will investigate
the biogeochemical cycling of DOM in a small coastal Antarctic pond, Pony Lake,
located on Cape Royds, Ross Island. Because there are no higher plants present
at this site all of the DOM in this lake is derived from microorganisms. Thus,
Pony Lake is an ideal site to study the effect of physical, chemical, and
microbial processes on the composition and character of the DOM pool. Finally,
Pony Lake is also an ideal site to collect an International Humic Substances
Society (IHSS) fulvic acid standard. Unlike other IHSS standards, this standard
will not contain DOM components derived from higher land plants. To better
understand the role of physical influences, the project will study the changes
in the DOM pool as the lake evolves from ice-covered to ice-free conditions
during the summer, as well as the relationship of DOM to the observed turnover
of dominant microbial communities in the lake. Scientists will also monitor
changes in microbial abundance, diversity, and productivity that may occur
during the ice to open-water transition period. This research will provide much
needed information regarding the relationship between microbial diversity and
DOM biogeochemistry. Middle school science students will be active participants
in this project through the Internet, while scientists are in the field, and in
the lab.