* 0338195
* Time/space Patterns of Microsatellite DNA Variation in Relation to Patch Structure of Southern Ocean Krill, Euphausia Superba
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Ann Bucklin, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 01/31/2006
* USD 211,465.00

The proposed study will use genetic markers to examine population genetic
diversity and structure of the Southern Ocean krill, Euphausia superba
(Crustacea, Euphausiacea). This effort builds upon previous work by one of the
project participants to develop these genetic markers and the appropriate
protocols for E. superba. Molecular genetic analysis is planned for archived
samples collected during Southern Ocean cruises to the Western Antarctic
Peninsula (WAP) during 2001 and 2002. Temporal and spatial patterns of genetic
diversity and structure will be described in the context of krill swarms,
bathymetry of the collection region, and mesoscale ocean circulation. Specimens
of E. superba will be identified from alcohol-preserved zooplankton samples.
Krill from different cruises and diverse regions of the sampled domain will be
used to screen 20 to 40 genetic markers to determine levels of genetic
differences between krill collected in different regions and at different times
of the year in the Southern Ocean. The long-term goal of this effort is to
contribute to our understanding of the population dynamic processes determining
recruitment and maintenance of Southern Ocean krill. Broader impacts for this
effort include training of an undergraduate student; international collaboration
in research and education with researchers and students in Europe; and new
understanding of the genetic architecture of a pivotal species in a polar
ecosystem that is likely to be impacted by global change.