* 0338354
* Catalysts for Reform: a university - schools partnership in northwest Washington
* EHR,DGE
* 06/15/2004,11/30/2008
* Gisele Muller-Parker, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 11/30/2008
* USD 1,908,627.00

Title: Catalysts for Reform: a university.schools partnership in northwest
Washington Institution: Western Washington University PI: Dr. Scott Linneman
(WWU Geology and Science Education) Co-PI: Ms. Sandra Austin (Nooksack Valley
School District); Ms. Susan Bergman (Mount Vernon School District); Dr.
Alejandro Acevedo-Gutierrez (WWU Biology and Science Education); Dr. Gisele
Muller-Parker (WWU Biology) Number of Fellows/year: 9 Graduate and 4 Advanced
Undergraduate School District Partners: Bellingham School District, Lummi Tribal
School, Mount Vernon School District, Nooksack Valley School District Target
Grade Band: Middle School (Grades 7 and 8) Setting: Rural NSF Supported
Disciplines Involved: Biology, Chemistry, Geology, and Physics Narrative
Summary: Catalysts for Reform will partner nine science graduate students, four
advanced undergraduates, and eight science faculty from Western Washington
University with 25 middle school science teachers from four neighboring school
districts to improve learning in middle school science among diverse student
populations.

Intellectual Merit: Catalysts for Reform will explore how to best use masters-
level graduate students and advanced undergraduates from biology, chemistry,
geology, and physics/astronomy departments to achieve improved middle school
science teaching and learning through support of systemic reform. The thinking
to Learn. Institute model will be evaluated as a means to provide university
disciplinary students with research-based teaching strategies through careful
research protocols. The impact of the institutes and workshops on pedagogical
content knowledge on teacher knowledge and practice, curriculum selection and
implementation, and ultimately on middle school student science performance will
also be studied.

Broader Impacts: The project will provide a national example of how graduate and
advanced undergraduate students from multiple disciplines in a master.s degree
granting regional university can acquire and apply research-based teaching
strategies. Participants will have a systemic impact resulting in improved
middle school student science learning and teacher content and pedagogical
knowledge and practice in schools with high populations of Native American and
Hispanic children. As a result of involvement of science faculty, the project
will have a sustainable impact on undergraduate and graduate science teaching
and learning. The Thinking to Learn. Institute, which will be embedded into the
graduate science curriculum, is an innovative and replicable model for all
higher education institutions. This project is receiving partial support from
funds from the Directorate of Geosciences.