* 0338817
* A Problem-focused Research Agenda for the Highway Transportation Infrastructure: A Holistic Systems Identification and Integration by Using Field Test-sites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Dan Frangopol, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 06/30/2004
* USD 34,990.00

PI: Emin Aktan, Drexel University

The advantages which are inherent in the management of the entire highway
transportation infrastructure as one integrated hyper-system based on the
principles of integrated asset management has been articulated by the FHWA as
well as the NSF. Currently, both the FHWA and the NSF are very interested in
synergistic research and technology demonstration programs that would advance
the states-of-the-art and practice of the engineering and management of
infrastructure systems. These two agencies offer a set of complementary
resources that would very much enhance the Nation's capabilities for scientific
research and demonstrations to advance the engineering and management of
infrastructures.

The challenge is to understand, conceptualize and frame the problem, and
articulate the critical issues and their possible resolutions clearly. We need
to bring together an expert community representing the broad spectrum of
stakeholders and reach consensus on the definitions, issues and their possible
resolutions. Then we may formulate, sponsor and execute research and
demonstrations on actual operating or decommissioned infrastructures to test
these resolutions. This proposal submitted to the NSF envisions bringing a group
of multi-disciplinary experts to discuss and frame the problem and articulate
the issues.