* 0338406
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Development of Technologies for Heavy Metal Remediation of Mine Tailings in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Allen Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robb M. Winter
* 07/31/2007
* USD 31,100.00

0338406&lt;br/&gt;Davis, University of Maryland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Allen P. Davis, Director of the Maryland Water Resources Research Center of the
University of Maryland proposes to collaborate in environmental remediation
research with Dr. Kyoung-Woong Kim of the Kwangju Institute of Science and
Technology. The detailed research investigation will be funded through the
Korean side via a companion KOSEF proposal. This NSF proposal requests support
for travel to Korea by the U.S. team and some laboratory supplies. The goal of
their research is to develop advanced mine tailings characterization techniques
and remediation technologies for the removal and/or stabilization of heavy
metals and arsenic in contaminated mine materials at several abandoned mine
sites in Korea. As part of the project, four U.S. students (2 each for 2
summers) will travel to Korea to learn first hand about mine tailings
characterization and remediation technologies, but also to be exposed to the
environmental problems, research, and approaches to solutions in Korea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will provide information
about tailing characteristics and factors affecting the behaviors of metals and
arsenic in the tailings. Both metals-removal and stabilization technologies will
be advanced through fundamental laboratory and pilot investigations on
characterization, monitoring, and remediation of soils and mine tailings.
Collaboration between Dr. Kim and co-workers in Korea, together with Dr. Davis
and his students, creates a unique team to address the mine tailings problem and
for information exchange. Dr. Davis is an engineer with experience in heavy
metals chemistry, while Dr. Kim is a geochemist whose recent work has involved
new biomarker techniques to quantify metal contamination in soils and to monitor
the progress of remediation and stabilization processes. Work will be done at
both the University of Maryland, with excellent access to laboratory and
instrumentation facilities, and in Korea, where the investigators will have
easier access to mine tailings and a regulatory environment that will permit the
necessary field studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Benefits to both
the U.S. and Korean teams include learning new analysis and remediation
techniques and gaining experience with different instrumentation. This
experience will broaden the global understanding of environmental issues of all
participants, but particularly the U.S. student participants. A special effort
will be made to attract students from underrepresented groups to this project,
primarily through personal contact with other faculty members at the University
of Maryland and at local Historically Black Institutions. Both the PI and the
Korean counterpart have excellent records in dissemination of results through
conferences, refereed venues, and web sites. Nonetheless, the greatest benefit
of this work may be the reduction of heavy metals and arsenic levels in
agricultural areas near the abandoned metal mines in Korea that will be studied.
This has been a significant environmental problem in Korea since local
populations are being directly exposed to the contamination. The results of this
work will reduce the metal toxicity risk to those local exposed
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;