* 0338856
* SP:  Collaborative Research:  Safari:  A Scalable Architecture for Ad Hoc Networking and Services
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* David Johnson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,450,781.00

Within little more than a decade, digital information and the Internet have
assumed a critical role in virtually all sectors of society, including
education, commerce, science, government, and entertainment. However, today's
Internet is dependent on wired or cellular wireless infrastructure. This
dependence limits the reach of digital communication to regions of the world
where the required infrastructure is technically and economically feasible; at
the same time, it renders the network vulnerable to disasters and attacks that
threaten this fixed infrastructure. This proposal aims to develop technologies
to reduce the dependence of digital communication on wired and cellular wireless
infrastructure, thus extending its reach into underdeveloped parts of the world
and economically disadvantaged part of society and increasing its resilience to
natural disasters, acts of war, or terror attacks on its physical
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;The work exploits synergies between two areas of
research that have enjoyed dramatic advances in recent years, but have to date
mostly worked independently: (1) ad hoc networking, and (2) decentralized, self-
organizing distributed systems. They have assembled a team of experts in each of
these areas that will jointly tackle the major technical challenges towards a
network architecture that exploits infrastructure when it is available but does
not depend on it:&lt;br/&gt;Self-organizing network hierarchy: Will develop a
novel, self-organizing buoy protocol that recursively subdivides the network
into an adaptive, proximity-based hierarchy of cells. The cell hierarchy
provides the foundation for scalable routing and provides a low-overhead,
proximity-based overlay structure that can be used to support network services.
Periodic broadcasts from buoy nodes in each cell efficiently disseminate
aggregated location, addressing, and routing information. Scalable ad hoc
network routing: Based on the buoy protocol, they will develop an ad hoc network
routing architecture for mobile and stationary devices that scales to at least
tens of thousands of nodes. Nodes maintain only a small amount of routing state
that is logarithmic in the size of the network, in exchange for a slightly
longer route length. Nodes maintain their routing state passively by listening
to buoy broadcasts, which results in very low routing overhead. The per-node
space and message requirements of the protocol grow at most logarithmically with
the size of the network. &lt;br/&gt;Self-organizing network services: The
proposers plan to develop self-organizing, robust, and secure network services
that exploit the hierarchical overlay structure of the buoy protocol. Basic
naming, host configuration and network time services will ensure the operation
of the network in the absence of fixed infrastructure servers that provide
conventional DNS, DHCP and NTP services. Other self-organizing services will
provide email, instant messaging, storage, and content distribution in the
absence of a server infrastructure, manual administration, high-capacity
backbones or trusted entities. Our approach builds on foundations from p2p
systems, but takes advantage of the hierarchical, proximity-based low overhead
overlay structure provided by the buoy protocol to provide a solution suitable
for ad hoc wireless environments.&lt;br/&gt;Integrated ad hoc network
architecture: The proposers plan to develop a network architecture that will
integrate wired and wire-less networks, infrastructure-based, and self-
organizing services. The architecture takes advantage of existing infrastructure
when and where available, without depending on its presence. In the wake of a
disaster, the architecture will allow remaining islands of surviving
infrastructure to self-organize jointly with wireless, mobile components to
recover and resume connectivity and emergency network services. Similarly, the
architecture will allow the integration of islands of wired infrastructure via
wireless ad hoc communication in developing countries.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of this work include the development of the science and
technology to meet these challenges; they will evaluate theoretical results,
algorithms and protocols through analysis, simulation, and experimental
evaluation of prototype implementations; disseminate the results via
publications, industrial collaborations, and student training; and to distribute
software artifacts for evaluation and use by industry and the research
community. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work include the development
of technologies that will substantially increase the&lt;br/&gt;resilience of
digital networks to physical disasters or attacks and that will extend its reach
into economically disadvantaged parts of society and underdeveloped parts of the
world. Educational impacts include the training of students and research
personnel and outreach to educational institutions not historically involved in
research.