* 0338743
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:   Center Manifolds and Stability of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Yuri Latushkin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 24,000.00

0338743&lt;br/&gt;Latushkin&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Yuri Latushkin and
students from the University Missouri-Columbia in a collaboration with Jan
Pruess of the Department of Mathematics and Informatics at the University of
Halle-Wittenberg, Germany. The topic of the proposal is an interplay of several
fields: applied partial differential equations, infinite dimensional dynamical
systems, theory of evolution equations and semigroups of linear operators,
operator spectral theory, and harmonic analysis. The funded research will add to
our understanding of the existence of invariant manifolds for nonlinear partial
differential equations and to the spectral theory of semigroups of linear
operators generated by the linearization of the nonlinear equations about steady
states. A concommitant goal of the current project is to involve a group of
postdocs and graduate students at the University of Missouri-Columbia and the
University of Halle in collaborative projects in mathematics (modern analysis
and applied partial differential equations) conducted by the senior
investigators on both sides. Funding will enable several graduate students at
the University of Missouri to participate in the International Internet Seminar.
The results of this project will be reported to and discussed with researchers
at Brown University, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, University of Minnesota, University of Texas-Austin,
University of Memphis, Georgia Institute of Technology, Michigan State,
University of Tuebingen, University of Karlsruhe, University of Ulm, and many
other scientific centers, and will be published in central mathematical
journals.&lt;br/&gt;