* 0338476
* Advances in Biotechnology and Their Potential Applications
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Eileen Choffnes, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 06/30/2006
* USD 760,668.00

The risks posed by bioterrorism and the proliferation of biological weapons
capabilities have increased concern about how the rapid advances in genetic
engineering and biotechnology could enable the production of biological weapons
with unique and unpredictable characteristics. A new study by an Ad Hoc
Committee of the National Research Council, will examine current trends and
future objectives of research in public health, life sciences, and biomedical
science that contain applications relevant to developments in biological weapons
5 to 15 years into the future and ways to anticipate, identify and mitigate
these dangers. This Committee of the National Research Council will explore
issues surrounding the "dual use" applications of biotechnology and genetic
engineering data. The "dual" nature of biotechnology is evident in the
scientific literature. For example, an Australian research group attempted to
sterilize mice by immunizing them against an important reproductive protein. In
order to do so, this protein was inserted into the poxvirus genome to produce
the antigen in the mice. A gene for interleukin 4 (IL-4) was also inserted into
this poxvirus vector, as IL-4 is known to enhance antibody formation. Although
the original intent was simply to sterilize the mice, the researchers found that
the engineered poxvirus construct was more virulent. The construct resulted in
the death of genetically resistant, vaccine-protected, and wild-type mice. This
example illustrates the current potential, through biotechnology, to enhance the
potency of disease-causing agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop
and subsequent report will enhance our understanding of the national security
implications of advances in biotechnology and other technological disciplines to
generate information that can simultaneously enhance and harm the human
condition 5 to 15 years into the future. A diverse community, including the
scientific, national security, public policy, risk management and public health
communities will benefit from the dialogue generated from the public workshop.
The Committee consensus reports generated by this activity will be used to
stimulate and inform response capabilities to future threats both domestically
and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;