* 0338750
* SP:  Very Fine-Grained Proximity Addressing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Paul Francis, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 496,421.00

Today host computer systems attached to the Internet have two basic identifiers:
the IP address and the Domain Name. Neither identifier reliably indicates how
systems are "positioned" in the Internet with respect to each other. Two IP
addresses or Domain Names may be very similar, and yet the two systems they
represent may be far apart in terms of latency or throughput. This lack of a
proximity "address" is a serious limitation of the Internet architecture.

There have been several research projects to address this limitation. The
pioneering work in this area was IDMaps, which proposed an infrastructure
service that could answer queries about proximity between pairs of IP addresses.
A subsequent advancement proposed using Global Network Positioning (GNP)a
proximity address formed from a Cartesian coordinate system super-imposed on the
Internet.

The primary shortcoming of these and other approaches is that they operate only
at course granularity. At less than 50ms latency (a typical east-to-west coast
latency!), over-estimates of 200% and 300% are common. This is entirely
inadequate for applications such as networked first person shooter games and
tightly-coupled grid computing applications, both of which require latencies
well below 50ms. Data intensive grid computing applications and peer-to-peer
applications like file sharing would reduce network load significantly if
participants in the same campus network or ISP could find each other. Another
shortcoming of existing approaches is that they typically require that dedicated
infrastructure be deployed. While this is feasible for private corporations like
Akamai, there exists no known business model for a common public proximity
service.

This project will design and implement a system for calculating proximity
addresses at very-fine granularity (microsecond latencies and gigabit
throughputs) and at global scale. By necessity this system will be distributed
(peer-to-peer), requiring that all nodes be able to serve as "reference points"
in the coordinate system. This is because it is impossible to represent
microsecond latencies unless the reference points are within microseconds. The
existence of a global fine-grained hierarchical proximity address, however,
presents other tantalizing possibilities. For instance, such an address could be
used as the basis for building a new type of routing overlay, which could then
be used as a peer-to-peer discovery mechanism.

This project presents significant new intellectual challenges comparable to
those in network routing required to move from flat addressing to hierarchical
addressing. The research team plans to design new forms of proximity addressing
that are hierarchical rather than flat, that do not focus load on a few systems,
and that are simple enough that they can be auto-configured. The researchers
also must design new types of P2P networks that are customized for the problem
of configuring proximity addresses. These P2P networks must be simpler than
current networks so that they can truly scale to global proportion even in the
face of churn (nodes joining and leaving). This project is expected to produce
broad intellectual results in the structure of hierarchical proximity addresses
and how they relate to network metrics, as well as in how to build very large
and simple peer-to-peer networks.

This project will have two forms of impact. First, any distributed application
that dynamically discovers participants, and requires that participants be
nearby, will benefit from very-fine grained proximity addresses. Such
applications include networked games and Grid computing. Indeed the improvements
in granularity may enable the creation of new applications. Second, the advances
in peer-to-peer networking required for this project may serve as the basis for
other types of peer-to- peer applications. Specifically, any peer-to-peer
application that requires the discovery of nodes that can serve a certain role
(i.e., act as reference points) will benefit from the advances in scale and
efficiency required for this project.