* 0338271
* Collaborative Research:    West Antarctic Ice Sheet Stability:   The Glacial Geologic Record from the Ohio Range of the Horlick Mountains in the Bottleneck
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 07/31/2007
* USD 160,671.00

This award supports a project to document former high stands and assess the
stability of the West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS) at the Ohio Range near the head
of Mercer Ice Stream (formerly Ice Stream A). The field location is situated in
the "Bottleneck", a unique, relatively narrow passage in the Transantarctic
Mountains connecting the West and East Antarctic ice sheets. The location lies
near the ice divide and is thus well situated to determine past interior ice
elevation. The research will involve geologic mapping of glacial deposits and
erosion features combined with cosmogenic surface exposure dating on the Ohio
Range nunataks to determine the chronology of past higher ice sheet levels and
local glacier fluctuations. Exposure ages of fresh glacial erratics, up to 60 m
above the present ice level will be used to constrain the timing of the last
high stand and subsequent draw down of the WAIS in this sector. Exposure ages of
debris bands on the ice sheet surface will constrain the duration of continuous
ice cover near the present elevation. A complimentary local proxy climate record
will also be obtained from a chronology of the local glacier moraines. Data
obtained from the proposed research will contribute to the development of time-
dependent, non-equilibrium models of the WAIS, at and since the last glacial
maximum 20,000 years ago, a major objective of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
Initiative. Age control on ice sheet elevation from this key location, near the
head of the Mercer Ice Stream, will complete chronologic coverage extending from
the ice age terminus in the Ross Sea, through McMurdo Sound and the southern
Transantarctic Mountains, to the onset area near the ice divide. In addition,
the glacial geologic record in the Bottleneck will reflect the history of the
interaction of WAIS and EAIS, which could be used to test hypotheses of
Pleistocene collapse of the WAIS. The future behavior of the WAIS is of
significant interest to society because of its linkage to sea level. Melting of
Antarctic ice sheets would raise sea levels, negatively impacting the large
portion of the human population living near the world's coasts. The research is
designed to provide necessary data on the past history of the WAIS to the ice
sheet modeling community in order to accurately predict the future behavior of
the ice sheet. In addition, the proposed research incorporates both graduate and
undergraduate student education and involves them in research with goals that
are of societal significance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;