* 0339735
* US-France Cooperative Research: Controlled Optoelectronic Properties of Hybrid Dioxythiophene Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* John Reynolds, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2007
* USD 18,000.00

0339735&lt;br/&gt;Reynolds&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research project, the research groups of John Reynolds at the
University of Florida, and Pierre Audebert at the Ecole Normale Superieure-
Cachan will investigate the development of new dioxyheterocycle-based hybrid
conjugated polymers. The U.S. team has expertise in the dioxythiophene and
dioxypyrrole polymer systems. This is complemented by French specialization in
tetrazine, triazine, and cyclophane systems. The goals are to study the
optoelectronic and redox properties of these polymer systems. Four properties,
which may have special impact, are targeted: n-Type doping, multi-color
electrochromism, combined electrochromic/photochromic materials, and controlled
luminescence. Instrumentation for photochromic and fluorescence experiments is
available in the French laboratory. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance our understanding in polymer design and has potential to lead to new
electrochromic/photochromic materials with applications in optics and
electronics. U.S. students will be trained in international research and have
the opportunity to establish early on in their careers international research
connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
(CNRS). NSF provides funds for visits to France by the investigators and
graduate students. The CNRS will support visits to the United States by the
French team.&lt;br/&gt;