* 0339070
* Transition to Middle School: Changes in Aggression, Popularity, and Peer Social Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Hongling Xie, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

During the transition to middle school, youth make significant adjustments to
changes in school context and peer culture. It is reported that aggression and
deviance become more accepted in middle school peer groups, while good classroom
behaviors become less valued. Such changes in peer attraction and acceptance are
likely to influence middle school students' social orientation and educational
aspirations. This transition is also related to increased levels of social
aggression and victimization (e.g., gossip, alienation, backbiting). The primary
purpose of this project is to examine youth's social experience in peer groups
during the transition to middle school. Specifically, we are interested in how
changes in peer social dynamics may affect youth's use of various forms of
aggression and their experience of victimization (physical, verbal, and social)
in school. Approximately 450 children will be followed from the spring of 5th
grade to the spring of 7th grade. Data collection regarding children's
friendships and peer social networks, their experiences with aggression and
victimization, their opinions about themselves, and their perceptions of peer
culture at school will occur in each semester. Analyses will determine changes
in youth's aggression and victimization, and how peer social relations and peer
culture may contribute to such changes. This research will generate fresh
information on the dynamic interplay between various forms of aggression and
peer social processes. Traditional research and intervention efforts have been
focused on physical or verbal aggression at school. Research shows that middle
school students frequently experience social aggression, and that victimization
is detrimental to children's learning and social/emotional development. The
findings from this study will be extremely informative to the development of
comprehensive and effective prevention programs targeting multiple forms of
aggression and victimization at school. Such programs have the potential to
reduce school violence and enhance students' behavioral and academic
performance.