* 0339049
* SBIR Phase I:    Innovative and Cost-Effective Packaging Technology for Nanoblock IC-Based Microelectronic Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Michael Renn, Optomec Design Company
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,818.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the feasibility of using Optomec's Maskless Mesoscale Materials
Deposition (M3DTM) technology for packaging NanoBlockTM IC-based microelectronic
devices. The assembly of microelectronic systems based on NanoBlockTM ICs
presents a number of unique challenges. Unlike the traditional packaging
technology in which the electronic components are assembled to a board with pre-
printed circuitry, the NanoBlockTM IC-based assembly involves the creation of
patterned interconnect structures, not before but, after the ICs are assembled.
These interconnects are currently produced by using complex and costly thin film
and lithography methods, which are environmentally unfriendly, inflexible,
require a highly skilled workforce, and significant capital investment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Phase I project is to demonstrate
the feasibility of using the M3DTM process for packaging NanoBlockTM IC-based
microelectronic devices. M3DTM is an additive process, which deposits a wide
variety of materials onto low-temperature substrates without masks or other
thin-film equipment. The material is deposited and patterned by an aerosol
micro-jet and then laser sintered to achieve properties near that of the bulk
material. The research will involve formulation of the deposited materials,
optimization of process parameters, and characterization of the electrical
properties and geometrical features of deposited materials. The successful
implementation of the M3DTM technology for packaging NanoBlockTM -based
microelectronic systems would greatly expand the applications for NanoBlockTM
IC-based microelectronic devices due to the substantial cost reductions that
would be realized. The benefits of such a technology are vast and will allow a
dramatic reduction in production cost and time, while being able to perform
design iterations in a matter of minutes or hours, compared to the traditional
several weeks turn-around time for the conventional photoresist/mask process.
The electronics industry and defense sectors would benefit in several
applications areas including Radio Frequency Identity Devices (RFID), micro-
sensor systems, prototype development, and flexible displays. The significant
potential commercial impact of the project results from the fact that the global
shipments of RFID systems alone reached approximately $965 million in 2002. The
RFID market experienced roughly 8% compounded annual growth since 2000. The top-
ranked consumer products companies will need more than 550 billion smart tags
per year for tracking merchandise. The military applications for the NanoBlockTM
-based devices, especially micro-sensors, are also extensive. Another important
consideration is the environmental impact. The proposed technology provides
significant environmental benefits by eliminating the energy and water waste and
hazardous chemicals associated with traditional manufacturing methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;