* 0339955
* SBIR Phase I:      Automatic Extraction and Enforcement of Application-Specific Security Policy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Tzi-cker Chiueh, Rether Networks Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
Program semantics-Aware Intrusion Detection (PAID) system that derives a
security policy from an application's source code, and checks the application's
system calls against the resulting policy at run time. Not only can this product
derive these policies completely automatically, but also the resulting security
policy is tailored to individual applications and thus is highly accurate. Some
of the most dangerous cyber security threats are "control hijacking" attacks,
which hijack the control of a victim application, and execute arbitrary system
calls assuming the identity of the victim program's effective user. These types
of attacks are highly perilous because commercial applications with such
vulnerabilities appear to be wide spread, as shown in the rampancy of the recent
SQL Slammer Worm. System call monitoring has been touted as an effective
solution to "control hijacking" attacks because it could prevent remote
attackers from inflicting damage upon a victim system even if they can
successfully compromise applications running on the system. A weakness of this
approach is how to construct accurate security policy that could minimize false
positives and negatives. Although various approaches have been tried to solve
this problem, none of them is satisfactory. Host-based intrusion detection based
on system call monitoring, also referred to as behavioral blocking systems, is a
well known tend to err on the conservative or false positive side. The tool will
automatically derive accurate security policies corresponding to the system call
patterns of individual applications, thus reducing both false positives and
negatives to the minimum.

The PAID system represents a big step in closing the gap between current
behavioral blocking products and the actual needs of real world information
technology (IT) systems.