* 0339150
* EITM:  Firm-Specific Capital and the Secular Rise of Tobin's Q
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Boyan Jovanovic, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2009
* USD 225,948.00

The project studies the upward trend in stock market valuations of firms over
the last century. It assembles and analyzes a massive data set on firm balance
sheets and stock market valuations. These data are used to test and develop a
theory that rising stock market valuations are due to rising firm-specificity of
assets. A rising specificity of assets makes it easier to transfer more rents to
the owners of the firm. The rise of management in general and, more
specifically, the growing importance of the information processing role of
managers played a key role in this result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Market to book
value of firms (Tobin's Q) has risen a lot since 1980. The usual explanation is
an increase in the importance of intangible investments and organization
capital. These investments are not on the books of firms, and Q's are thereby
biased upwards. There are two reasons why intangibles are not likely to be the
whole story. First, the rise in Q's has happened within sectors and, in
particular, in manufacturing sectors. And, second, the rise is not a new-economy
phenomenon but is a century-long trend, and this includes the traditional
sectors. This project hypothesizes that some of the rise in Q's is due to a
steadily rising firm-specificity of assets. Evidence for rising specificity is a
dramatic reduction in labor turnover over the century, and a reduction in
entries and exits of firms that result in the dispersal of physical and human
assets.&lt;br/&gt;Like the intangibles hypothesis, this theory also implies that
as a percentage of the tangible capital stock earnings ought to have risen - and
they have by more than 60 percent since the late
1920's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But this project's model of the division of the
rents - based on auction theory - leads to a different test. The model will be
one in which a firm's profits depend on how efficiently its managers can procure
the human and physical capital that the firm specifically needs. The specificity
of the assets to the firm will mean that there will be a rent that is somehow
split between the firm and the factors in question. The test relies on the
cross-section variability of Q 's and the earnings to capital. These measure the
dispersion in firms' abilities to procure high quality assets at a low price. In
this model a rise in the dispersion of Q 's signals a rise in the specificity of
assets. The investigators estimate the model using macroeconomic time series on
profit rates, the skill premium, capital and labor inputs, and GDP from 1929 to
2001 and find that the data are consistent with increasing firm specificity of
capital. This project will improve the model and refine the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Wild swings in the market
can have a strong impact on the real economy, and so it is important to know if
the market is overvalued. This analysis shows that one part of the rise in the
market is warranted by fundamentals - in this case a rise in the shareholder's
portion of the firm's rents.&lt;br/&gt;