* 0339106
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of High Performance Ultraviolet Single Photon Detectors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Petre Alexandrov, United Silicon Carbide, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop and
commercialize very high gain and low noise UV single photon detectors for
numerous low signal intensity UV sensing over a very wide range of UV spectrum.
The novel design for low voltage and high efficiency and advanced processing
technologies combined with the unique material property used for the single
photon detectors are expected to lead to orders of magnitude improvements to the
performance of the UV single photon detectors. The single photon detectors are
expected to be capable of high speed, high gain, high efficiency, low noise and
high radiation tolerance. The single photon detectors overcome the major
problems of their counterparts based on other wide bandgap semiconductors in
terms of the excess noise, gain, and reliability. The project will develop a
process for designing the single photon detectors, and demonstrating the
feasibility by fabricating the proposed UV single photon detectors. The
fabricated single photon detectors will be characterized and their potential and
suitability for very low intensity light and single molecule detection will be
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will
result in UV single photon detectors with very high gain and very low excess
noise thus enabling numerous applications including biosensing, biological
warfare agent detection, single molecule detection, future photolithographic
systems, cryptography, astronomy, missile detection, lidar and radar as well as
basic quantum mechanics investigation.&lt;br/&gt;