* 0339854
* SBIR Phase I:  Use of a Visual Programming Environment to Promote Bioinformatics Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Maciek Sasinowski, INCOGEN INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project targets the need for a
visual programming environment in bioinformatics education. A bioinformatics
visual programming tool has never been implemented for classroom use and could
potentially revolutionize bioinformatics training at the undergraduate and
graduate levels. The work, which will be performed in collaboration with, and
under guidance of, science and education faculty, will leverage the existing
Visual Integrated Bioinformatics Environment (VIBE) software. Currently, there
exists a significant shortage of trained personnel with the necessary skill set
to extract knowledge and derive benefits from data generated in life science
research experiments. The shortage of bioinformaticists is due in a large part
to a lack of formal bioinformatics training programs at universities. The
current lack of formal bioinformatics training, training tools, and qualified
bioinformaticists creates a significant bottleneck in the discovery process
because it impairs the ability to fully exploit the vast amounts of data
produced at pharmaceutical and agricultural research companies as well as
government and academic laboratories.

The software will immediately address the existing shortage of bioinformatics
education tools and, as a result, will also address the downstream problem of
the dearth of qualified bioinformaticists. This project offers an efficient and
elegant approach to provide a partial solution to these significant problems.
The primary customers for the software are individual bioinformatics professors
and students, as well as entire departments and universities that offer a
bioinformatics degree. .