* 0339133
* EITM: Collaborative Proposal: Empirical Analysis of Matching Models
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Maristella Botticini, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2007
* USD 79,782.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO: 0339133 INSTITUTION: Boston University NSF PROGRAM: EMPIRICAL
IMPLICATIONS OF THEORETICAL MODELS PI: Botticini, Maristella TITLE:
COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL: Empirical Analysis of Matching Models

Recent research has derived estimable non-parametric transferable utility models
of the marriage market. One of the major goals of the empirical analysis of
matching models is to deal with endogeneity, measurement, and other problems.
Accounting for endogenous matching in the empirical analysis of contracts helps
explain the apparent clash between theoretical predictions on contracts and
empirical observations.

This research will extend the theoretical and empirical literature on matching
in three ways. First, it examines ways to empirically characterize bilateral
matching markets with heterogeneous participants. Choo and Siow (2003) provide
an empirical framework to estimate a transferable utility model of the marriage
market without observing the equilibrium transfers. This research will use a
unique dataset of about 2,700 marriage and dowry contracts for the city of
Florence and the villages in her countryside in the early fifteenth century to
empirically test this model. The research will also extend the CS model to allow
for dynamic behavior in marriage markets, thus making it possible to consider
important decisions made by prospective spouses, such as delaying marriage if
expected prospects in the future look better.

The second extension is to use traditional hedonic market models to study
marriage markets. Recent work has introduced econometric techniques for non-
parametric identification of preferences in hedonic markets. This non-parametric
identification is important since it ensures that empirical findings come from
information in the data rather than from arbitrary functional forms or
distributional assumptions. The research will apply these new techniques Italian
dataset on marriage and dowry contracts. In addition this research will extend
the hedonic methodology by allowing unobserved "traits", characteristics that
not only affect an individual's preferences over potential spouses, but also
potential spouses' preferences over the individual but not known to the
econometrician, in the econometric model.

Finally, the PIs will study the consequences of matching in marriage markets on
fertility and sex ratios by estimating a dynamic model of fertility. We will use
data on the number and gender of children born to the couples in the marriage
contracts described above. This approach allows the PIs to explain biased sex
ratios without appealing to infanticide or differential care for boys and girls.
The results of this research, together with the planned educational activities,
are likely to have a significant intellectual and broader impact on economic
science.