* 0339595
* US-Germany Cooperative Research: Mechanistic Investigation of the Ribosomal Peptidyl Transferase Reaction
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Scott Strobel, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2008
* USD 16,000.00

0339595&lt;br/&gt;Strobel&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Scott A. Strobel and
students from Yale University in a collaboration with Marina Rodnina of the
Institute for Physical Biochemistry at the University of Witten/Herdecke,
Germany. The focus of the collaborative research will be the catalytic mechanism
of the ribosomal peptidyl transferase reaction. Recent structural results from
ribosome crystallography have identified the location of the peptidyl
transferase center and suggested which rRNA bases are most likely to be involved
in catalysis. However, functional identification of catalytic groups by
quantitative measurements is lacking for a series of challenging technical
reasons. The collaboration between the German and US groups aims to solve these
problems by combining the technical expertise of the two research groups. The
mechanistic investigation will be undertaken by combining rapid kinetic methods
(German group) with the affinity purification of native ribosomal mutants, and
the use of new synthetic substrate analogues (US group). This award will also
facilitate interaction and collaboration between the young scientists in the two
research groups. The international experience will provide two graduate students
and one postdoctoral associate with a broader perspective of science and
culture. It will also help them to see their research projects in the expanded
context of an international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;