* 0339236
* SBIR Phase I:     SUMMiT VII -- A Seven Level Surface MEMS Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2004
* Jeffry Sniegowski, MEMX, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2004
* USD 96,901.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to enhance
the surface micromachining technology (the SUMMiT V technology) -- with an
additional structural and interconnect level. The resultant technology, SUMMiT
VII, should enable the monolithic fabrication of devices to address the most
difficult Micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) product requirements. The
primary technical challenge associated with the additional polysilicon and oxide
levels is the management and mitigation of stress in the films deposited on the
wafer. Left unchecked, this stress would lead to excessive wafer bow that could
affect the accuracy of subsequent lithography processes or make the wafers
impossible to handle with automated equipment. The goal of this research program
is to better understand and characterize the stress in the additional SUMMiT
levels during the fabrication process. A variety of techniques to mitigate this
stress will be analyzed to ensure SUMMiT VII devices can be built reliably and
uniquely positioned to complete this research program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging MEMS device requirements in fields like adaptive
optics and advanced tunable radio-frequency (RF) devices are starting to exceed
the capabilities of even the most sophisticated surface micromachining
technologies. The proposed transition to SUMMiT VII mirrors the progression of
integrated circuits and printed circuit boards, where the availability of
additional vertical levels permitted the design of smaller, cheaper devices with
even better performance and functionality. The incremental mechanical
sophistication of the new structural level in SUMMiT VII permits design
enhancements like flatter mirror surfaces, integrated particle and electrostatic
shields, and increased device robustness and reliability. The additional
interconnect level permits larger, denser arrays and removes many of the routing
constraints inherent in any single level interconnect scheme. SUMMiT VII should
permit the enhancement of existing MEMS application areas, but could also enable
solutions for product applications where current MEMS technologies simply fall
short. SUMMiT VII should enable a world-class solution in ophthalmic adaptive
optics, a MEMS market estimated at $20M per year. The annual market for high
performance tunable capacitors is estimated at $120M, part of a total RF MEMS
opportunity, which exceeds $1 billion annually.&lt;br/&gt;