* 0339068
* SBIR Phase I:  Assessing Status and Trends of Threatened Species from Uncertain Monitoring Data:  Methodology and Software
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2004
* H Akcakaya, Applied Biomathematics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 09/30/2004
* USD 99,974.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
and implement as software methods for entering, processing, and analyzing
monitoring data, which is one of the most basic forms of biological information
that comes from surveys, censuses, and other routine assessments. These methods
will use basic monitoring data to (1) assess the status and trends of the
monitored species at the population-level, and (2) estimate the input parameters
for the more advanced quantitative models, thereby increasing the use of these
models, which include population viability analysis models, habitat models and
other GIS-based methods, and quantitative risk criteria, such those used by the
World Conservation Union (IUCN) and the NatureServe. One of the major
innovations of the software will be its treatment of uncertainty. Ecological
data are often scarce and uncertain, including spatial and temporal variation,
measurement and sampling errors, and demographic variance. The methods to be
implemented in the software will account for this uncertainty and incorporate it
into the assessment of status and other outputs
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project will include
standardization of the monitoring process for a broad spectrum of species,
significantly reduced the cost of processing and analyzing monitoring data, and
increased use of advanced quantitative models and assessment methods in relation
to environmental issues. This will, in turn, increase the use of scientific
information in environmental decision-making and policy formulation. The methods
developed in this project will also allow incorporating data uncertainties in an
objective, transparent, and credible way, thereby providing scientifically
credible and sound summary of the status and trends of the species monitored.