* 0339877
* EITM:  Collaborative Research on Legislative Party Switching: Integrating Formal and Comparative Empirical Analyses
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Carol Mershon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Philip O. Paolino
* 08/31/2007
* USD 100,001.00

&lt;br/&gt;Party switching in legislatures is important. Recent US history
drives home the point. When&lt;br/&gt;Senator Jeffords left the Republican Party
in 2002 to serve in the Senate as an independent, he&lt;br/&gt;fundamentally
altered the policy-making landscape. In leaving the Republican Party and
handing&lt;br/&gt;control of the Senate to the Democrats, Jeffords transformed a
unified government into a divided&lt;br/&gt;government. The change in partisan
control of the Senate changed policy making and outcomes. His action thus
demonstrated the importance of political parties, even in the United States
where the two major parties often are seen as weak and essentially
indistinguishable from one another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit.
Political scientists of all stripes agree that parties are essential to
representative democracy. Parties organize legislatures, articulate choices,
aggregate preferences, and, above all, provide labels under which candidates vie
for public office. Scholars commonly examine such issues as the value of party
labels or party discipline for voters' decision making, but rarely ask how these
affect legislators' choices. Students of US politics debate the degree to which
parties condition legislators' voting, for example, but few have trained either
empirical or theoretical attention on such other aspects of legislative behavior
as the choice of party affiliation. Only a few formal models focus on
politicians' party switching. A more extensive but still limited empirical
literature, most of it divorced from formal research, examines legislators'
moves among parties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the causes
and consequences of party switching. It seeks to answer such&lt;br/&gt;questions
as Why would a legislator decide to change party affiliation? Under what
conditions would a party choose to accept a defector from another party? Most
broadly, what are the effects of party switching? Answers to these questions
will both illuminate party switching and advance our understanding of parties,
party discipline, and party systems. They also will advance understanding of how
interdependent, individual decisions interact to create a social dynamic. To
pursue this agenda, the project integrates formal and empirical approaches to
the study of politicians' choices of, and changes in, party affiliation. The co-
Principal Investigators will build a formal model of party switching, specify
the model's testable hypotheses, develop a research design for empirical
evaluation of those hypotheses, and conduct empirical tests of the model in
selected national settings. Their plans are animated by the conviction that the
key to fostering scientific progress in this area (and others) is to bridge the
chasm between formal and empirical analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plan of the
work. The co-PIs have successfully recruited ten prominent political scientists
in&lt;br/&gt;order to establish a Research Work Group on Party Switching. Group
members will propose and&lt;br/&gt;discuss refinements or alternatives to the
co-PIs' model, hypotheses, and research design. They also will assess the
empirical plausibility of the model, examining evidence from a wide range of
settings, including Brazil, Eastern Europe, Russia, Italy, Spain, the European
Parliament, the United States, and Japan. The Work Group will meet twice, in
summer 2004 and summer 2005. The co-PIs will make publicly available the Group's
datasets on the party affiliations of legislators and candidates as well as seek
to arrange publication of the Group's papers in a special issue of a refereed
journal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The co-PIs and the Group will
contribute to: (1) the dissemination of scholarly&lt;br/&gt;results (via
publication of journal articles and sharing of databases); (2) the enhancement
of research infrastructure (via scholarly collaboration across national
boundaries); (3) the teaching and training of graduate students (discussion with
graduate students will be an integral part of the Group's meetings); and (4) the
broadening of participation of underrepresented groups (women constitute one-
third of the Research Work Group). We have no plans directly to undertake
undergraduate curriculum development as part of this project, but we believe it
can and should have (5) substantial indirect impact on undergraduate education.
For example, the flurry of media attention to the causes and consequences of
Jeffords's move made it clear that party switching is a puzzle. This project
should help scholars better understand party switching as a general phenomenon.
They then can better teach their students why, when, and how choices of party
affiliation and, by implication, parties matter. &lt;br/&gt;