* 0339263
* SBIR Phase I:     Chart Explainer:     Automatically Generating Natural Language Descriptions of Charts and Tables
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Ted Caldwell, CoGenTex, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,955.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
problem of information accessibility by creating an innovative Chart Explainer,
a generic natural language generation program which automatically composes
fluent textual summaries and annotations of graphical and tabular information.
The introduction of this new tool will enhance access to information for both
specialized and general audiences. Self-sufficient textual summaries of charts
and tables will make the information displayed in them Web-accessible to
visually impaired people via existing text-to-speech tools. For sighted
audiences, textual annotations will be slightly different, and serve more to
complement what is easily viewed in charts and tables, summarizing and
highlighting salient facts and trends. In addition, automatic production of
summary text will make graphical and tabular information accessible to all
audiences by phone CoGenTex envisions Chart Explainer to have a profound and
beneficial impact in the information accessibility area, making graphical and
tabular information Web-accessible to visually impaired people. Chapter 508 of
the Federal Disability Act mandates that all the graphical and tabular
information on the government Web sites be accessible to visually impaired
people. Currently, Web accessibility to tables for the visually impaired is
implemented by XML tagging of table cells, which are then read by the page
reader devices. Web accessibility to charts is implemented using a list of data
points on the chart. In both cases, the information is delivered in a very
inconvenient, fragmentary way, which makes its integration and understanding
difficult. In contrast, Chart Explainer will deliver graphical and tabular
information in a much more natural way, conveniently summarizing it and
highlighting its salient characteristics. For a general audience, the
substantial impact will be in enabling phone accessibility to such information,
as well as in enhancing understandability of charts and tables by providing
annotations to them, which highlight salient facts and summarize the rest. Both
these features will have a substantial impact on the applications in the
business intelligence area, in particular, on corporate scorecarding, which
commonly uses graphical displays of various kinds.