* 0339096
* EITM: Recognizing, Modeling, and Simulating Coupled Processes in Dyadic Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* William Griffin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2007
* USD 107,664.00

There is a substantial literature showing the correspondence between the quality
of relationships within a family and the incidence of physical and psychological
maladies among its members. This study addresses two fundamental questions:
"What patterned behaviors between family members, either adults or adults with
their children, are associated with relationship quality" and "Can these
patterns be quantified sufficient to be reproduced in computer simulations?" Our
research efforts to answer these questions are organized in four steps. First,
we use existing observational data collected from the behavioral interactions of
married couples to determine which behavioral clusters-their timing and flow-in
the interaction are most associated with the quality of the relationship.
Second, we then use these extracted behavior sets to construct pattern
recognition software (e.g., Hidden Markov Models) to discriminate distressed
from non-distressed relationships. Third, the discriminating patterns then
become the blueprint for constructing computer simulations of dyadic
interaction; we will develop computer simulations that reproduce the sequencing
of patterns seen in distressed and non-distressed married couples. Finally,
using existing data, we will apply the developed methodology of pattern
extraction and computer simulation to behaviors observed in parent-child
interactions. The broader impacts of this research are twofold: first, by
utilizing pattern recognition technology, we advance the state of the art for
quantifying observational data of human interaction, and second, the
classification of patterns and testing via computer simulation is the first step
in developing a computer-based recognition system for identifying at-risk
populations.