* 0339108
* NSF/USDOT Collaborative Proposal:    Methodology for Calibration and Validation of Traffic Simulation Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Haris Koutsopoulos, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Edward John Jaselskis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 74,999.00

Traffic simulation is a critical methodology for the analysis of complex
transportation systems and evaluation of new technologies and concepts. Modern
traffic simulation tools are a synthesis of a number of individual models,
interacting in complex ways. These models capture traffic dynamics and network
performance on one hand, and travel behavior on the other. Despite the
importance of traffic simulation models, both in research and practice,
systematic procedures for their calibration and validation are very limited. The
objective of this research is to develop the basis for scientific and rigorous
approaches to the calibration and validation of traffic simulation models using
readily available data, e.g., loop detector counts, speeds, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The calibration and validation approaches to be developed
recognize the aggregate nature of the available data (which makes the error
associated with various components of the simulation model difficult to
isolate); and the complex, large-scale nature of the applications. The research
builds the required methodological foundations from diverse fields such as,
stochastic optimization, statistics, traffic flow theory, and travel behavior
and uses empirical analysis to provide support for theoretical developments.
Important activities of the research include: &lt;br/&gt;Development of a
rigorous modeling framework for calibration and
validation.&lt;br/&gt;Exploration of algorithmic and computational aspects of
the proposed solution approaches.&lt;br/&gt;Identification of appropriate
statistical validation techniques, applicable to the type of data available for
validation of traffic simulation models and consistent with the characteristics
and properties of the measures of performance of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;Identification of long-term research directions that will
eventually lead to practical tools for calibration and
validation.&lt;br/&gt;Empirical analysis to assess the validity of the proposed
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the research will
have important broader impacts. Without appropriate validation and calibration,
conclusions regarding new systems and designs can be erroneous with serious
consequences in terms of deployment cost and time, and overall assessment of
their value. Improvements in the accuracy of traffic simulators and the validity
of the conclusions reached through simulation will result in the minimization of
the risk involved in the deployment of new technologies and the development of
appropriate risk mitigation strategies and better utilization of available
resources. Case studies will be developed. The research results will be
disseminated through scholarly journals, seminars and conferences as well as
through a web page. The results will also be integrated into the curriculum at
two universities. &lt;br/&gt;