* 0339139
* EITM: Distribution Networks, International Business Cycle, and the Dynamic of International Trade
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2009
* George Alessandria, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/28/2009
* USD 181,748.00

While much progress has been made in the profession's understanding of
international macroeconomic interdependence over the past decade, standard open
economy models have failed to account for several prominent features of the data
- issues that can be characterized as international business cycle puzzles and
dynamic international trade puzzles. In the business-cycle dimension, standard
international macroeconomic models cannot account for several stylized facts,
now referred to as puzzles such as the Backus Smith puzzle (relative consumption
is orthogonal to the real exchange rate), the consumption correlation puzzle
(the correlation between home and foreign consumption is lower than the
correlation between home and foreign output), and the price puzzle (relative
prices across countries are much more volatile than output but almost as
persistent). In the trade dimension, these same models cannot quantitatively
account for the elasticity of trade volume with respect to world-wide tariff
reductions and for the changing composition of the traded goods basket.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the failure of standard
theoretical models to account for these properties of international business
cycles and the growth in trade. The project develops a unified framework to
study the international transmission of business cycles and the growth in trade
over the past 40 years. It employs quantitative methods developed for business-
cycle research - an approach that integrates theoretical and empirical research
by combining formulation and solution of theoretical models of dynamic
stochastic general-equilibrium economies calibrated using evidence on micro-
foundations and empirical testing through model simulation. The project seeks to
enhance our understanding of the role the distribution sector - an economically
significant sector that has generally been ignored in international
macroeconomic and trade research - in the workings of the macro economy in an
international setting. The investigators have done some exploratory empirical
work with a disaggregated trade data set and with a data set of scanner retail
sales for the purpose of developing microeconomic evidence about the costs
involved in establishing a distribution network and about the durability of
these relationships. They have also done exploratory work with a prototype
model. Extensions of the framework will be used first to investigate
international business cycle implications. A continuation of the project will
focus on the role of the distribution sector in understanding the pattern and
volume of international trade and their response to trade liberalization
associated with reductions in tariffs and nontariff
barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This new framework provides a
better tool than standard models to study economic and welfare effects of
changes in international macroeconomic and trade policy (e.g., periodic changes
in tariffs and countervailing duties levied on subsets of goods) such as those
embodied in NAFTA. &lt;br/&gt;