* 0339779
* SBIR Phase I:    A Software Tool for Teaching Reading Based on Text-to-Speech Letter-to-Phoneme Rules
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Marian Macchi, E-Speech Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/2004
* USD 99,713.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop
software for interactive teaching of reading, based on letter-to-phoneme rules
developed for an entirely different technology, namely computer text-to-speech
synthesis (TTS). Awareness of letter-phoneme correspondences is important for
learning to read English. However, no tools are available that identify and
apply all the letter-to-phoneme rules occurring in any word or name of English.
Challenges are to identify which letter-to- phoneme rules are useful for the
learner, to determine which words are best presented as exceptions, how to
present letter-to-phoneme rules and exceptions effectively for learners, and how
to integrate the software into an overall reading program. Phase I will develop
a software prototype, criteria for identifying and formulating useful rules, and
quantitative methods for assessing the effectiveness of the software.

The role of explicit reference to the letter-sound correspondences in the
teaching of reading has experienced fluctuations in popularity, in part due to
the lack of educators' unanimity about which of the rules that can be deduced
are real and helpful. E-Speech's letter-to-phoneme rules have undergone decades
of development and serve as an excellent basis for identifying useful word
pronunciation rules for learners. The resultant software would enable beginning
readers, adult learners, learners of English as a second language, and readers
with learning disabilities to learn English word pronunciation, and it could be
used by teachers who find students having difficulty with certain words. The
technology would provide reading assistance to users on an individual basis, it
could allow users to learn in a private setting, and it could be cost-effective,
since it could reduce the amount of time required with a human teacher. The
technology could be incorporated into other educational software packages and
programs. Consequently, it would contribute substantially to gains in American
literacy as well as support the internationalization of English. In addition,
the software might also become part of a computer-based, standard dictionary of
English, supplementing the phonetic transcriptions for all words in a
dictionary.