* 0340590
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Solutions for Rapid Seismic Imaging of Subterranean Objects
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Bojan Guzina, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2007
* USD 18,000.00

0340590&lt;br/&gt;Guzina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this three-year
U.S.-France cooperative research project is to develop an advanced computational
basis for expedient and cost-effective 3D imaging of underground objects using
elastic, seismic waves. In contrast to existing 3D seismic analyses, the
proposed imaging technology will revolve around a Boundary Integral Equation
(BIE) method so that only the outline of a hidden object is rendered. This
boundary-only sensing approach has its origins in radar and sonar technologies,
but has been largely unexplored in the context of seismic surveys. The need for
imaging of subterranean objects spans many aspects of society, ranging from
civil engineering to exploration seismology, environmental remediation, and
homeland security applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves
research groups led by Bojan Guzina at the University of Minnesota and Marc
Bonnet at the Ecole Polytechnique in Paris, France. They recently developed a
prototype algorithm, which demonstrates that BIE formulations could
significantly reduce the computational effort needed to identify underground
openings. Building on this initial development, the research would focus on
robustness for a wider class of subterranean conditions. They plan to proceed to
a proof-of-concept phase aimed at implementing the new sensing technology. U.S.
graduate students will participate in the project, developing skills in
international research and establishing international ties early in their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the development of a
novel, boundary-only imaging technique for robust seismic delineation of
underground objects. Potential applications of this research include rapid
detection of underground facilities and unexploded ordnances, cost-effective
mapping of subterranean infrastructure in urban areas, and non-invasive
delineation of buried waste. The need for fast and economic 3D seismic imaging
in these areas is especially pronounced in situations where current
electromagnetic surveys may be inadequate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). NSF provides support for visits to
France by the U.S. investigators and students. The CNRS covers the costs of
visits to the United States by the French investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;