* 0340996
* SGER: Toward a Science of Design for Small, Highly Dynamic Digital Information Collections
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Allen Renear, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2005
* USD 79,992.00

This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project opens a science of
design for a new and critical field of information management research: small,
highly dynamic digital information collections (SDICs) such as evolving
documentation repositories supporting critical incident management; changing
research article collections for emerging localized science communities; rapidly
developing project websites; etc. SDICs are are among the most widely used types
of information collections, yet there is currently little theory of the type of
cyclic redesign essential for these localized information repositories.
Interestingly, the localized subject focus and the highly dynamic nature of
SDICs makes them excellent candidates for new theories of design: First, their
design depends on highly local and idiosyncratic requirements, resources, and
constraints, instances of which have not yet been generalized in to scientific
design principles. Second, their design is continuous and repeated, as
information content, interpretations, requirements, and participants enter and
leave the design space. This project develops generalized dimensions of the
design space for SDICs. Next, it generates a model of the use-drivers for SDICs
and their essential dynamic properties. Third, it will provide prototype
software that demonstrates the how the design space and use-drivers can be
coupled into dynamic configurations of SDIC software. This work will generate
rapid impact in the research community, providing both preliminary design theory
and example platforms that generate further experimentation. Finally, it will
help to galvanize research-community interest in the science of highly dynamic,
focused-content information systems, their core research issues, and effective
approaches for designing them.