* 0340602
* Study of Monsoon Processes Using Sounding Data from North American Monsoon Experiment (NAME)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Richard Johnson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2007
* USD 370,687.00

The North American Monsoon Experiment (NAME) is a multi faceted research effort
that strives to improve predictability of warm season precipitation over North
America. As part of NAME, this research is directed toward an improved
understanding of key processes in the North American Monsoon System. Diagnostic
studies will focus on information derived from the deployment of four National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Integrated Sounding Systems (ISSs). The
ISSs will be deployed for a six-week period in July and August 2004 along both
sides of the Gulf of California and will constitute a major portion of a
sounding network centered around the mouth of the Gulf. Other sounding sites
include the operational sounding network of Mexico, upgraded to two soundings
per day; however, in a central sounding hexagon, there will be four sounding per
day, increasing to six-to-eight per day during Intensive Observing Periods
(IOPs). The sounding data will be used to address three primary scientific
objectives of NAME: the structure, evolution, and initiation mechanisms for Gulf
of California southerly wind surges; the sources of moisture for precipitation
in the Southwest; and the diurnal cycle of convection in complex, coastal
environments. Sounding data and analyses also will form a basis for testing and
validating multiscale numerical modeling studies of the monsoon. Following the
field phase of the experiment, the sounding data will be analyzed using line-
integral and multi quadric interpolation procedures to address the scientific
objectives. Both raw sounding data and gridded analyses will be made publicly
available at the Colorado State University NAME Website.

With regard to the broader impacts of the research, it will address key issues
pertaining to the North American Monsoon System, and is ultimately directed at
improving the prediction of precipitation over North America. Current models do
not handle moisture surges or the diurnal cycle of precipitation well. In fact,
the problem of the diurnal cycle of precipitation is global in nature, so
improved understanding of the diurnal cycle from NAME will have far-reaching
implications. The ISS deployment will involve participation of graduate students
from Colorado State University, as well as graduate students from Mexico, in the
launching of rawinsondes. This activity will promote their understanding of the
basic elements of the monsoon system and enhance their opportunities for
conducting relevant research on the monsoon system.