* 0340575
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Algebraic and Homological Methods in Low Dimensional Topology
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Frederick Cohen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2009
* USD 18,000.00

0340575&lt;br/&gt;Cohen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this three-year
U.S.-France cooperative research project in mathematics is to develop
connections between algebraic topology and low-dimensional topology. U.S. and
French researchers, led respectively by Frederick Cohen of the University of
Rochester and Alain Breuguieres of Universite de Montpellier II, will hold
annual meetings to collaborate on the following topics in topology: space of
knots structure; Vassiliev spectral sequence and Vassiliev invariants, skein-
modules; braid groups configuration spaces and related questions; homotopy
quantum field theory; construction of invariants of flat connections on 3
dimensional manifolds; and quantum invariants from the point of view of
algebraic topology using a categorical approach for 3 dimensional
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes advantage of complementary
expertise of the U.S. and French groups and will advance understanding in
algebraic topology, homotopy theory, and low dimensional topology. The National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
(CNRS) jointly support the collaboration. NSF will provide funding for visits to
France by the U.S. team and the CNRS covers the costs of the French team's
travel to the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;