* 0340071
* STTR Phase I:  Fault-Tolerant MPI:  An Enabling Strategy, Product Concept, and Enhancement of Production Cluster Computing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Pirabhu Raman, MPI Software Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,958.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I proposal
proposes to develop a scalable, fault-tolerant and reliable message-passing
interface. MPI-2 is a key technology for the next several years in enabling
scalable parallel computing on massively parallel machines and Beowulf clusters.
Fault-tolerance is absent in both the MPI-1 and MPI-2 standards, and no
satisfactory products or research results offer an effective path to providing
production scalable computing applications with effective fault-tolerance. This
proposal addresses fault-tolerance in both the MPI-1 and MPI-2 standards, with
attention to key application classes, fault-free overhead, and checkpoint-
restart strategies. It connects the resource management infrastructure in use by
many types of MPI users in science and industry with the fault-tolerant
mechanisms, to be useful in practical scientific computing.

If successful this product will provide key new capabilities to parallel
programs, programmers, and cluster systems, including the enhancement of
existing commercial applications based on MPI, such as CFD applications. The
proposed effort is the first towards realizing a fault-tolerant MPI-2, a
technology that would be exploited by scientists and engineers across the
spectrum, since parallel computing based on MPI is a widespread enabler of
scientific discovery. The project expects to increase the adoption of MPI-2, as
well as higher productivity parallel computing for clusters and potentially for
the grid. The computer science and engineering experience gained through this
work will enable better interoperation of MPI implementations and resource
allocators, which in turn will further enable efficient production parallel
computing. The optimizations targeted at the popular recovery mechanisms, for
key classes of applications, can be applied to any middleware and hence would
result in improving the performance of applications in general.