* 0340779
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Search for Edge Currents and Domain Walls in SrRu0
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Ying Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2008
* USD 18,000.00

0340779&lt;br/&gt;Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of superconductivity in
strontium (Sr)/ruthenium (Ru)/oxygen (O) materials provides opportunities for
studying unconventional superconductors. In this three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research award, Ying Liu of Pennsylvania State University and Klaus
Hasselbach and his group at Le Centre de Recherche sur les Tres Bas Temperatures
in Grenoble, France will investigate the nature of superconducting order
parameters in SrRuO using a low temperature scanning SQUID microscope. The
unique properties of SrRuO materials may be exploited for novel applications of
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. investigator has experience
with SrRuO materials. This is complemented by French experimental techniques and
their development of a scanning superconducting quantum interference devices
(uSQUID) microscope with the world's smallest spatial resolution. This
instrument is capable of simultaneous topographic and magnetic imaging of an
experimental sample. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation (NSF)
and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) jointly support this
project. NSF will fund visits to France by the U.S. investigator and graduate
students. The CNRS provides support to the French investigators for their travel
to the United States.&lt;br/&gt;s