* 0340930
* Biomathematics: Developing a Textbook and Case Study Manual for Teaching Introductory Courses in Mathematical Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Robin Davies, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 01/31/2007
* USD 74,994.00

There is a recognized national need for increased application of mathematical
techniques to problems in biology. In order for advanced research programs
integrating mathematics and biology to succeed, strong interdisciplinary
preparation is necessary and should begin early in the undergraduate years.
Currently, there are few appropriate published textbooks in biomathematics for
sophomore level undergraduates. Project principal investigators are developing a
textbook entitled Biomathematics, along with a laboratory manual of hands-on,
computer-assisted case study projects. Written by a team of Sweet Briar College
professors and University of Virginia researchers, the material in the text and
laboratory manual is unique because it is written at a level that requires
minimal prerequisites, teaches the specific approaches and problem solving
skills used in biomathematics, emphasizes multiple approaches to solving some
problems, and includes case studies based largely on current research projects
that will heighten student interest. As colleges and universities add
biomathematics courses to their curricula, the need is growing for a range of
new educational materials in biomathematics, particularly at the introductory
level. The textbook and laboratory manual are appropriate for use in a first
course in biomathematics, to supplement existing biology and mathematics
courses, and as a source for student research projects.