* 0340484
* SBIR Phase I:  Carbon Nanotubes FET Platform for Electronic &amp; Sensors Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Jean-Christophe Gabriel, Nanomix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,878.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
involves the fabrication of a nanoelectronic device research module or kit for
use by educational institutions and private sector researchers. The
nanoelectronic devices will be used as transducer components in chemical,
biological and photonic sensors. The kit will have three components: 1) packaged
nanotube based field effect transistors (NTFETs); 2) a functionalization test
board (FTB) for testing the devices; and, 3) a data acquisition system by which
the users control the FTB. The NTFET development will require refinement of the
production of reproducible nanotube array devices on 4" silicon wafers. The
proposed work involves extending semiconductor manufacturing to produce 1 nm
objects with the attendant challenges of imaging, measurement and process
control. The project will optimize the major variables important to the uniform
growth of arrays of single-wall carbon nanotubes with the electronic properties
necessary for sensor transduction. The work will explore FET geometries and will
develop tools and software for nanotube device
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this
project is a research tool for the electronics market. The impact of the
proposed work lies in its potential long-term contribution to the $300 billion
electronics industry. Advances in silicon electronics have been driven by
reductions in the feature size on the silicon chips. To extend the reach of
Moore's Law, nanotubes offer the best path. The transition from silicon
electronics to molecular electronics will be facilitated by the introduction of
carbon nanotubes into hybrid architectures based on silicon substrates.
Commercial availability of the NTFET kit would allow many component makers to
study molecular electronic interactions and develop proprietary formulations for
NTFET-based sensors. In addition, the academic community will be provided with
inexpensive access to a technology with a very high barrier to
entry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;