* 0340422
* SBIR Phase I:  Diode-Laser Sensors for Real-Time Control of Semiconductor Processing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Thomas Owano, LOS GATOS RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project proposes to
support the development of a real-time, insitu sensor for the monitoring and
control of next-generation semiconductor etch tools. The sensor is based on
ultrasensitive diode-laser absorption techniques for measurements of important
native etch products (HF, DF, CO). This novel sensor system will measure
concentrations of native etch products insitu with high sensitivity, accuracy,
speed and specificity, eliminating the need for auxiliary etch
stop&lt;br/&gt;layers. These auxiliary etch stop layers, which are currently
used for control of the etch process, increase&lt;br/&gt;layer capacitance, and
hence reduce operating speed of the devices in
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This sensor system has direct commercial impact
on the next-generation etch tools and their&lt;br/&gt;process capabilities. The
real-time control afforded by this sensor system will likely become an
industry&lt;br/&gt;standard and become a critical subcomponent of the
semiconductor etch tool market. Application to&lt;br/&gt;other plasma-based
process tools is a natural extension of this technology, as well as extension to
other&lt;br/&gt;application areas including industrial process control, vehicle
engine testing, and atmospheric and&lt;br/&gt;environmental monitoring.