* 0340607
* US-France Cooperative Research:  The Anatomy of Fear-Networks in the Lateral Amygdala
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Luke Johnson, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2008
* USD 12,780.00

0340607&lt;br/&gt;LeDoux&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fear is an emotional response
characterized by both the subjective state (the feeling of fear) and bodily
responses elicited by threatening stimuli. The detection of threats and the
production of protective bodily responses (behavioral, autonomic, and endocrine
changes) are a vital part of biological survival. The brain has circuits that
appear pre-wired to respond to some stimuli, such as ancestral threats, and
novel stimuli associated with pre-wired dangers. Individuals can use information
from past situations to avoid potentially dangerous organisms, objects, and
situations. However, the circuits, network properties and computations performed
by the brain's fear systems to encode, store and retrieve conditioned fear
memories are not yet known. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this three-year
cooperative research project, Joseph LeDoux, Luke Johnson of New York
University's Center for Neural Science and Valerie Doyere of the Universite
Paris-Sud will identify the underlying neural circuitry and networks in lateral
amygdala of the brain responsible for fear behaviors. The project combines
complementary expertise of the U.S. and French investigators and will advance
understanding of how the mammalian brain encodes, stores and retrieves fear
memory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation (NSF) and the
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) will jointly support this
project. NSF will cover the costs of the U.S. investigator's visits to France.
The CNRS will provide funding to the French investigator for travel to the
United States.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;