* 0340999
* Nanotechnology in Advanced Therapy and Diagnosis, October 9-12, 2003, Yokohama, Japan
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2004
* Mauro Ferrari, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 01/31/2004
* USD 54,452.00

0340999 Ferrari The symposium Biomedical Nanotechnology in Advanced Therapy and
Diagnosis, October 21-22, 2003 in Yokohama, Japan, is one of a series of
meetings being conducted by US and Japanese scientists to facilitate the
transition of nanotechnology research results from the discovery stage to the
realization of practical devices or processes. The first such meeting, the US-
Japan Workshop on Tools and Metrology in Nanotechnology, occurred at Cornell
University, January 21-22, 2003 (award 0309262).

The importance of this symposium lies in the rapidly developing area of
biomedical nanotechnology and the significant potential this emerging field has
in mitigating pain, suffering and death caused by many diseases and conditions
such as cancer and heart disease, and the vital role that multidisciplinary
collaborations play in this emerging domain. Biomedical nanotechnology must
incorporate the knowledge and experience from a variety of disciplines,
including but not limited to mechanical engineering, electrical engineering,
physics, material science, molecular biology, chemistry, chemical engineering,
genomics, proteomics, computer science and clinical medical specialties such as
radiology, anesthesiology, surgery, cardiology and oncology. Additionally, it is
crucial that various nations develop and strengthen networks among their experts
and researchers in all areas relating to nanotechnology in order to exchange
knowledge about cutting-edge results that can advance the field as a whole.

The topics to be addressed during the symposium are: Nanotechnology for Medical
Therapeutics Nanotechnology for Medical Diagnostics Nanotechnology for
Fundamental Life and Medical Science

The results of the symposium are to be published in a medical publication from a
medical perspective with an understandable explanation of the engineering
details. A report is to be published for the field of nanotechnology based on
the results of the meeting in the journal Biomedical Microdevices. Also, a
multimedia CD-ROM is to be made containing highlights and presentations of the
entire symposium.