* 0340695
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Functional and Structural Patterning of Microbial Communities in a Natural Soil Ecosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* DeEtta Mills, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2008
* USD 382,431.00

Because microbial populations operate at spatio-temporal scales far removed from
typical human perception, it has been difficult in the past to investigate their
role in complex ecosystem behavior. However, with the expanded use of molecular
methods combined with computational tools, these limitations are rapidly
decreasing. Microbial nitrification, ammonia oxidation, and denitrification all
play critical roles in the global nitrogen cycle. Concerns over the agricultural
use/misuse of excessive nitrogenous fertilizers are based on the environmental
imbalance that can produce decreased microbial diversity in soils and
eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems, as well as increased nitrate accumulation
in groundwater, which can directly impact human health. What is lacking is a
complete 'picture' of the functional microbial community as it applies to
nitrogen cycling in a specific system. Multi-seasonal spatio-temporal data for
undisturbed soil will be generated during this project. In addition,
manipulation of the system and the impact that anthropogenic disturbances may
have on microbial community dynamics in situ will be assessed and linked to the
ecosystem's 'drivers'. Molecular techniques for studying the structural
diversity in ecosystems are now available. Both amplicon length heterogeneity
(ALH) and terminal restriction fragment length polymorphisms (TRFLP) are often
used to query microbial community structure. However, there is a need to
continue to refine and expand microbial community profiling to functional genes.
These molecular data will then be correlated with the physical, biogeochemical,
and chemical soil data. Because of the wealth of data that will be produced in
this comprehensive community analysis, bio- and eco-informatics tools that can
better interrogate those data will also continue to be developed. &lt;br/&gt;The
integration of molecular biology, soil science, and computational science is
essential to unraveling the intricacies of complex microbial communities in
situ. The long-term goal of this project is to determine at what scale these
critical components need to be tracked in order to develop a community-wide
ecosystem picture. Once the scale is determined, much will be learned about
microbial communities as they interact during nitrogen cycling and respond to
natural or introduced environmental 'drivers'.&lt;br/&gt;