* 0340915
* Workshop on Interface Problems in Cement-Based Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Yunping Xi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 12/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

This workshop on Interface Behavior in conjunction with the
FramCos-5&lt;br/&gt;Conference on Fracture Mechanics of Concrete and Concrete
Structures,Vail,Colorado,April 12-16,2004. It will provide a forum for a
exchange on fundamental issues related to interfacial transition zones in
cement-based materials at different scales of observation.At the macroscopic
level we will address adhesive bond among bi-materials such as concrete and
reinforcing steel with and without polymeric coatings. At the mesoscopic level
we will focus o adhesive-cohesive properties between cementitious constituents
and natural aggregate inclusions as well as reinforcing members and laminates.At
the microscopic level,we will examine the cohesive behavior between different
.cement-based constituents. The workshop on interface fundamentals will include
four sessions:(i)experimental obser-vations and sensing,(ii)theoretical aspects
and material models,(iii)computational issues of delamination and fracture,and
(iv)applications at different .levels of observation.The workshop presentations
will be by invitation only.The discussion will benenifit from the participants
of the FramCos-5 Conference who will be invited to attend the workshop at
nominal cost.The intent of the workshop is to bring together leading researchers
and to identify outstanding issues and a research agenda in the field of
interface behavior starting from interface mechanics/chemistry all the way to
repair strategies for hot and cold joining. It is the interfacial transition
zone which is at the core of the workshop.The basic intenet are interface
properties which determine the degradation of multi-material systems such as
reinforced cement-based materials under monotonic and cyclic environments.Aside
from&lt;br/&gt;the multi-scale aspects of such heterogeneous materials the
workshop is intended to high-light recent advances and current issues in
measuring interface properties,i formulating the constitution of zero-and finite
thickness interface transition zones under multi-axial loading,in model-based
simulations of interface degradation under monotonic and cyclic conditions, and
in different .applications in the .field of joining and
debonding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;