* 0340048
* STTR Phase I:  High Speed Terahertz Tomographic Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE) Imaging System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* David Zimdars, PICOMETRIX, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop the technological and theoretical foundation of a high-speed terahertz
(THz) tomographic non-destructive evaluation (NDE) imaging system. It is
proposed to construct and evaluate a multiple THz transmitter and receiver
module array test-bed to be employed with a commercially availability
spectrometer system. This test-bed will be configured in a tomographic
configuration and initially employ 4 and 6 elements in Phase I. This test-bed
will be used to evaluate 1) the functional parameters and the feasibility of
gathering multiple channels of data from an array of modules driven by the same
split fiber optic source; and 2) the functional parameters and the feasibility
of the reconstruction of 3 dimensional tomographic images from simple test
objects scanned by the array. THz imaging has shown great potential, and there
is great potential for innovation and research to provide a quantum leap in
imaging speed and three dimensional image reconstruction. The image formation
rate and three-dimensional image construction have been identified as two of the
most important enabling factors in the widespread adoption of this technology
for commercial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THz tomography offers
tremendous market potential in the fields of Non-Destructive Examination (NDE),
and homeland security. THz imaging can be used for the NDE of plastic and
composite materials in aerospace and other industries, to insure strength and
safety of manufactured components. In addition, rapid imaging of concealed
explosives, biological agents, chemical weapons, flammables, metallic and non-
metallic weapons, and other potentially dangerous items are of great concern to
many civilian and governmental agencies (transportation security, law
enforcement), and industries such as commercial aviation. This STTR
collaboration will foster the developmental collaboration between industry and
university in this rapidly advancing field.&lt;br/&gt;