* 0340989
* Chiral Catalyst Development and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 06/30/2003,04/30/2005
* Michael Doyle, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2005
* USD 227,462.00

The objective of this work is to prepare new chiral carboxamidate ligands and
their dirhodium (II) complexes, then use these complexes as asymmetric catalysts
for a variety of organic transformations. Chiral catalysts will first be used
for enantioselective C-H insertion reactions. Dirhodium (II) carboxamidates will
then be attached to solid supports and used for cyclopropanation as well as C-H
insertion catalysts. Metal catalyzed reactions of diazo compounds will then be
used for heterocycle synthesis and metal catalyzed macrocyclizations of diazo
compounds will also be studied. Lastly, these dirhodium (II) carboxamidates will
be used as mild Lewis acid catalysts for enantioselective hetero Diels-Alder
reactions and other Lewis acid catalyzed organic
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Michael P.
Doyle of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Arizona. Dr. Doyle
will explore stereoselective, metal catalyzed reactions of compounds which
contain a functional group (reactive site) known as a diazo group. Diazo
compounds can be induced to lose nitrogen by metal catalysts thereby providing
substrates for new carbon-carbon bond forming reactions. The catalysts form
chiral pockets where the bond forming reactions occur and only one of two
possible stereoisomers of the product is formed. The ability to form carbon-
carbon bonds in molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror
images) and make only one of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer) is one
of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today.
Students trained during the course of this work will gain skills needed by the
pharmaceutical industry which now produces a number of single enantiomer
compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;