* 0340540
* Performance and Tracking of Nonstructural Systems in a Full-Scale Building
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Tara Hutchinson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 04/30/2005
* USD 59,738.00

PI's: Tara C. Hutchinson, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Irvine and &lt;br/&gt;Falko Kuester, Dept.
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, &lt;br/&gt;University of
California, Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This small grant for exploratory
research (SGER) is requested to take advantage of a unique opportunity
to&lt;br/&gt;study the response of nonstructural systems assembled within a
full-scale building structure. The proposed investigation has two primary
objectives: (1) to characterize the seismic response of an important class of
equipment and building contents and (2) to study the applicability of tracking
the response of these rquipment and contents using arrays of image-based
monitoring systems. An SGER is requested to provide&lt;br/&gt;the resources to
outfit a number of rooms within the interior of the building with nonstructural
equipment&lt;br/&gt;and camera arrays to assess performance of both of these
systems. We hope the work conducted under this&lt;br/&gt;SGER will demonstrate
the applicability of this idea for use in full-scale building structures and
identify needed areas for further study in the image acquisition and analysis
portion of the process. As such, data&lt;br/&gt;collected from the proposed
field experiments will be critical for the development of a larger proposal
using NEES equipment to investigate alternative computer vision and motion
tracking algorithms to advance camera-based systems as an earthquake monitoring
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The building of interest is a four-story
building located at 4827 North Sepulveda Blvd., Sherman&lt;br/&gt;Oaks,
California (approximately 80 km from the UC Irvine campus). The building was
damaged significantly during the 1994 Northridge earthquake and has not been
occupied since this event. Through separate funding provided by NSF, Professor
John Wallace will use the UCLA NEES Mobile Equipment Unit to conduct field
vibration experiments on this structure. Planned vibration experiments include
placing pairs of linear and eccentric mass shakers on the roof of the building
and driving the structure in the two orthogonal directions. In addition, a pair
of shakers will be used to impose torsional motions into the structure. While
much emphasis is placed on studying the structural response of this building,
this field project provides a unique opportunity to study the response of
elements mounted inside of the structure as well.&lt;br/&gt;