* 0340587
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Optimal Design and Equilibrium Outcomes
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Russell Cooper, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2010
* USD 9,000.00

0340587&lt;br/&gt;Cooper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
three-year U.S.-France cooperative research project in economics is to study
various forms of monetary union. The U.S. investigator, Russell W. Cooper of
Boston University and the National Bureau of Economic Research, and the French
investigator, Hubert Kempf of the Universite de Paris I (Sorbonne), have
successfully worked together on issues related to costs and benefits of monetary
union. This project addresses in depth new questions related to fiscal
constraints in monetary union and partition into national currency areas. They
will perform equilibrium analysis and evaluate optimal allocations. The effects
of trade on a common currency and interaction between monetary union and
financial crises will be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
relates to a number of existing policy issues. Many issues associated with the
design of a monetary union remain open in the context of the European Monetary
Union. In particular, there is ongoing discussion over fiscal constraints and
criteria for admission. Their work also relates to ongoing discussions of the
adoption of the dollar as currency by Ecuador and the debate over this issue in
Argentina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation (NSF) and the
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) jointly support this
project. NSF will cover the cost of visits to France by the U.S. investigator.
The CNRS provides support to the French investigator for travel to the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;