* 0341959
* Bringing Engineering to Tangelo Park
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Debra Reinhart, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The Bridges for Engineering Education Planning grant is a unique partnership
between the University of Central Floida College of Engineering and College of
Education and the Tangelo Park Community. It provides the Tangelo Park children
with new high-tech career opportunities with high economic potential. Further it
increases the probability that these children will take advantage of guaranteed
Tangelo Park Program college scholarships, and it builds on Tangelo Park.s
commitment to improvement and growth. The goals of this project are to increase
the understanding of the entire community about high-tech career opportunities,
and to ensure that their students have the skills and knowledge needed to
succeed in post-secondary quantitative education programs. Specific objectives
of the planning project are to (1) evaluate the ability of the community to
engage students in quantitative fields, (2) apply well-known pedagogical
principles to improve the math and science curriculum in schools serving Tangelo
Park students, (3) broadly disseminate results of the project to engineering
educators, and (4) develop a full-scale implementation plan for a program that
would lead to increased participation and success of minority students in
engineering and other quantitative fields. As with other aspects of the Tangelo
Park project, this program is translatable to similar communities throughout the
country resulting in similar opportunities for economic development and
community improvement. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To meet the objectives described
in Section 2, four tasks are envisioned. These will include (1) a
&lt;br/&gt;baseline assessment of schools, students, and the community, (2)
design of math and science pilot &lt;br/&gt;activities for preK, elementary,
middle school, high school, and the community, (3) &lt;br/&gt;implementation and
assessment of the pilot programs, and (4) development of a program
&lt;br/&gt;implementation plan. Expected outcomes of this project are an
increase in the number of well prepared Tangelo Park students entering
engineering and related fields, documentation of the level of awareness
&lt;br/&gt;in Tangelo Park of these careers, and a plan for implementation that
can be used at similar communities anywhere. &lt;br/&gt;