* 0341983
* RUI: Translational Regulation of RpoS mRNA
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Paula Schlax, Bates College
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 01/31/2008
* USD 271,840.00

In Escherichia coli, a common response to environmental stress is alteration in
the pattern of gene expression. The transcriptional factor sigma S, encoded by
the rpoS gene, is used by the cell to transcribe genes required to respond to a
variety of environmental stresses. Production of sigma S in the cell is
controlled translationally during osmotic stress. The non-coding RNA molecule
DsrA binds to RpoS mRNA, promoting formation of a translationally active RpoS
mRNA conformation that readily participates in translational initiation. This
project investigates structural differences between translationally active and
inactive RpoS mRNA structures using nuclease mapping. Kinetic studies will be
performed to determine the mechanistic steps of DsrA mediated translational
activation. This laboratory has recently shown that DsrA interacts specifically,
and in a novel binding site, with the small subunit of the E. coli ribosome in
vitro. Photo-induced chemical crosslinking of DsrA to the ribosomal subunit will
be used to determine the specific amino acids and nucleotides of the ribosome
and DsrA that interact. These studies will assist characterization of the novel
RNA binding site on the ribosome. The project will provide general insight into
the roles of non-coding RNAs in biology and in induction of the environmental
stress response in E. coli. This work will directly integrate research with
undergraduate education. The experimental plan is designed to allow
undergraduate students to participate in all parts of this project, including
data acquisition, experimental design, paper authorship and presentations at
national research conferences.