* 0341158
* Collaborative Research: Polar Experiment Network for Geospace Investigations [PENGUIn] - A New Vision for Global Studies
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Calvin Robert Clauer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 07/31/2008
* USD 693,875.00

This project will continue the operation of surface-based magnetometers, imaging
and broadbeam riometers (relative ionospheric opacity instruments), and two-
wavelength zenith photometers at South Pole and McMurdo stations in Antarctica,
and imaging riometers at Iqaluit (nominally conjugate to South Pole) and
Sondrestrom in the Arctic. Additionally, the data acquisition systems at South
Pole and McMurdo for the common recording of other geophysical data, and the
provision of these data to collaborating investigators will be continued. The
Antarctic data sets are web-based, and can be accessed in near-real time.
&lt;br/&gt;The continuation of the activities in the 2004-2006 time frame will
contribute to several major science initiatives, including the GEM (Geospace
Environment Modeling), CEDAR (Coupling, Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric
Regions), ISTP/GGS (International Solar-Terrestrial Project/Global Geospace
Science), and National Space Weather programs. The overall objective of the
project is to understand the relevant physical processes that produce the
observed phenomena, and how they relate to driving forces, either internal, such
as magnetospheric/ionospheric instabilities, or external, such as solar
wind/interplanetary magnetic field variations. It is expected that this project
will lead to an enhanced capability to predict sufficiently in advance the
possible occurrence of events that might have negative technological or societal
impacts, and thus provide time to lessen their effects. &lt;br/&gt;