* 0341753
* Evaluation of Carbonate Platform Records to Track Greenhouse, Transitional and Icehouse Worlds through the Paleozoic
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* James Read, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2008
* USD 165,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation of Carbonate Platform Records to Track Greenhouse,
Transitional and Icehouse Worlds through the Paleozoic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;J.
F. Read &lt;br/&gt;Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University&lt;br/&gt
;ERA-0341753&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shallow marine
carbonate shelves act as dipsticks to global sea level changes driven in part by
climate and global ice volume. Thus we propose to use them to reconstruct sea
level history during their growth using a combination of field studies,
literature search, and computer modeling. This will provide insight into global
ice volume and climate changes from 550 to 250 million years ago, at higher
resolution than has been attempted previously.&lt;br/&gt; Carbonate platforms
record relatively high frequency climate changes driven by the earths orbit that
leave a distinctive signature in the rock record depending on the earth's global
climate at the time. During greenhouse times, carbonate platforms develop under
the influence of many small (few meter) sea level changes driven by precession
(roughly 15 to 20 thousand year periods). When the earth has abundant ice at the
poles, sea level changes may be large (up to 100 m or more) and tend to be
driven by obliquity and eccentricity (roughly 40 thousand, 100 to 400 thousand
year periods). Between these two end members, when the earth contained moderate
amounts of global ice, sea level changes likely were a few tens of meters or
less. Such transitional states appear to occupy a significant amount of the
geological record, and have been overlooked in the past. In addition, many of
the giant oil fields in carbonate rocks appear to have formed under such
transitional climatic states. &lt;br/&gt; The study will thus provide a long
term window into global climate change. It will also clarify how global climate
has influenced the geological distribution of carbonate reservoirs hosting giant
petroleum fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;