* 0341128
* Web-Delivered Interactive Lecture Demonstrations (WEBILD): Creating an Active Science Learning Environment over the Internet
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* David Sokoloff, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Mateja
* 12/31/2009
* USD 249,918.00

Physics (13) This project develops methods and tools that facilitate effective
teaching in both traditional and non-traditional introductory Physics
environments. We are producing a web delivery system for a proven interactive
pedagogy, Interactive Lecture Demonstrations (ILDs) that we developed earlier.
Prototype WebILDs, like in-class ILDs, lead to significant changes in conceptual
understanding and are easy to implement. Starting with this proven, research-
based, pedagogical method and our successful WebILD prototype software we
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) refining, using student learning as a guide, the
Motion, Force, and Energy WebILD prototype by testing it with larger and more
diverse introductory course audiences and using it for learning at a distance.
&lt;br/&gt;2) creating WebILD sequences in additional physics topic areas.
&lt;br/&gt;3) refining delivery and administration software and making the
software and the WebILD sequences available nationally. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the learner and uses well established
conceptual evaluations to measure learning. We are using the flexibility of
internet-delivery to adapt ILDs to increase their already considerable efficacy
with under-prepared students including women and minorities. This project meets
a need for distance learning, for pedagogical methods that work with Internet
delivery, and for methods to teach teachers. &lt;br/&gt;