* 0341346
* Native American-based Materials for Integration into Undergraduate Mathematics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* A. Duane Porter, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 01/31/2007
* USD 99,627.00

Mathematics(21). This project develops mathematics material prototypes for
integration into selected undergraduate courses at California State University
Fullerton (CSUF) and the University of Wyoming (UW), which are based in the
mathematical traditions of Native American peoples. Currently, most mathematics
curriculum materials at both these and most other universities are textbook-
based, or at best, somewhat technology-based. In any case, most of these
materials are culturally homogenous, focusing on Western traditions of
mathematics and mathematical methods. This project uses a previous study of
Native American Indian mathematical traditions of the Western region and
develops materials (both print and technology-augmented lessons) based in those
traditions, pilots them through integration into a variety of existing courses
at these universities, revises these materials as necessary, and makes available
for broader dissemination to other universities, colleges and community colleges
--especially those with Native American student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prototypes produced by this project allow
instructors of Native American students to include relevant materials in their
courses, in addition to allowing all students a fuller appreciation of the
diversity of mathematics and Native American intellectual tradition.&lt;br/&gt;