* 0341484
* Avida-ED: Technology for Teaching Evolution and the Nature of Science using Digital Organisms
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Robert Pennock, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 07/31/2009
* USD 279,973.00

Interdisciplinary (99) This project is developing Avida-ED, an educational
simulation based on a proven artificial life research platform. In the digital
environment of Avida-ED, one can observe the evolution of self-replicating,
autonomous digital organisms, and perform experiments to test evolutionary
hypotheses in ways that no other tool allows. This unprecedented ability to
introduce experimental evolution in biology classrooms lets students learn about
basic principles of scientific method and see for themselves how evolutionary
theory is confirmed. We are developing and testing the Avida-ED environment,
formally accessing its pedagogic efficacy in the classroom for undergraduate
science and non-science majors, and distributing the software and associated
materials to biology educators. The project is addressing significant science
education challenges identified in national standards in a novel, rigorous, and
promising manner. Our initial results show that by being able to observe the
evolutionary mechanism in action, students come to understand the key biological
insight of how evolution produces complex information. The intellectual merit of
this project is the novel use of information technology - artificial life - that
was inspired by evolutionary principles, and has become a revolutionary research
tool for biologists. The broader impacts of this project lie in the application
of this simulation and the developed materials in a wide range of undergraduate
science curricula.