* 0341460
* Exploring Earth's Volcanic Environments: Development of Virtual Reality Education Modules
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Steven Carey, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 05/31/2007
* USD 73,117.00

Geology (42) A new Web-based virtual fieldtrip (VFT) dealing with volcanic
environments is being developed that utilizes inquiry-based exercises to allow
students to observe eruptive activity, make field observations, and formulate
hypotheses about volcanic processes. The module uses video segments of eruptive
activity and virtual reality panoramic images that enable students to explore
volcanic terrains in an immersion environment similar to a real geological
fieldtrip. The VFT activities are centered on the 79 A.D. eruption of Vesuvius
in Italy. As a result of the burial of the ancient Roman cities of Pompeii and
Herculaneum, this eruption provides a unique opportunity for students to
understand the great power of volcanic eruptions and their impact on human
populations. Students can observe eruption footage that is reminiscent of the 79
A.D. event, make observations about eruption impacts, and then visit the
excavated cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum to build hypotheses about how each
were buried by the eruption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project lies in bringing scientific content developed through the PI team's
extensive experience in NSF-supported volcanological research into the classroom
for students who do not have access to such field-based experiences. Beyond the
educational benefits, the broader impacts of this work lie in its development
plan, which will occur in coordination with the Student Technology Assistance
program at the University of Rhode Island. Both undergraduate and graduate
students will be involved in conceptual design, implementation, and progressive
field-testing of this VFT.&lt;br/&gt;