* 0341197
* Engaging Undergraduates in On-Line Inquiry Learning:  A Case-Based CyberLibrary in Human Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Merle Bruno, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2006
* USD 170,001.00

This project addresses the need to engage introductory biology students and
future teachers in critical thinking and problem solving. The work fosters
active learning and provides inquiry-oriented biology materials that make
learning biology exciting and relevant for all students. The products include 1)
The Human Biology Case CyberLibrary, a powerful suite of medical case studies
for undergraduates; and 2) a set of software tools to support student inquiry.
Medical cases are adapted from cases developed for medical education, including
some from Harvard Medical School. Based on prior funding from the CCLI program
and the Department of Education we developed infrastructure software, inquiry
tools and one human biology case. The current project is developing several
additional cases and testing the effectiveness of the product and tools on
student learning. We are examining how well the material supports inquiry
learning and evaluating usability and changes in student attitudes towards
scientific reasoning. This material is being tagged for the National Science
Digital Library (NSDL) and submitted to and reviewed by BioQUEST. Intellectual
merit: The work pushes the state of the art in the use of artificial
intelligence, interactive multimedia, and web-based technology in biology
education. Broader impact: The results have the potential to impact publishers,
universities, for-profit companies, and individual authors who develop non-print
educational materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;