* 0341010
* Mechanisms of Incongruent Reduction
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Kenneth Sandhage, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 233,612.00

Chemical reactions that convert a solid oxide into new fluid and
solid&lt;br/&gt;products with compositions that differ from the initial oxide
are&lt;br/&gt;considered to be "incongruent" (e.g., incongruent melting,
incongruent&lt;br/&gt;dissolution). While some types of incongruent reactions
are well&lt;br/&gt;understood, the basic kinetic mechanisms by which oxides
undergo&lt;br/&gt;"incongruent reduction" with molten metals are not. The
objective of this&lt;br/&gt;research is to develop a fundamental understanding
of the kinetic&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms (rate-limiting steps, microstructural
evolution) by which a&lt;br/&gt;solid oxide undergoes incongruent reduction with
a reactive metallic&lt;br/&gt;liquid. In this work, the incongruent reduction of
aluminum oxide in&lt;br/&gt;contact with Mg-Al liquids (which involves the
formation of solid magnesium&lt;br/&gt;aluminate spinel) will be examined. Novel
experiments with in-situ x-ray&lt;br/&gt;diffraction will be used to track, in
real time, the formation of spinel on&lt;br/&gt;alumina surfaces immersed under
molten Mg-Al layers. The kinetics of&lt;br/&gt;alumina weight change upon
immersion in Mg-Al melts will also be studied&lt;br/&gt;under steady-state
conditions. These kinetic measurements (phase change,&lt;br/&gt;mass change)
will be used along with microchemical and microstructural&lt;br/&gt;analyses of
the alumina/melt interface to identify the rate-limiting&lt;br/&gt;step(s) of
incongruent alumina reduction.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The rate of reaction
between ceramics and liquid metals is of vital&lt;br/&gt;importance for a number
of advanced technologies, such as: 1) novel,&lt;br/&gt;low-cost, reactive
infiltration processing of ceramic/metal composites for&lt;br/&gt;automotive
applications (e.g., cylinder liners, brake components,
bearing&lt;br/&gt;sleeves), and 2) investment casting of advanced titanium
alloys for&lt;br/&gt;lightweight and strong structural components in aircraft.
The purpose of&lt;br/&gt;this research project is to develop a better
fundamental understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the mechanisms of reactions between solid
ceramics and liquid metals, so&lt;br/&gt;that the rate of such reactions can be
better predicted and controlled.&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve the use of
state-of-the-art analytical equipment&lt;br/&gt;to track the progress of such
reactions in real time at interfaces between&lt;br/&gt;solid ceramics and liquid
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;