* 0341212
* Using Metacognition to Teach Evaluation of Results in Structural Analysis Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* James Hanson, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 12/31/2007
* USD 75,000.00

As the size and complexity of structural analysis problems increase, the
potential for errors and the devastating impacts of errors increase. Currently,
structural analysis courses and textbooks provide minimal coverage, if any, on
how to evaluate the reasonableness of structural analysis results. Therefore,
this project is developing prototype course materials for teaching evaluation of
structural analysis results using metacognition. Metacognition is a sequence of
steps followed by a person to monitor and improve that person's own cognitive
performance in an area. Metacognition has been used to improve student learning
in reading, math and science for over twenty years; however, the technique has
not yet been widely used in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
are interviewing expert structural engineers to document the cognitive
strategies they use to successfully evaluate structural analysis results. The
students receive instruction on the cognitive strategies and on metacognition.
Metacognition allows the students to monitor their own decision-making processes
as they learn how to implement the cognitive strategies. Members of the Campus
Office of Assessment are conducting evaluation of student learning as
independent observers. Learning is being measured during three iterations of the
Structures I and Structures II courses: the first without formal instruction on
metacognition and the two subsequent iterations with instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prototype course materials are being made available
electronically so that instructors at other institutions can adopt the new
format for the courses. The investigator is publishing the strategies used by
expert engineers to allow practicing engineers to improve their knowledge
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials are also being disseminated to design
firms for in-house training. In addition, these materials are being made
available to instructors in order to introduce results evaluation in courses
across all engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;