* 0341019
* Adopting the Principles and Practices of the Integrated Laboratory Network (ILN) at other Institutions:  Implementation and Evaluation
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Larry Gilbert, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

Interdisciplinary (99) The Integrated Laboratory Network (ILN) combines
laboratory, computer, and instructional technology to provide a wide range of
teaching, research, and learning opportunities. Through the use of a variety of
Internet-based instructional packages, such as NetMeeting and Blackboard,
greater access to university laboratories, instrumentation, and expertise is
achieved. The intellectual merit of the ILN lies in how it allows students and
researchers to operate instruments from any Internet-equipped computer and
provides for the direct exchange of information, data, and classroom material
over the Internet. The broader impacts include increased access to
instrumentation in the classroom, which allows more students to be trained on
and to use instruments for research and classroom activities at earlier stages
within curricula. The ILN system and associated instructional materials and
practices developed and established at Western Washington University are being
modified and tested in programs at the University of British Columbia and the
Bellingham School District. The transferability, adaptability and impact of the
ILN at these institutions are being assessed at the student, instructor and
institution level. Successful adoption of the ILN at these institutions will
demonstrate the universal nature of ILN principles and practices. This
demonstration project will provide institutions with the necessary tools to
develop an internal ILN system, or to link to other institutions for the
development of an inter-institutional ILN.