* 0341541
* Proof-of-concept Web-delivered Exploration and Production Simulations for the Introductory Geoscience Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Scott Brande, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 08/31/2008
* USD 74,994.00

Geology (42) This proof-of-concept project is developing interactive, discovery-
based computer simulations for Web and wireless delivery to undergraduate
students enrolled in a physical geology science laboratory course. Students work
in collaborative working groups (student corporations) to address map-based
realistic problems (quarry development and oil and gas exploration) that
integrate with and extend traditional geoscience laboratory topics, as well as
practical business concepts such as budgets, time-constrained deadlines, and
committee consensus. In the quarry simulation, students virtually drill a
landscape to determine the extent and volume of mine able industrial rock for
stone production. In the oilfield simulation, students compete for property
leases required for exploration of limited oil and gas pools. The exercises
require analysis of different types of information (text, numbers, maps), and
provide multiple opportunities for students to refine cognitive skills. Server-
based and wireless computer technology is delivering these materials via the Web
through wireless access points for personal digital assistants (PDA's) so as to
override constraints in the traditional classroom of restricted mobility in time
and space. Intellectual merits of this project include students learning
geologic concepts in an economic/business context, receiving quick feedback on
risk/reward decisions, and providing flexible Internet access to the materials.
Broader impacts of this project include addressing societally relevant
geoscience issues and targeting a non-traditional urban student population (at
the PI institution).