* 0341903
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Advanced Sensors and Smart Structures Technology for Civil and Mechanical Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Billie Spencer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2005
* USD 27,880.00

0341903&lt;br/&gt;Spencer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on advanced
sensors and smart structures technology for civil and mechanical systems to be
held in Yokohama, Japan from November 16-18, 2003. The co-organizers are
Professor Bill F. Spencer at the University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign and
Professor Akira Mita at Keio University in Japan. In the last few years there
has been significant progress in the areas of advanced sensors and smart
structures technologies around the world, but particularly in the United States
and Japan. Innovative concepts such as multifunctional smart materials, sensors
and actuators integrated with informatics, intelligence software and algorithms,
were proposed to develop the knowledge and technology base to enable realization
of smart structures. There have also been several full-scale trial
implementations of smart structures technologies, as well as case studies of
large-scale structures such as buildings and bridges, both in Japan and the U.S.
The seminar sessions will be devoted to four theme topics of 1) innovative
sensing hardware, 2) advances in wireless technology, 3) damage
detection/characterization and condition assessment methodology, and 4) case
studies and experimental verification on international testbeds. The objectives
will be to identify the outstanding research issues, and to formulate an action
plan with recommendations for development and implementation through possible
collaborative research projects and sharing of scientific data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have complementary scientific expertise
in the field. This enables them to evaluate and attract the best engineers to
participate. These new developments will revolutionize how civil and mechanical
structural systems are built and maintained in the future to achieve ultra-high
reliability/safety, superior performance, and minimal lifecycle costs. The
seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve postdocs and graduate
students as both participants and observers. The exchange of ideas and data with
Japanese experts in the field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own
work, and will set the stage for future collaborative projects. Following the
seminar the organizers plan to establish a workshop web page. Conference
proceedings will be published on this web site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;