* 0341365
* Reliable Concurrent Software Development Via Reliable Concurrency Controllers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Tevfik Bultan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 342,000.00

This proposal presents a framework for reliable concurrent programming based on
interface-based specification and verification of concurrency controllers.
Proposed specification and verification techniques for concurrency controllers
are modularized by decoupling behavior and interface specifications. The
behavior specification is a set of actions (which correspond to methods or
procedures) composed of guarded commands. The interface specification is a
finite state machine whose transitions represent actions. Con-currency
controllers can be designed modularly by composing their interfaces. The
proposed approach separates the verification of the concurrency controllers
(behavior verification) from the verification of the threads, which use them
(interface verification). For behavior verification it is possible to use
symbolic and infinite-state verification techniques, which enables verification
of controllers with parameterized constants, unbounded variables and arbitrary
number of client threads. For interface verification it is possible to use
explicit state program verification techniques, which enables verification of
arbitrary thread implementations without any restrictions. The correctness of
the user threads can be verified using stubs generated from the concurrency
controller interfaces, which improves the efficiency of the thread verification
significantly. It is possible to synthesize efficient Java monitors from the
concurrency controller specifications, and the generated implementations
preserve the verified properties of the specifications. The proposed framework
will be implemented as a set of tools for concurrency controller specification,
verification and synthesis