* 0342985
* GOAL:  Development of a Cell Culture Analog Device to Assess MultiDrug Resistant Suppressors
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Colin Hill, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 07/31/2006
* USD 282,340.00

0342985 Shuler A key factor in improving human health is determining the
response of the human body to various pharmaceutical and environmental
chemicals. A device or system to provide this information can then be used to
formulate guidelines for acceptable doses and exposure. Current approaches to
predicting in vivo human response to chemicals fall into two basic categories:
in vivo work with non-human animals and in vitro work with human or non-human
cells and tissues. Animal studies may be lengthy and expensive and difficult to
extrapolate to humans over a wide range. In vitro studies using isolated cells
of a single type do not allow for exchange of metabolites between tissues. A
more realistic approach is to build a micro cell culture analog (microCCA) that
uses mammalian cells cultured in interconnected chambers to physically represent
a physiologically based pharmokinetic model (PBPK). PBPK models mathematically
simulate animal/human metabolism by modeling the adsorption, distribution,
metabolism, and elimination kinetics of a chemical in interconnected tissue
compartments.

In prior work, the PI demonstrated "proof of concept" through fabrication of
three and four chamber microCCA devices to model liver, lung and fat. The
proposed work will focus on significant engineering challenges related to the
operation of the microCCA, e.g., integrating a micropump capable of maintaining
recirculating flow and fabricating the device from an optically clear substrate
in order to integrate sensors for data collection.

The GOALI activities are focused on developing a microCCA and PBPK combination
that can be used to assess chemicals as potential agents to suppress multidrug
resistance (MDR) in colon cancer. The PI will design a CCA system that will be
transferred to Gene Network Sciences, Inc. (GNS, Co-PI). GNS has constructed a
biologically detailed model of a colon cancer cell that will be modified to
incorporate different mechanisms of multidrug resistance. The PBPK and CCA will
be matched to include the same organ/tissue compartments allowing direct
comparisons of simulation to responses of the in vitro CCA. A large variety of
MDR suppressors and chemotherapeutics will be screened to treat MDR colon
cancer. GNS will provide all of the modeling expertise and share both simulation
and experimental results with the PI.