* 0342732
* Preparation of the First Draft of Official List of Names in Ichthyology
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2004
* William Eschmeyer, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James Woolley
* 02/29/2004
* USD 79,875.00

The purpose of this project is to test the effectiveness and utility of a new
provision of the Code of Zoological Nomenclature added in the fourth edition in
1999. This new article provides that a list of available names in a discipline
can be approved by the International Commission; older names not on the list are
then made unavailable. This will greatly stabilize zoological nomenclature and
save workers much time. Via this project, the ca. 55,000 species names and
nearly 10,000 generic names of all Recent fishes will be placed on draft lists
of available and unavailable names. The latter list will include between
5,000-10,000 names that appeared in rejected works (publications), without
descriptions (nomina nuda), or lack type specimens, have never been used, and
are unrecognizable. These names contain no information content and can be
purged. Drawing on the massive, existing Catalog of Fishes and its associated
databases, it should be possible to produce the draft lists within a year; the
drafts would be made available to the community for comment and change, and
eventual community recommendation via the American Society of Ichthyologists and
Herpetologists and International Commission of Zoological Nomenclature. This
project that will save systematists, and the users of systematic information on
fishes, a great deal of time and effort. It can be a model for other large
disciplines wishing to use these code provisions for the improvement of the
systematics of other groups of animals.