* 0342088
* Investigation of Embedded Heat Pipes in Cutting Tools for Dry Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/30/2003,08/31/2004
* Richard Chiou, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2004
* USD 62,608.00

This grant provides funding to support research in building the theoretical
basis and knowledge base in embedded heat pipe technology for elimination of the
use of cutting fluids in the machining industry. This research project adopts a
new heat transfer concept for environmentally conscious cutting tool design.
This research project will conduct the following investigations: (1)
characterization of the embedded heat pipe systems in cutting tools; (2)
thermodynamic and heat transfer finite element analyses to predict the
temperature distribution of the specific cutting process; (3) evaluation of the
performance of the embedded heat pipe for tool wear analysis. The cutting rake
insert, heat pipe container, wick structure, and working fluids are design
parameters to adjust the temperature distribution. The proposed research will
lead to the development of predictive models for heat transfer behavior, and
experimental investigation and predictive modeling of the tool wear due to the
embedded heat pipes in cutting tools in machining processes. The outcome of
these studies will be useful for dry machining in industry.

The impact of this research will facilitate the temperature control optimization
in the use of the heat pipe in achieving a balance between process productivity
and environmental consciousness. The models can then be used in selecting
experimental conditions to explore, to interpret the experimental results, and,
ultimately, to guide industrial tool design for dry machining. Finally, the
research results within this program will be integrated with education through
interdisciplinary activities in curriculum development, Alliance for Minority
Participation, high school joint research programs, university/industry seminars
and conferences, and web information center.