* 0342810
* Research Starter Grant - Cloning Polyketide Biosynthesis Genes In Hypericum Perforatum
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2006
* Tara Sirvent, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

Polyketides are one of the largest classes of secondary compounds in nature.
Their complex and diverse chemical structures arise from a common biosynthetic
strategy. In plants, aromatic polyketides range from compounds that act as
phytoalexins, plant defense compounds, and colorants to compounds such as the
bioactive ingredients in phytomedicinal crops - for example, the hypericins, a
family of red anthraquinones produced by the herb St. John's wort, Hypericum
perforatum. Recent work points out the roles these secondary metabolites play in
defense strategies for herbivory, pathogen attack, intra-plant competition, and
attraction for symbionts and pollinators. There are significant economic
considerations for the phytomedicinal industry since concentrations of
particular plant secondary metabolites within dried materials determine crop
market value. Polyketide synthases (PKS) are enzymes that make polyketides and
they share striking structural similarities and chemical strategies in synthesis
of the backbone structures of polyketides, regardless of organism carrying out
this synthesis. The bulk of the research on plant polyketide synthases to date
has concentrated on chalcone synthase (CHS), a plant-specific PKS that
synthesizes chalcone, a key intermediate for flavonoids. Because of the
structural diversity of plant polyketides, it is clear that there are many more
PKS enzymes yet to be discovered. The goal of this research is to use H.
perforatum (St. John's Wort) as a model system to study polyketide formation
because polycyclic aromatic compounds similar to the intermediates and end
products of H. perforatum are produced across multiple fungal and plant species.
The focus will be to determine the biosynthetic intermediates and key PKS(s)
involved in the formation of hypericins by: 1) identification of putative
intermediates in the polyketide pathway leading to the hypericin family of
compounds, and 2) identification and characterize the PKSs responsible for
hypericin biosynthesis in H. perforatum. To determine the pathway and detect
intermediates leading to synthesis of hypericins, a 13C biolabeling technique
will be employed followed by 1H and 13C-NMR spectroscopy analysis for structure
elucidation. Genetic analyses of H. perforatum will be conducted initially to
identify and characterize PKSs by using degenerate PCR primers designed to
conserved regions of known PKS genes to amplify and clone unique gene fragments
present in H. perforatum. These fragments will be used to probe a cDNA library
derived from a clonal line that is a high producer of hypericins. Alternatively,
a second approach will be to use T-DNA insertional mutagenesis. T-DNA tagged
genes from these mutants will be isolated and their role in secondary metabolism
will be determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Key findings obtained
during the initial stages of this project would shed light on the dynamics of
plant secondary metabolism; this work will contribute toward an understanding of
chemical diversity and its role in plant physiology, and contribute information
related to phytomedicinal herb quality and food (dietary supplement) safety. In
addition, this project will generate information concerning how organisms
utilize chemical diversity to live and prosper in harsh and challenging
environments. This work will have a strong educational impact since
undergraduate and graduate students (MS) will be recruited to work on this
research project and equipment will be used for training of students. In
addition, the research will be integrated into undergraduate chemistry education
at the host institution.&lt;br/&gt;