* 0342167
* Improving and Understanding the Folding of Disulfide Containing Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Watson Lees, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 09/30/2008
* USD 348,699.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professors Watson J. Lees at Florida International University will examine the
rational design and application of non-traditional thiols that will
significantly increase the rate of in vitro protein folding. These non-
traditional thiols will be designed using the enzyme protein disulfide isomerase
(PDI) as a guide. PDI is the enzyme in humans that is reported to catalyze the
folding of disulfide containing proteins. PDI itself is rarely, if ever, used
for folding due to cost and low specific activity. Because PDI has a low pKa
thiol in its active site and displays enhanced reactivity towards protein
disulfides, aromatic thiols were selected. These also possess low thiol pKa
values and enhanced reactivity towards protein disulfides. Preliminary results
have demonstrated that the addition of aromatic thiols significantly increases
the folding rate of disulfide containing proteins, such as ribonuclease A (RNase
A), in vitro. However, before designing more complex compounds several
strategies that have the potential to further improve protein-folding rates will
be investigated. The first strategy involves determining an equation to predict
folding rates for a particular protein under a variety of conditions so that the
optimal conditions can be selected. Dramatic increases in protein folding over
traditional methods are expected based on preliminary results.

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division
supports Professor Watson J. Lees at Florida International University who
proposes to facilitate the production of disulfide containing proteins under a
variety of conditions and to understand the protein folding process. Many
pharmaceutically relevant proteins and numerous extracellular proteins contain
essential disulfide bonds. Common examples include insulin, human growth
hormone, and erythropoietin (EPO), a glycoprotein hormone produced primarily by
cells of the peritubular capillary endothelium of the kidney that is responsible
for the regulation of red blood cell production. In addition to providing a
greater understanding of the folding of disulfide containing proteins at a
fundamental level, Professor Lees' research will also provide a valuable
mechanism for training graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and undergraduate
students in biochemistry and organic chemistry.