* 0342661
* Precontact Population Decline and Coalescence in the Southern Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Patrick Lyons, Archaeology Southwest
* Continuing Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

How did 40,000 people vanish from the southern Southwest a century before the
introduction of European diseases? This question has intrigued and vexed
archaeologists and the broader public for more than a century. Advances in
method and theory, and data accumulation make this an opportune time to
reconsider this question. With National Science Foundation support, this project
will examine the causes, tempo, and spatial variability of this decline in four
key study areas within the region.

The Center for Desert Archaeology's (CDA) Coalescent Communities settlement
database indicates that this population reduction occurred gradually during the
interval from A.D. 1300 to 1450. This conclusion is supported by recent CDA
research in the lower San Pedro valley in southeastern Arizona, where
demographic decline was a complex process associated with long distance
migration and population aggregation. After decades of gradual population loss,
boundaries between social groups slowly dissolved as groups continued to
coalesce to maintain irrigation systems and social networks. By A.D. 1450, the
San Pedro valley was occupied by a remnant population comprised of descendants
of both local and migrant groups. This population either abandoned the region
shortly thereafter or became "archaeologically invisible."

This model will be evaluated in four additional study areas that highlight the
variation in the southern Southwest: the Phoenix Basin, Tonto Basin, Perry Mesa,
and Safford Basin. Each area provides a unique perspective on these processes. A
complex problem requires multiple analytical strategies. To test the proposed
model in each study area we will use existing collections and conduct limited
surface collections to: enhance the temporal resolution of archaeological sites
using a revised scheme for dating late prehistoric pottery assess the occurrence
and scale of migration in each study region examine trade and conflict between
different social groups in each study area through settlement and ceramic
exchange patterns examine interaction on a larger scale through obsidian
exchange patterns reconstruct environmental and agricultural variables in a GIS,
including terrain, arable land, streamflow, and temperature review osteological
data from existing burial populations for evidence of nutritional stress,
disease, trauma, and changes in fertility and mortality rates These various
threads of evidence will be synthesized by a research team with over a century
of combined regional and topical experience relevant to resolution of our
central question. In addition, students will further their education as research
assistants during the data collection and analysis process.

Project results will be broadly disseminated to the professional community and
the general public. Synthetic results of this project will be presented to the
professional community in several formats, including a conference of independent
researchers, presentations at national meetings, and articles in professional
journals. The project results will be presented to the general public in an
issue of Archaeology Southwest (CDA's quarterly magazine) and outreach lectures,
highlighting the importance of preservation archaeology, in Tucson, Phoenix, and
smaller communities in southern. Finally, presentations will be made to tribal
governments and cultural resource specialists of Native American groups.

Sites from the late prehistoric period are particularly threatened by looters
and urban development, and enhanced preservation is another benefit of this
project. CDA will use information from this project to expand our site purchase
and conservation easement preservation program. Project results will improve
interpretation and management policy at two large new National Monuments that
focus on archaeological resources. Finally, these results will benefit state
policymakers by augmenting the Arizona State Historic Preservation Plan.