* 0342307
* US Government Support for IAI Core Budget 2003-04
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Gustavo Necco, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2004
* USD 550,000.00

This is an award to support part of the IAI core budget operational expenses for
a one-year period (October 2003 - September 2004). The IAI is an
intergovernmental organization supported, at present, by 19 countries in the
Americas dedicated to pursuing the principles of scientific excellence,
international cooperation, and the open exchange of scientific information to
increase the understanding of global change phenomena and their socio-economic
implications. The IAI's mission is to develop the capacity to understand the
integrated impact of past, present and future global changes on regional and
continental environments in the Americas and to promote collaborative research
and informed action at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The request is to cover
85% of the costs of the IAI Directorate international staff salaries along with
part of the costs associated with travels of the IAI Directorate staff and of
the Scientific Advisory Members (SAC) members and part of the costs of
communications (dissemination/documentation/publication) at the institute. The
remaining expenses to be supported by the IAI core budget are covered by the
other IAI member countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Background&lt;br/&gt;The IAI
has been listed by the State Department as an international organization within
the meaning of the Federal Employees International Organization Service Act,
covered by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and 5 U.S.C. 3581.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core Budget
support, for which this proposal is submitted, allows the operation of the
Directorate of the IAI. Currently, the IAI Directorate is hosted by Brazil in
Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo state, on the campus of the Brazilian National
Space Research Institute (INPE), where the IAI Directorate functions as an
internationally recognized juridical personality, with the corresponding
privileges and immunities granted by the Government of
Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core Budget commitment pledges are made by the all
Parties to the Agreement Establishing the IAI: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Jamaica,
Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, the USA, and Venezuela. Amounts are
arrived at by consensus at an annual meeting of the Conference of the Parties to
the IAI Agreement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IAI is a U.S. initiative to
stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific
institutions of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the lead U.S.
Government agency designated by the White House to carry out U.S.
responsibilities within the IAI.