* 0342020
* SGER:    Exploratory Study on a Maintenance-free Novel Device for Seismic Reponse Control of Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Genda Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 10/31/2005
* USD 34,358.00

PI: Genda Chen, UM-Rolla

In structural control, semi-active strategies are considered most promising for
the hazard mitigation of buildings and civil infrastructures. They can be used
to effectively suppress the dynamic responses of a structure with a small amount
of external energy. During the past 20 years, a number of semi-active devices
have been implemented in buildings and bridges for reduction of wind-,
earthquake- or traffic-induced vibration. All semi-active control devices
developed in the past require the use of external energy. Although low in energy
use, this requirement necessitates the maintenance of such devices over the life
span of a structure being controlled. In this study, a maintenance-free tank
filled with liquid and fine particles is proposed to mitigate the dynamic
responses of a structural system. The device (tank) works following the
principle of a Tuned Liquid Damper. Its mass, however, can be changed as base
excitations increase, based on the "soil liquefaction" mechanism in soil
dynamics. Therefore, though no external energy is required in operation, the
device functions as a semi-active unit. The objective of this proposed work is
to demonstrate the device's effectiveness with a proof-of-concept testing
program. Buildings and civil infrastructures are subjected to multi-hazards such
as blasting, windstorms, and earthquakes. The uncertain nature of these man-made
or natural hazards dictates the constant inspection of a semi-active device if
maintenance for such a device is required. The proposed work is unprecedented in
developing a maintenance-free device in structural control. It will therefore
generate a surge of new research activities in structural control.

The project will be completed in one year with one graduate student. The results
and findings will be disseminated in an authorative journal and national
conference.