* 0342321
* Electronic, Optical, and Interfacial Properties of pi-Conjugated Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Jean-Luc Bredas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 379,650.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Bredas of the Georgia Institute of Technology will
conduct research in four areas: 1) to provide a description of intra- and
intermolecular self-exchange electron-transfer reactions; 2) to analyze energy-
transfer processes including resonant energy transfer (singlet-exciton hopping)
as well as singlet-singlet, singlet-triplet, and singlet-polaron annihilations;
3) to evaluate photo-induced electron-transfer processes; and 4) to characterize
organic/organic heterojunctions and simple metal/conjugated molecule
interactions. The first of these topics relates to the transport mechanism and
is a key process in all applications of semiconducting polymers and oligomers,
while the second has to do with color tuning and loss mechanisms in organic
light-emitting diodes and lasers. The third topic concerns the operation of
photodetectors, solar cells, as well as photorefractive devices. Lastly, the
work of topic four serves to expand previous studies on metal/organic
interfaces.

The work depends on a continuous interaction between experiment and theory,
through extensive collaborations with experts within and outside the USA.
Students and postdoctoral associates will participate in the research in a
multidisciplinary and multicultural environment. The proposed research will be a
good mechanism to train a highly educated and motivated workforce in the field
of advanced materials.