* 0342067
* Upgrade of Multichannel Seismic Capabilities on the Research Vessel MAURICE EWING
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* G. Michael Purdy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Shor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 3,975,279.00

0342067 Diebold This award to Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia
University in the City of New York provides a new multichannel seismic
reflection acquisition system, including an 8-kilometer solid state hydrophone
streamer, to significantly improve the geophysical survey capabilities of the
research vessel Maurice Ewing, an NSF-owned ship operated by LDEO as part of the
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System research fleet. The enhanced
system can be accommodated on the existing R/V Ewing handling system, and thus
put to immediate use, providing both long, deep-penetration data acquisition
with the increased length (from the present 6 kilometer maximum) as well as
substantial improvement in high resolution data acquisition for shallower
studies, since the streamer includes 1.5 km of 6.25-meter group spacing sections
as well as 6.5 kilometers of 12.5-meter sections plus spares. The system will
accommodate 3-D, multiple streamer capabilities, which are presently being
considered either as part of a refit of R/V Ewing or acquisition of a
replacement vessel, and the seismic system supported here will provide improved
capabilities for academic researchers under either scenario. We anticipate that
these improvements will be of substantial advantage to marine geophysicists
using the ship in their research, and we anticipate substantial use of the
system to support major ongoing NSF research initiatives, including the
Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP), EarthScope, MARGINS and RIDGE 2000.
***