* 0342421
* Entrainment, Ultragiant Particles, and Warm Rain Formation in Trade Wind Cumulus
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Sonia Lasher-Trapp, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2009
* USD 373,568.00

Warm rain processes account for a significant fraction of precipitation that
falls in the tropics. Despite fifty years of research on this topic, a
quantitative understanding of the production of warm rain has remained elusive.
It is commonly stated that traditional condensation and coalescence theory
cannot produce rain in the observed time of 20 min. Several ideas have been
proposed to explain ways in which drops &gt;50 micron diameter can be formed
more quickly to initiate the coalescence process, while others describe ways
that smaller drops might coalescence more readily than currently
thought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One potential mechanism for producing the large
drops needed to initiate warm rain is the entrainment of dry air from outside
the cloud and its subsequent mixing within the cloud. Laboratory results have
suggested that some droplets in the cloud may not be affected by entrainment,
while others completely evaporate, so subsequent growth can be shared among
fewer droplets, making them larger. Recent work by the PI and her collaborators
has demonstrated that large drops can be produced as a result of entrainment and
mixing. Results from this modeling framework will be tested against and
constrained by observations, and then be extended to coalescence processes in
order to understand the influence of entrainment on warm rain formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, to fully understand and test this mechanism,
more information is required about the process of entrainment itself. Past
observational and numerical studies have presented conflicting results about the
dominance of a larger thermal circulation within the cloud, or smaller
entraining eddies at the cloud edges. A goal of the research is to gain insight
into the cloud motions that are important for cumulus entrainment by analyzing
new observations in conjunction with high-resolution numerical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultragiant particles ingested by cumulus are
another potential mechanism to produce the large drops needed for precipitation
initiation. These particles are much larger than traditional cloud condensation
nuclei, and are thus capable of initiating coalescence without any prior growth
by condensation. The greatest question about this mechanism is whether or not
enough of these particles exist in the atmosphere to significantly influence
warm rain production in a cumulus cloud. A final goal of the research is to make
reliable measurements of local concentrations of ultragiant particles in the
atmosphere, and compare their relative importance to warm rain formation with
that from the large drops formed by entrainment and
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be collected in support of these
objectives during the Rain in Cumulus over the Ocean (RICO) field campaign. The
objective of RICO is to characterize and understand the properties of trade wind
cumulus at all scales, with particular emphasis on precipitation. Aircraft and
radar observations of the clouds will be analyzed and used with detailed
Lagrangian microphysical calculations performed within high-resolution cloud
simulations to meet the project objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work seeks to fill holes in current understanding of cumulus entrainment,
ultragiant particles, and their roles in warm rain formation. It is unique in
that the roles of ultragiant particles and large drops formed by entrainment and
mixing will be compared within similar modeling frameworks, constrained by
crucial observations collected during the RICO project. Acquiring new knowledge
on these topics will be beneficial for developing new parameterizations for
convection and precipitation in weather and climate forecast models, thus
affecting broader scientific endeavors. &lt;br/&gt;