* 0342173
* Symposium H:    3 D Nanoengineered Assemblies;  April 12-16, 2004;  Moscone West, San Francisco, CA
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 09/30/2004
* USD 5,000.00

The goal of this symposium is to provide a forum for scientific and technical
exchange to advance the practice and progress of nanoengineering in three
dimensions. The two dimensional character of materials processing will have to
become more three dimensional as the layer thickness or feature size becomes
comparable to the remaining length scales. There is a need to find alternatives
to conventional processing tools that will work in three dimensions. These more
truly 3D structures will have different applications. The path to 3D nano-
engineered assemblies is crossdisciplinary, and progress depends on the exchange
of information and ideas between researchers working in different
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advance to nanoscale materials processing is
taking place on myriad paths, including lithography, production of nanoparticle
assemblies, surface manipulation and many others. Many of the new techniques
create structures that are three-dimensional, or almost three-dimensional. Even
smaller structures intended to be two-dimensional have a more three-dimensional
geometry as their (2D) feature size and layer thickness become similar. The
properties of these denser assemblies are driving different applications in
electronics (single electron devices), optics (photonic crystals &amp; switches)
and elsewhere (NEMS). Insights from one area of research can be crucial in the
development of other areas. The topic of this symposium is particularly timely,
and the emphasis on three-dimensional nanostructures is novel.&lt;br/&gt;