* 0342805
* SGER:    Engineered Nanowires and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Nitin Padture, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 07/31/2004
* USD 60,000.00

The prime objective of this exploratory project is to demonstrate that metal-
oxide-metal spliced (MOMS) nanowires can be synthesize, and that they can be
assembled into nanoelectronic circuits on substrates with metal contact-pad
electrodes for nanosensor applications. The structure of these novel MOMS
nanowire comprises metal nanowire (Pt; 50-100 nm diameter; 1-100 um long) with a
small segment (50-100 nm wide) being replaced by a sensor oxide (SnO2 ). In
other words, a MOMS nanowire has SnO2 of precise dimensions with integral Pt
nanowire interconnects. These MOMS nanowire nanosensors are likely to have
unprecedented sensitivity and selectivity due to: (i) the high-surface area
Nanoscale SnO2 , providing highly responsive gas-adsorbate-modified surface-
electrical conductivities and (ii) the Pt nanowire in contact with the SnO2
serving as a catalyst. If we are successful in achieving the stated objective,
this research will open the way to assembling the MOMS nanowires into arrays of
highly sensitive, highly selective gas nanosensors. These MOMS nanowire
nanosensors also have the potential to be integrated into nanowire-based
circuits in "bottom up" nanoelectronics providing added functionalities. Thus,
this research has the potential to revolutionize the field of gas sensors, with
far-reaching implications. Moreover, the proposed approach is generic in nature,
and it could be applied to MOMS nanowires containing other oxide segments (e.g.
ZnO, BaTiO3 , (Ba,Sr)TiO3 , PbTiO3 , ZrO2 , SiO2 , Al2 O3 , MgO, pyrochlores,
etc.), which can impart other functionalities. This will also opens the door to
assembling site-specific MOMS nanowire using various self-assembly methods for
making nanodevices. Thus, the MOMS nanowires and their assembly into devices
have the potential to revolutionize the entire field of nanoelectronics.
However, this hinges on our ability to synthesize and assemble these engineered
nanowires, which has hitherto not been done. This makes the proposed project
high-risk, but suitable for the small grant exploratory research (SGER) program.
This project will result in the education of 1 graduate and 1 undergraduate
student in this exciting area of nanoelectronics.