* 0342484
* Collaborative Research:  ANDRILL - - Investigating Antarctica's Role in Cenozoic Global Environmental Change
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2005,12/31/2014
* David Harwood, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Cooperative Agreement
* thomas wilch
* 12/31/2014
* USD 13,310,123.00

ANDRILL is a scientific drilling program to investigate Antarctica's role in
global climate change over the last sixty million years. The approach integrates
geophysical surveys, new drilling technology, multidisciplinary core analysis,
and ice sheet modeling to address four scientific themes: (1) the history of
Antarctica's climate and ice sheets; (2) the evolution of polar biota and
ecosystems; (3) the timing and nature of major tectonic and volcanic episodes;
and (4) the role of Antarctica in the Earth's ocean-climate system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award initiates what may become a long-term program
with drilling of two previously inaccessible sediment records beneath the
McMurdo Ice Shelf and in South McMurdo Sound. These stratigraphic records cover
critical time periods in the development of Antarctica's major ice sheets. The
McMurdo Ice Shelf site focuses on the Ross Ice Shelf, whose size is a sensitive
indicator of global climate change. It has recently undergone major calving
events, and there is evidence of a thousand-kilometer contraction since the last
glacial maximum. As a generator of cold bottom water, the shelf may also play a
key role in ocean circulation. The core obtained from this site will also offer
insight into sub-ice shelf sedimentary, biologic, and oceanographic processes;
the history of Ross Island volcanism; and the flexural response of the
lithosphere to volcanic loading, which is important for geophysical and tectonic
studies of the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The South McMurdo Sound site is
located adjacent to the Dry Valleys, and focuses on the major ice sheet
overlying East Antarctica. A debate persists regarding the stability of this ice
sheet. Evidence from the Dry Valleys supports contradictory conclusions; a
stable ice sheet for at least the last fifteen million years or an active ice
sheet that cycled through expansions and contractions as recently as a few
millions of years ago. Constraining this history is critical to deep-time models
of global climate change. The sediment cores will be used to construct an
overall glacial and interglacial history for the region; including documentation
of sea-ice coverage, sea level, terrestrial vegetation, and melt-water discharge
events. The core will also provide a general chronostratigraphic framework for
regional seismic studies and help unravel the area's complex tectonic
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include formal
and informal education, new research infrastructure, various forms of
collaboration, and improving society's understanding of global climate change.
Education is supported at the postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and K-12
levels. Teachers and curriculum specialists are integrated into the research
program, and a range of video resources will be produced, including a science
documentary for television release. New research infrastructure includes
equipment for core analysis and ice sheet modeling, as well as development of a
unique drilling system to penetrate ice shelves. Drill development and the
overall project are co-supported by international collaboration with scientists
and the National Antarctic programs of New Zealand, Germany, and Italy. The
program also forges new collaborations between research and primarily
undergraduate institutions within the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
key factors in sea-level rise and oceanic and atmospheric circulation,
Antarctica's ice sheets are important to society's understanding of global
climate change. ANDRILL offers new data on marine and terrestrial temperatures,
and changes our understanding of extreme climate events like the formation of
polar ice caps. Such data are critical to developing accurate models of the
Earth's climatic future.&lt;br/&gt;