* 0342831
* Rapid Response Monitoring of Wildfire Impact on Partitioning of Infiltration and Runoff:  The 2003 Aspen Fire in Sabino Canyon, Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Paul Ferre, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2004
* USD 93,688.00

Nijssen&lt;br/&gt;0342831&lt;br/&gt;In the Southwest, severe fires can destroy
as much as 90% of the vegetation and litter cover. &lt;br/&gt;Exposed, burned
soils are highly vulnerable to intense monsoon rains, leading to increases in
surface runoff, peak flows, and erosion rate. These drastic physical and
chemical hydrologic changes negatively impact aquatic habitats and endanger
human lives and property. The Aspen Fire in the Coronado National Forest north
of Tucson has burned in excess of 40,000 acres and destroyed more than 300
structures. This tragic fire offers a unique opportunity to monitor post- fire
soil and water conditions in the well-studied Sabino Creek basin. The effects of
fire at this point scale have been studied extensively and generally, local
scale investigations have shown that the magnitudes of the hydrologic impacts of
fire depend on vegetation, topography, temperature, and fire-intensity. What is
lacking is a coordinated study that links point scale I hydrologic changes with
basin-integrated runoff and stream flow response. The unique opportunity to
combine soil physical measurements of infiltration capacity with integrated
watershed geochemistry will improve our ability to unravel the partitioning
between runoff and infiltration after a wildf1re. Funding sought under this SGER
proposal will be used for intensive &lt;br/&gt;Data collection in the period
immediately following the burn and for continued monitoring over the next year.
SGER is selected as the funding vehicle, because of the urgency to start the
research before or as close as possible to the start of the monsoon. The
motivating science question is: How is the partitioning of precipitation into
infiltration and surface runoff affected by wildfire? We propose an intensive
data collection campaign to measure the watershed response to monsoon and winter
storm events in the wake of the Aspen Fire. &lt;br/&gt;Continued monitoring, to
gauge recovery, will take place over the remainder of the year. Soil physical
measurements, using a modified air permeameter will be made to determine the
extent to which fire-induced changes in soil hydraulic properties lead to
changes in infiltration and &lt;br/&gt;Runoff generation. Stream flow
measurements and analysis of soil and water chemistry will b~ used to
investigate the catchments response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;