* 0342625
* Precipitation and Convective Statistics in the Trades: Observations, Simulation and Parameterization
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Bjorn Stevens, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2009
* USD 551,844.00

Within the "Rain in Cumulus over the Ocean" (RICO) experiment, this investigator
will use measurements from a research radar and an instrumented aircraft to
characterize the mesoscale and climate-scale properties of fields of trade-wind
Cumuli. In contrast to most previous studies that have relied either on analyses
of budgets or on in situ observations, this study will combine remote sensing
and in situ measurements in order to characterize entire fields of clouds. The
result will be a climatologically meaningful data set with supplementary
detailed documentation of properties of the cloud fields in a few representative
cases. The scientific goals are: (i) to determine statistically meaningful
characteristics of trade-wind Cumuli and variations in those characteristics
attributable to large-scale forcing (e.g., caused by passing weather systems);
(ii) to determine if models, especially those that rely upon large-eddy-
simulation, can reproduce and explain those variations; and (iii) to investigate
the influence of precipitation on the measured properties of the cloud fields.
The project thus seeks to use the detailed studies of individual clouds to be
conducted in RICO to determine the ensemble properties of such clouds, needed if
the influence of such cloud fields are to be incorporated into mesoscale and
climate models. The expected result is improved understanding of the transport
of moisture, energy, and momentum by trade-wind clouds and better knowledge of
how to represent those effects in weather and climate systems.

The project will also contribute to the training of graduate students and
postdoctoral scientists in this area of research, both through their direct
involvement in this project and through the RICO graduate-student seminar
series. Another expected broader impact is the development of a benchmark data
set against which models of tradewind Cumuli will be tested in this and future
studies. This should be an important step toward better representation of the
ensemble characteristics of these important tropical regions in climate models.