* 0342417
* Scheduling Collaborative Computations on Heterogeneous Clusters
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Arnold Rosenberg, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2008
* USD 242,024.00

Rosenberg, Aronld University of Massachusetts Amherst CCF-0342417

The past decade has seen a paradigm shift in the computing platforms used for a
wide variety of computations. Advances in technology and economic considerations
have made clusters of workstations or pc's a viable medium for high-performance
"collaborative'' computing (wherein many computers cooperate to solve a single
computational problem). Many of the algorithmic devices that ensured efficient
"collaborative'' computing in earlier computing environments no longer guarantee
efficiency within such clusters, especially when the clusters are heterogeneous,
in the sense that their workstations may differ in computational power. The
program of research proposed herein is dedicated to achieving provably efficient
computation in heterogeneous clusters, via efficient algorithms for large
classes of important computations. The first component of the goal of "provably
efficient computation'' will be the use of a combination of analytical and
experimental methods to develop the insights needed to craft scheduling
algorithms whose performance is predictable via rigorous mathematical and/or
statistical analyses. The second component of the goal will be to validate the
abstract models used to formulate and analyze algorithms. Implementations of
algorithms on actual clusters, and comparison of measured performance against
the predictions of the abstract algorithmic models, will be used to validate or,
where necessary, to modify the models. The scheduling algorithms and, when
appropriate, implementations thereof that result from this process will be the
main product of the research.

The proposed research will focus on "ad hoc'' clusters, which are assembled from
"off the shelf'' workstations or pc's, interconnected via local-area networks.
The major scheduling challenges here reside in the substantial cost of
interworkstation communication and in the cluster's (likely) heterogeneity,
i.e., the differences in computing power of its constituent workstations.
Initial studies have led to a mathematical framework for the proposed research.

Technical impact.. The proposed work will provide rigorously validated
guidelines for scheduling a broad variety of significant computational problems
efficiently on heterogeneous clusters. Research results will be disseminated in
leading conferences and journals, and will be incorporated into courses and
seminars. Via the training of students, and via collaborations and technical
interactions with colleagues, both in the US and abroad, the work will lead to
yet further technical progress. (There are ongoing collaborations with
colleagues in Australia, France, and Italy.)

Broader impacts. Prior support from NSF has led to the incorporation of cutting-
edge technical material into independent studies, courses, and research
seminars, which have been part of the training of several generations of
students in several departments at U Mass Amherst. All but one of the PI's
doctoral students have pursued (successful) academic careers at colleges or
universities in the US. Two recent doctoral students have been women: one was
born in China and one in eastern Europe; both are successfully pursuing careers
in US educational institutions. Results from the proposed research will be
incorporated into the educational program in the same way that prior results
have been.

