* 0342847
* Regulation of Histone Gene Expression During Drosophila Development
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Robert Duronio, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 03/31/2008
* USD 455,100.00

The functional building block of all eukaryotic chromosomes is a structure
called the nucleosome, which is composed of a short stretch of DNA wrapped
around a complex of 8 histone proteins. Many thousands of nucleosomes are needed
to package a cell's entire complement of DNA into chromosomes. The proper
inheritance and function of genes rely on specialized domains within the
chromosomes that carry these genes. The correct assembly of nucleosomes plays a
pivotal role in the establishment and maintenance of these chromosome domains,
and consequently in the maintenance of a properly functioning genome. Nucleosome
assembly requires coordinated, temporal control of histone protein biosynthesis.
Histone production is tightly coupled to the rate of DNA replication during cell
proliferation, because new nucleosomes must be formed to package the newly made
DNA. The cell's ability to control the level of histone mRNA, which is
translated into histone protein, accounts for nearly all of the control of
histone protein biosynthesis. This control operates at many levels, including
production of the mRNA, stability of the mRNA within the cell, and translation
of the mRNA into protein. The goals of this project are to determine the
molecular mechanisms of histone mRNA biosynthesis and metabolism, and how they
are coupled to the rate of DNA replication during cell division throughout
animal development. Histone mRNA metabolism is one of the best systems for
exploring the multitude of strategies that eukaryotic cells use to coordinately
regulate the expression of a family of mRNAs. Moreover, this research project
will have an impact on scientific education. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will perform the bulk of the experimental work, which provides
extensive training in genetics, molecular biology, and cell
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;