* 0342735
* SGER:  High Performance MEMS Metals Developed by Solidification Processing of Composite Coatings and Embedded Layers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Peter Wong, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 07/31/2004
* USD 91,994.00

This SGER focuses on an innovative process and materials that can solve (1)
reliability problems due to surface effects, (2) high-temperature post-
processing, and (3) packaging in multi-layer devices. The materials are high
performance Ni-Al and Ti-Al thin films that can coat surfaces or be embedded in
structures. Here we propose to initiate a reaction to create either Ni-Al or Ti-
Al intermetallics in-situ with minimal intervention to the fabrication
process/equipment. These materials have good corrosion resistance, high
temperature strength, and, in the case of Ti-Al, good biocompatibility with
potential applications in BioMEMS. The proposed research will involve both
thermal modeling and experimental validation. The largest challenge is in
optimization of the Ni-Al and Ti-Al deposition thickness and laser and infrared
heating parameters to trigger the reaction without harming the rest of the
silicon structures. The team will adapt and use a transient
melting/solidification model, which will ultimately be expanded to include
reaction kinetics and the possibility of atomic level
deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SGER will result in the development of
high performance intermetallics for interlayer/interconnects in multi-layer and
multi-chip MEMS devices, utilizing an innovative, realistic thermal process that
can be added to standard microfabrication lines. In addition, an advanced
thermal model of intermetallic solidification processing will be created. The
graduate students in this project will benefit from strong, interdisciplinary
collaboration between two universities, as well as the opportunity to create
exciting demonstrations for undergraduate courses&lt;br/&gt;