* 0342548
* Tropical Marine Aerosols in the Trade Winds: Towards a Better Understanding of the Role of Organic Aerosols in Cloud Condensation Nuclei (CCN)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Olga Mayol Bracero, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 05/31/2008
* USD 251,927.00

This project is a component of the broader "Rain in Cumulus Over the Ocean"
(RICO) experiment, a multi-investigator study of warm-rain formation and the
characteristics of trade-wind Cumuli to be conducted in Antigua-Barbuda in
2004-2005. Rain in such clouds forms after condensation on particles called
"cloud condensation nuclei," or CCN, some of which are thought to be partly
composed of organic compounds. However, little is known about the organic
components in CCN, and this is a controversial topic because standard CCN
measurements may not provide valid measurements in cases where there is a
substantial organic component. The objective of this research project is to
determine representative concentrations, size distributions, composition, CCN
activity, and organic fraction for tropical marine aerosols, with particular
attention to the influence of organic aerosols on the properties of clouds.
Filter samples will be collected at three sites, two in Puerto Rico and one at
Barbuda near the RICO experimental area, so that natural and anthropogenic
sources can be separated. Analyses of the collected samples will be performed by
an international collaboration of chemists who will be participating in this
work. Other components of the study include measurement of the fraction of
particles scavenged by clouds and study of possible effects of water-soluble
organic carbon on the surface tension of solution
droplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to help determine
if organic constituents have a significant influence on CCN, the subset of
particles that determines the droplet concentration and droplet size in tropical
clouds. Understanding the influence of such particles on clouds is a key
contribution to RICO because the sizes of the droplets that result influence the
rate and efficiency of precipitation from the clouds, the primary processes
being studied by that experiment. The results have far-ranging potential
implications in studies of anthropogenic influences on climate because they
advance understanding of the effects of particles, including those produced by
humans or those associated with air pollution, on rainfall. The project also
brings good local involvement into the RICO experiment (to be conducted in
Antigua-Barbuda) by including investigators and students from the University of
Puerto Rico. A Graduate Student seminar conducted during the field experiment
will provide educational opportunities for students from this university and
others and will help advance training in this area, with particular benefits for
the predominantly Hispanic students at this university. New equipment to be
acquired for this work will also enable related studies to continue at this
institution.