* 0343682
* SGER:    Power System Locational Price Reconcillation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Bruce Wollenberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 07/31/2005
* USD 97,197.00

The United States is Deregulating its Electric Power Systems in the manner as
other large public service systems such as airlines, telephone, natural gas, and
banking were deregulated. Electric power system deregulation is justified using
the same logic, that is, to lower costs to consumers and foster innovation and
development. This has not been universally attained as seen in the problems
faced in California in recent years. The US Department of Energy's Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) has recently released a Standard Market
Design (SMD) document that introduces, among other issues, the problem of
enabling two operations systems to reach consistent Locational Marginal Prices
(LMP's) along their boundary (seamless operation). This problem does not have a
well-developed technical solution. Solution of this problem is critical to the
US economy and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this proposal is considerable. Engineers and economists
have developed means of calculating the price that should be paid to suppliers
and paid by consumers at specific locations throughout a power system. These
prices are derived using Optimal Power Flow (OPF) and Unit Commitment (UC)
algorithms that have been developed over the past 30 years. Several regions now
using these algorithms in computer control systems have experienced "seams
problems" along their boundary (e.g. the PJM and NYISO boundary). The
intellectual challenge is to use economic signals, methods of distributed
processing, and alternating current (AC) power flow analysis to solve this
problem. Tutorial courses for both academic and industry audiences will be
conducted as the research unfolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research will be broad indeed. Throughout
the US there are difficulties involved in trading electric energy. A
comprehensive solution would allow consumers to purchase electric energy at the
lowest possible cost even if that meant buying from a source on the other side
of the continent. Consumers who wish to purchase from sources offering green
energy (electric power generated with renewable sources) will have wider options
open to them, as transmission congestion would be properly reflected in the
prices paid. Without a consistent locational pricing mechanism consumers will be
forced to deal only with local suppliers, leading in many cases to higher
prices. The project will hold a workshop for experts from academia and industry
to discuss the problems and solutions found. Minority and women experts will be
sought for inclusion in this workshop. Finally a set of Web pages with is set up
to disseminate reports and results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary
Education&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students involved in this research will be required
to obtain a strong academic interdisciplinary background that includes formal
training not only in electrical engineering, mathematics and computer science,
but also in economic theory and applied economics. Education requirements were
discussed at a workshop jointly sponsored by NSF and the Electric Power Research
Institute (EPRI) in March 2002. The workshop revealed that at present only a few
graduate programs provide individuals who have the appropriate interdisciplinary
background required. The curriculum for the students involved in the proposed
research is designed to provide researchers and future educators who have the
proper background required for solving the nation's critical electric power
deregulation problems.&lt;br/&gt;