* 0343838
* RUI: Embryonic Control of Metamorphic Remodeling in Neural Crest-Derived Skeleton of Xenopus Laevis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Christopher Rose, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/28/2009
* USD 277,325.00

Many animals develop two distinct body forms. In amphibians, the earlier, larval
body form is designed for life in water, and the later, adult form, for life on
land. The intervening metamorphosis involves loss of some larval features,
remodeling of others, and gain of adult features. All changes are regulated by
thyroid hormones (TH). One long-standing hypothesis for explaining the
widespread occurrence and long-term persistence of metamorphosis is that
metamorphosing animals have evolved separate mechanisms for developing larval
and adult features. This decoupling of larval and adult development frees the
two stages to evolve different body forms that are well suited to their
respective environments. By exploiting two environments over their lifetimes,
the members of one species thus face less competition with each other for
essential resources. However, there have been few attempts to test this
"developmental decoupling" hypothesis on amphibians and none that specifically
address whether the larval and adult features are controlled by the same
programs of gene expression. Hox genes, which are expressed in different
combinations in the cells that form the lower jaw, throat and gill
&lt;br/&gt;cartilages, trigger genetic programs that produce the distinct shapes
of these larval cartilages. The study will address whether these genetic
programs also control how these &lt;br/&gt;cartilages respond to TH. In
tadpoles, the lower jaw responds with cell proliferation, the gill cartilages
with cell death, and the intervening throat cartilage with both. The study will
use grafting experiments to produce tadpoles with a lower jaw cartilage in place
of a gill cartilage, and vice versa and the tadpoles will subsequently be
exposed to TH to determine if the TH response of the out-of-place cartilage is
affected by its new &lt;br/&gt;environment, or whether it retains the response
expected from its Hox gene expression prior to grafting. In addition, eggs will
also be injected with either a blocker of Hox gene activity or an extra Hox gene
to produce tadpoles with a lower jaw cartilage &lt;br/&gt;in the shape of a
throat cartilage, or vice versa and these tadpoles will also be exposed to TH to
determine if the cartilage with a transformed larval shape also has a
transformed TH response. Determination of how TH response is controlled will aid
in understanding whether metamorphosis in amphibians represents a true
decoupling of larval and adult development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;