* 0343154
* Redefining Mechanical Engineering : Systemic Reform of the Mechanical Engineering Program at City College
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,04/30/2008
* James Hammonds, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 04/30/2008
* USD 1,505,000.00

This project will under take department level reform at City College of New York
(CCNY) Mechanical Engineering (ME) Department in October 2002. This systemic
reform of the curriculum will be undertaken in partnership with the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME).

The reform effort has three components, each designed to correspond to a current
trend in the mechanical engineering profession. These are: a) incorporation of
emerging technologies such as, MEMS, Advanced Materials, Computer Aided
Engineering (CAE), Intelligent Systems/ Electronics, Biotechnology,
Nanotechnology and Nontraditional Energy, into the curriculum; b) new teaching
methodologies focused on student learning and c) enhanced efforts at recruitment
and retention of students to help increase the emerging technological workforce
for industry. All three elements of reform are planned to reinforce one another.
A distinguishing feature of this project is the collaboration with ASME, which
as the premier organization of the mechanical engineering profession can provide
meaningful feedback on the impact of the curriculum reform on the practice of
engineering. The collaboration with ASME will be in the following areas: a)
incorporation of the ASME Professional Practice Curriculum into the ME program
b) conducting ASME's Effective Teaching Workshop at CCNY c) instituting an
Industry Advisory Board to provide feedback and d) dissemination of results.

