* 0343737
* RUI: Cryptochrome Structure and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Margaret Ahmad, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2008
* USD 198,665.00

Cryptochromes are blue-light photoreceptors found in plants and other organisms
that control important aspects of growth and development. In animals,
cryptochromes function as components of the circadian clock and are therefore of
potential interest for treating jet lag and depression. They are also important
in many plant processes. This research involves screening Arabidopsis plants for
novel mutations within cryptochrome photoreceptors, followed by detailed
structure/function analysis of the mutated proteins. A saturation mutagenesis
approach will use simple, classic genetic screens available for detecting plant
cryptochrome mutations. Mutant plants that are insensitive to blue light will be
selected in populations of chemically mutagenized Arabidopsis seedlings followed
by sequencing of mutant alleles by PCR-based methods. Expression of the
cryptochrome protein in the mutant seedlings will be verified by Western Blot
analysis. The mutant photoreceptor proteins will then be expressed in a
recombinant baculovirus expression system, from which large amounts of virtually
pure receptor protein can be prepared. Mutant cryptochrome proteins will be
compared to wild type proteins via both spectroscopic (absorption and
fluorescence) and autophosphorylation assays. It will therefore be possible to
relate the effect of mutations that partially or totally inactivate the
cryptochrome photoreceptor in vivo with biochemical and biophysical properties
of the photoreceptor in vitro. These data should help to provide insight into
the primary mechanism of action of cryptochrome, and will complement several
site-specific mutagenic approaches being undertaken simultaneously by the
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impacts of this
research are the development of the infrastructure of the university and the
stimulation of student interest in molecular biology at the regional campus.
Equipment for advanced molecular biology techniques will be shared with the
teaching laboratories for use in designing more advances laboratory courses. The
intensive summer research program in Paris will provide students with direct
experience working in a foreign country and engender an appreciation of the
international nature of the scientific community as well as providing a full-
time exposure to a research environment of advanced standing. Based on the
record of past students who have participated in this program, the potential for
stimulating student interest in a scientific career is significant.&lt;br/&gt;