* 0343740
* Light and the Arts:     A Quantitative Approach
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Arthur Snider, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2006
* USD 108,527.00

This project will develop a fine arts course for engineering students that
approaches the subject matter through an avenue that they can see as valuable
and empowering. The key objectives in the creation of the new course
were:&lt;br/&gt;. to approach the subject of fine art from a perspective where
technology-oriented students&lt;br/&gt; would have an advantage, rather than a
handicap;&lt;br/&gt;. to exploit the experience so as to reinforce some aspect
of engineering science by&lt;br/&gt; reviewing it in a new context;&lt;br/&gt;.
to place the engineering students in an environment composed mostly of others in
the&lt;br/&gt; same discipline.&lt;br/&gt;Light is used as the underlying theme
for this new approach to fine arts appreciation. Light,&lt;br/&gt;obviously, is
the chief medium through which painting expresses itself to us.
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;students come into the course with a modicum of expertise
in optics and electromagnetics&lt;br/&gt;through their basic physics courses.
Moreover, it is apparent to them that optical devices will&lt;br/&gt;inevitably
play a role in their subsequent engineering practice. Therefore, a light-based
approach&lt;br/&gt;to fine art fulfills the goals of changing their perspective
from handicapped bystander to&lt;br/&gt;empowered facilitator and of creating an
experience that manifestly advances their
professional&lt;br/&gt;qualifications.&lt;br/&gt;The bulk of the course content
is a survey of the lives and works of 40 well-known artists.&lt;br/&gt;Most of
these works are presented in a context that reflects some aspect of the
physics,&lt;br/&gt;perception, or technology of light. Therefore, even though
study of light phenomena takes up&lt;br/&gt;only a fraction of the material, it
dictates the order of presentation of the artists and forms the&lt;br/&gt;frame
of reference for the syllabus. The exposure to the artists works is interspersed
and&lt;br/&gt;correlated whenever possible with the physical and aesthetic
aspects of light, the workings of the&lt;br/&gt;eye, and the use of technology
in world of the artist. "Lights and the Arts: A Quantitative&lt;br/&gt;Approach"
was taught for the first time in the spring of 2003 to 40 students, and it
successfully&lt;br/&gt;met its modest objectives for a first offering. Herein
the proposer seeks support to enable it to&lt;br/&gt;reach its full potential,
most importantly by developing a laboratory component providing
a&lt;br/&gt;hands-on experience in support of the exposition.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is the distillation of new conceptual
perspectives that, to&lt;br/&gt;some degree, recognize art as a manifestation of
technology, and technology as an empowering&lt;br/&gt;force for
art.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project is the challenge it extends to
educators to seek ways to&lt;br/&gt;empower, and not discourage, technology
students in their distributional curriculum, especially&lt;br/&gt;when the
subject matter may present non-conventional approaches to the understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;