* 0343515
* SGER:  Altered Sensory Sensitivity in Osteocalcin Knockout Mice
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Larissa Pohorecky, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 10/31/2006
* USD 126,000.00

The skeleton is one of the defining characteristics of the Class Vertebrata. It
provides structural support and a reservoir for calcium phosphate, but has been
largely ignored as a contributor to overall body homeostasis. Osteocalcin (OC)
is an abundant calcium binding protein component of bone matrix presumed to
participate in control of mineralization. A relatively consistent percentage of
OC is released to plasma (pOC) and generally reflects bone formation rate. Bones
of mice depleted of osteocalcin by gene deletion (KO) are more densely
mineralized than those of wild-type mice (WT). Interestingly, KO mice were also
observed to differ in behavior and sensitivity to touch compared to WT mice.
Because pOC concentration is also altered by external stimuli that can affect
tactile sensitivity, its deletion may alter the availability of calcium required
for nerve conduction. This project will confirm that KO mice that have no pOC
are more sensitive to touch and to pain than WT. Mice will be evaluated by
testing the following: (1) behavior in an open field environment, including
those related to tactile sensitivity such as grooming and wall contact; (2)
sensitivity to a heated surface and pressure on paws and other body areas
exerted by calibrated Von Frey fibers; (3) re-evaluation of touch response and
analysis of the stress hormone corticosterone following restraint and brief
immersion in shallow room temperature water. These experiments will provide
evidence that OC is necessary for normal tactile sensory function under both
normal and stressful conditions. They will also provide evidence that bone
functions as an endocrine organ with communication to the nervous system in the
form of pOC.&lt;br/&gt;