* 0343412
* Synthesis and Characterization of New Rare Earth Metal Main Group Metal Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Peter Dorhout, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 09/30/2008
* USD 503,329.00

This project addresses the prediction of chemical-structural relationships in a
family of solids based on a set of available building blocks. The fundamental
tools will be able to be broadly applied to any set of building blocks and
connecting units, whether they are rare-earth metals and main group anions or
other neutral or ionic building blocks. Three interrelated areas of materials
synthesis will be addressed with an emphasis on developing composition phase
diagrams for targeting specific rare-earth metal main group metal materials to
include quaternary phase space of rare-earth metal chalcopnictates, quaternary
rare-earth metal chalcotetrelates, and quaternary rare-earth metal
chalcotrielates. A series of chemical formulae that suggest products with
targeted compositions are possible will be tested. These formulae, in some
cases, can predict the space group symmetry of the related products.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This project is providing guidelines for the synthesis
of new classes of solid compounds, and guidelines for understanding how families
of structures are interrelated and how those families exhibit unique optical and
electronic properties. The broader impacts of the project include the training
of post doctoral scholars, graduate students and undergraduate students, in the
science of materials design and chemical synthesis. A new interdisciplinary
Materials Chemistry graduate program is being developed at Colorado State
University that is unique in the Rocky Mountain region.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;