* 0343846
* Young Investigator Travel Support for the 2004 Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation Meeting, in Bozeman, Montana, July 2004
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2005
* Michael Kahn, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 03/31/2005
* USD 9,000.00

The world is likely to face a severe food shortage in the near future, due in
part to rapid population growth. While humans previously used about 10% of the
total carbon produced through plant photosynthesis, we now directly or
indirectly use about 40% of that carbon. Major increases in crop production will
be needed to maintain current levels of human nutrition over the next 40 years.
Higher production will require increased yield in current crop areas and the use
of additional land areas now considered to be marginal. Producing high-quality,
protein-rich food depends on having enough nitrogen for plant growth and
development. However, increased yield through fertilizer application is
associated with problems of soil acidity and nitrogen accumulation that threaten
the sustainability of this kind of input-driven agriculture. In general,
sustainable agriculture must be managed with an eye toward conservation or
enhancement of soil fertility, decreased crop losses due to pests and pathogens
and greater resource efficiency, often to avoid long-term damage that can result
from short-term gain. A major contributor to sustainable agriculture is
effective management of nitrogen. Several studies have demonstrated that the
successful manipulation of N inputs through the use of biologically fixed
nitrogen can result in farming practices that are economically viable and
environmentally sound. Many diverse biological associations contribute to
biological N2 fixation in soil and aquatic systems. In most agricultural
settings about 80% of biologically-fixed nitrogen occurs via symbiotic
interactions with legumes, such as pea, alfalfa, soybean, peanut and lentil,
that are major American crops. Another large contribution is made by "nitrogen-
fixing" trees and shrubs, such as alder, that can provide useful timber.
Research aimed at improving symbiotic productivity is interdisciplinary and
requires studies of microbial genetics, microbial and plant physiology, ecology,
and soil science. There are several exciting developments recently in the basic
science of this effort, with significant progress in bacterial genomics and in
genetic manipulation of Medicago (alfalfa) species and of soybean. Research is
also international, since legumes and other crops grown on symbiotically
produced nitrogen are important in many countries. The19th North American
Conference on Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation, to be held at Montana State
University in Bozeman, Montana, on July 23-28, 2004, is the latest in a series
of biennual meetings that bring together workers in the various disciplines
related to symbiotic nitrogen fixation to exchange current information regarding
N2 fixation research in North America and the world. The meetings have been
distinguished by attempts to keep costs as low as possible to encourage student
participation and by the diverse group of scientific disciplines that are
represented. Subject matter at the conference ranges from the most basic to very
applied. This has been a meeting where cutting edge molecular biology is in one
session, cutting edge ecology in another and the latest in farm methods in a
third. The funds allocated in this award will help make this meeting accessible
to junior scientists, with all of the funds designated to support travel
expenses of junior scientists, in order to allow them to present their results
at this meeting. Only scientists in US laboratories or Americans working
overseas will be supported with this award, but we are also soliciting funds
that will allow awards to international scholars. Preference for these awards
will be given to Americans from underrepresented groups but the submitted
abstract of research to be presented will also be evaluated by the organizing
committee.