* 0343578
* Investigating the Feasibility of Scaling up Effective Reading Comprehension Instruction using Innovative Video-Case-Based Hypermedia
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Shirley Magnusson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 07/31/2006
* USD 995,462.00

The purpose of this Phase I IERI proposal is to investigate the feasibility of
scaling the knowledge base on the effective teaching of reading comprehension in
a manner that is accessible, reflective of the complex nature of this
instruction, focused on advancing students understanding of general and domain-
specific informational text, and informed by a theory of learning consistent
with the task at hand. Despite recent reading initiatives, students in the upper
elementary grades are not sufficiently prepared to interpret and learn from
informational text, precluding full attainment of reading competence and
interfering with their ability to learn from subject matter text. This is
particularly the case for poor urban youth. The most likely explanation for this
situation is the absence of opportunities for students to learn how to
comprehend text, reflecting teachers uncertainty about how to teach reading
comprehension, especially with respect to supporting learning in subject matter
areas with ambitious educational goals.&lt;br/&gt;Paradoxically, there is a
significant and robust knowledge base regarding effective reading comprehension
instruction. The challenge is to represent and disseminate this knowledge base
effectively and powerfully. The intervention we propose integrates the resources
accumulated by three programs of comprehension research with strong evidentiary
bases (Reciprocal Teaching, Questioning the Author, and Guided Inquiry
supporting Multiple Literacies). Specifically, we propose to conduct controlled
experiments in which we compare two models of professional development. One
model, informed by cognitive flexibility theory, features the use of hypermedia-
based videocases, while the second features the same information, presented via
traditional video-based cases. In addition to supporting teachers learning of
the targeted instructional techniques, the content of these cases will address
assessment, individual differences, teacher mediation, and text- and domain-
specific (to science) comprehension instruction.&lt;br/&gt;In each year of the
proposed project, participants include 60 teachers from 30 schools (1500
students), randomly assigned to one of two conditions. SES data for targeted
districts indicate that students qualifying for free- or reduced-cost lunch
range from 12% to 66%; and ethnicity data indicate that 7%, 51%, and 75% of the
students in the targeted districts are African-American, while the remainder are
principally White. Measures of teacher knowledge/beliefs/orientations and
practice, as well as student measures of general and domain specific reading
achievement will be collected to answer the following research questions: (1)
What are the effects of using hypermedia-based videocases versus traditional
video-based cases on the development of teachers knowledge/beliefs regarding
reading comprehension instruction; (2) What are the relative effects of these
tools on teachers reading comprehension instruction practices; (3) What are the
relative effects on students comprehension of general and specific subject
matter text, measured by standardized assessments; And (4) How are outcomes
mediated by teacher characteristics (e.g., knowledge, self-efficacy), student
characteristics (demographics, achievement), and features of school and policy
contexts that relate to successful buy-in. Throughout the study, a central focus
is on identifying features of successful professional development that are
scalable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;