* 0343861
* Virtual Construction Simulator:  Improving Design and Construction Engineering Education with Virtual Reality
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* John Messner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 11/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This project will foster student's ability to visualize the built environment is
a critical skill required in design and construction engineering education.
Students in Civil and Architectural Engineering programs typically learn to
analyze project designs and plan their construction by reviewing 2D CAD drawings
and developing Critical Path Method (CPM) schedules. With recent advancements in
computer display technology, it is now possible to place our students within a
large-scale, immersive projection display that allows them to experience and
experiment with a 3D, full-scale virtual prototype of a construction project.
This advanced visual communication can significantly improve the ability of
students to comprehend, learn, and gain experience with reviewing designs for
constructability and planning the construction of complex building and
infrastructure projects. The immersive models will also help students improve
their visualization skills so that they will be more prepared to interpret and
visualize 2D drawings in 3D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposed
project is to improve engineering education in building and infrastructure
design and construction through the use of interactive construction project
learning modules in an immersive virtual reality environment. The project team
will develop a Virtual Construction Simulator (VCS) that will allow students to
immerse themselves into a 3D construction project, perform a detailed analysis
of the design, and develop a plan for constructing the project. The construction
plan will include construction methods selection, activity sequencing, activity
duration definition, temporary facility locations, and project schedule
calculation. After the students complete their design analysis and construction
planning exercise, they will be able to review the results and present them to
their peers and instructors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of the VCS will make
an immediate impact on the quality of engineering education at Penn State in
Architectural Engineering and Civil Engineering. The broad impacts of this
project will be fourfold. First, it will enrich the education of engineers who
design and construct infrastructure and building projects. This will improve the
efficiency, safety and security of future building projects nationwide. Second,
it will demonstrate the VCS and case study projects in a low cost VR display.
These tools will be made available to other universities so that more students
and faculty can use the learning modules developed in this proposed project and
share new case studies developed from the project templates. Third, this project
will add to the research on the pedagogical value of using active learning
exercises in an immersed VR environment through a detailed assessment of the
impact of selected case study projects on our learning objectives. Finally, the
improved visualization capability development and engaging learning environment
should improve the attraction and retention of top caliber students to
engineering disciplines. This project will provide a model for future VR
engineering education applications by clearly showing the educational value and
preferred methods for applying these advanced visualization tools.&lt;br/&gt;