* 0343981
* Perceptual correlates of syllable weight
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Matthew Gordon, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2007
* USD 199,928.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Matthew Gordon will develop a
computational model of the auditory system's response to speech stimuli. This
auditory model will allow for quantitative investigation of a number of
different properties of sound systems in languages of the world, including the
focus of this study, the cross-linguistically pervasive phenomenon of weight-
sensitive stress: the attraction of stress by certain "heavy" syllables. This
research will explore the role that auditory, as opposed to strictly acoustic,
factors play in weight-sensitive stress systems: in particular, the study will
investigate the hypothesis that languages preferentially stress syllables that
have greater auditory prominence than other syllables. The project goes beyond
other work on the auditory basis for sound systems by collecting and
quantitatively analyzing phonetic data from ten languages, including several
understudied and endangered languages. The study also includes a perception
experiment demonstrating that the auditory factors driving weight-sensitive
stress are universal, even in languages lacking weight-sensitive stress.
Finally, the study will also explore possible correlations between weight and
syllable structure on a cross-linguistic basis in order to gain insight into the
factors relevant for acquiring a stress system.

This research investigates the relationship between the acoustics of speech and
the perception of speech in the auditory system in order to contribute to our
understanding of the sound systems of the world's languages. The result of this
research will be a publicly available auditory model that will not only account
for the phenomenon of weight-sensitive stress, the focus of the study, but will
also provide insight into several other linguistic features, including sound
inventories and syllable structure. Furthermore, investigation of the
correlation between stress and syllable structure will potentially contribute to
our understanding of how sound systems are acquired by children. Yet another
benefit of the proposed study is that it broadens our knowledge of a number of
understudied and endangered languages.



