* 0343442
* Making Waves: From Pattern to Structure in Dental Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Kenneth Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye E. Reed
* 01/31/2010
* USD 450,000.00

Dental patterning-the number, location, and morphology of teeth in the jaws-has
been a major factor in primate and human adaptive radiation. The specializations
made possible by dental variation are among the diagnostic characteristics of
primate and hominid evolution, and teeth are among the most important evidence
preserved in the fossil record. The dentition can be viewed as a set of nested
'waves' of growth along the embryonic dental lamina. The wave-peaks first
determine the position of teeth along the jaws. Subsequent peaks sculpt the
cusps within teeth, and the results are fixed in place by mineralization. This
wavelike pattern is generated by quantitative interactions among diffusible
(extracellular) signaling factors. The first objective of this project is to use
transgenic mice with altered expression levels of these factors, to see whether
variation resembling that occurring naturally can be produced. By making and
then interbreeding animals with enhanced and reduced expression of these
signaling factors, a better understanding of how the patterning process actually
works. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, not all genes involved in dental patterning
are yet known. Gene mapping methods will be applied to data on dental variation
in a large baboon genealogy at the Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research
in San Antonio, data collected by colleagues in Texas and at the University of
Illinois. Similarly, gene mapping will be done in commercially available
recombinant inbred laboratory mice, in which variation similar to that observed
in the baboons has been found. Chromosomal regions that may carry genes
affecting dental patterning will be explored by gene-expression studies and
bioinformatic (computer-based) methods to identify those genes, determine how
their expression is regulated, and characterize their appearance in developing
teeth in embryonic mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This broader impact of this
project will extend well beyond anthropology, to biology in general, because one
of the most fundamental questions of all of life, plant, animal and human is:
How do complex patterns of which organisms are built come about? The dentition
can serve as a model for many similar processes across the spectrum of life.
Technical materials like DNA clones and the sequence data will be made available
to the research community, and the results will be made accessible to the
scientific and general public through various review and overview articles. The
laboratory routinely includes undergraduates and minorities, as well as national
and international collaborations. This work is routinely included in courses
taught, and NSF REU supplements often support undergraduates in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;