* 0343374
* Crystallographic Study of a Quinoprotein Electron Transfer System: Methylamine Dehydrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2007
* F. Mathews, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 10/31/2007
* USD 486,715.00

Electron transfer between biological macromolecules usually occurs within a
transient complex in which the participating redox centers and the intervening
protein are optimally configured to promote and regulate electron flow between
the centers. Only a few such complexes have been crystallized. Methylamine
dehydrogenase (MADH) and amicyanin, both together and with a cytochrome, form
two structurally characterized physiological electron transfer complexes; the
complex of aromatic amine dehydrogenase (AADH) with azurin comprises a third.
MADH and AADH, as well as quinohemoprotein amine dehydrogenase (QHNDH), catalyze
the oxidative deamination of primary amines. All three enzymes contain the redox
cofactor tryptophylquinone (TRQ), a tryptophan side chain containing two quinone
oxygen atoms. TRQ is crosslinked to another tryptophan in MADH and AADH or to a
cysteine in QHNDH. The aims of this project are to carry out structural studies
of (1) amicyanin mutants with altered redox properties, alone and in complex
with MADH, (2) redox variants and ligand-bound forms of the AADH/azurin complex
and (3) the roles and biogenesis of TRQ and its crosslink to cysteine in QHNDH.
The results will help identify structural features important for modulation of
biological electron transfer, including partner recognition, regulation of
driving force, reorganization energy and gating. The studies of TRQ biogenesis
are important because of the ubiquity in biology of posttranslationally modified
amino acid side chains whose roles and biogenic mechanisms are poorly
understood.

The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity will include the
promotion of undergraduate training in research both nationally and
internationally. Efforts to involve local undergraduates in the structural
studies will continue and single crystal spectroscopic studies of electron
transfer complexes in Italy will provide a training environment for students
abroad. The research will also enhance research infrastructure through
international partnerships with scientists and their students in Japan and
Italy.