* 0343570
* RUI: Long-Term Coral Reef Dynamics in the US Virgin Islands: 1987-2008
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2009
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 10/31/2009
* USD 303,123.00

Long-term coral reef dynamics in the USVI: 1987-2008&lt;br/&gt;PI - Peter J.
Edmunds&lt;br/&gt;Institution -- California State University
Northridge&lt;br/&gt;Contact -- peter.edmunds@csun.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal focuses on coral reefs in the United States Virgin Islands (USVI),
specifically extending an existing long-term study of coral reef community
structure into its 22nd year and addressing four hypotheses addressing the
mechanisms responsible for recent and ongoing changes in these systems. The
analysis of the community structure entails documenting the relative abundance
of live coral and algae on the sea floor, and quantifying the birth, death and
growth rates of individual colonies of ecologically important species. To gain
insight into the underlying causes of change, experiments will be conducted and
existing data analyzed in order to: (i) identify the mechanisms relating coral
success to their potential to reproduce and replace themselves, (ii) determine
the importance of high temperature in killing coral recruits, (iii) gauge how
the relative abundance of coral colonies of ecologically important sizes -
namely large (i.e., old) colonies - has been changed by recent disturbances, and
(iv) develop the capacity to forecast what the reefs of tomorrow will look like,
and which species will dominate the communities. Close integration of this
project with the VI National Park provides clear channels of communication
through which the results can be directed in order to be effective components of
the decision making process concerning the management of coral reef
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals of this study, NSF support
through the LTREB program will be used to complete a five-year analysis of coral
reefs in St. John (USVI) that have been studied continuously by this
investigator since 1987. Reefs in this location represent a resource of profound
importance to the United States because they occur in a pristine location that
is protected within a National Park and the international system of Biosphere
Reserves. Because of this protection, changes on these reefs are more likely to
reflect the "natural" dynamics of marine communities within this region rather
than local effects attributed to urbanization and other human-induced effects.
In other words, the reefs of St. John provide a unique reference site against
which the effects of human impacts in more disturbed locations (for example, the
Florida Keys and Hawaii) can be gauged. The merits of this project lie in the
context, longevity and productivity of the existing study that provides an
empirical justification to continue the research, as well as a framework within
which meaningful hypotheses can be developed. Completion of this phase of the
work will create one of the longest quantitative histories with annual
resolution of a Caribbean reef, and by addressing mechanistic questions
substantial advances will be made in understanding the causes and consequences
of recent changes in coral reef community structure. &lt;br/&gt;