* 0343672
* CAREER: Error-Correcting Codes --- List Decoding and Related Algorithmic Challenges
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Venkatesan Guruswami, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 04/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Project abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves an integrated
collection of research and&lt;br/&gt;educational activities focused on the
theory of error-correcting&lt;br/&gt;codes. Error-correcting codes are
combinatorial objects used for the&lt;br/&gt;purpose of reliable communication
of information over a noisy&lt;br/&gt;channel. The project focuses on the
asymptotic and algorithmic aspects&lt;br/&gt;of coding theory, and in particular
aims to construct explicit&lt;br/&gt;families of codes that achieve good trade-
offs together with efficient&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for encoding and decoding
them. The channel noise is&lt;br/&gt;typically modeled adversarially (as opposed
to being generated by some&lt;br/&gt;probability distribution), as this will
yield codes and algorithms&lt;br/&gt;with the strongest possible error-
resilience guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central technical notion that
will be explored is that of "list&lt;br/&gt;decoding". Under list decoding, the
decoder is supposed to output all&lt;br/&gt;messages whose encodings are within
a certain distance of the received&lt;br/&gt;word. Thus one relaxes the
requirement that the decoder's answer&lt;br/&gt;always be unique. This
relaxation is necessary to meaningfully pose&lt;br/&gt;the question of decoding
beyond the ``traditional'' half-the-distance&lt;br/&gt;bound, and at the same
time even when constrained to output a small&lt;br/&gt;list, ends up permitting
decoding well beyond half-the-distance of a&lt;br/&gt;code. List decoding is
itself an old notion (first defined in the late&lt;br/&gt;50's) but it was only
recently that efficient list decoding&lt;br/&gt;algorithms were discovered for
useful families of codes. Consequently,&lt;br/&gt;though much progress has been
made in the last few years, list&lt;br/&gt;decoding is a subject still in its
infancy in terms of its true&lt;br/&gt;potential. In particular, the high level
conceptual motivation for&lt;br/&gt;list decoding is that it will enable
communication at rates close to&lt;br/&gt;the channel's ``capacity'' even when
the noise is adversarial (instead&lt;br/&gt;of obeying an assumed probabilistic
model). The codes needed for such&lt;br/&gt;a result are, however, not
explicitly known currently. One of the&lt;br/&gt;central goals of this project
is to make progress towards the&lt;br/&gt;construction of such codes and the
associated list decoding&lt;br/&gt;algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROAD
IMPACTS: The project will attempt to provide new tools and&lt;br/&gt;techniques
for the study of codes that involve a rare interplay&lt;br/&gt;between algebra,
combinatorics, and probability. It will try to&lt;br/&gt;enhance our
understanding of the fundamental limits of noiseless&lt;br/&gt;communication
possible on various noisy channels, as well as push the&lt;br/&gt;rate of usage
of transmission channels in practice much closer to&lt;br/&gt;their true
potential even in the face of adversarially effected&lt;br/&gt;errors. Due to
the great diversity in the results that it aims to&lt;br/&gt;obtain, the
research will enable bringing the different communities&lt;br/&gt;that work on
coding theory closer together, and more widely expound&lt;br/&gt;the merits of
the asymptotic complexity based approach pioneered by&lt;br/&gt;theoretical
computer science. Lecture notes from the offerings of the&lt;br/&gt;courses
developed in the educational component will be made freely&lt;br/&gt;available
on the web, and will eventually be embellished into a&lt;br/&gt;monograph on
coding theory with a focus on computational complexity&lt;br/&gt;that is
currently lacking in the standard texts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;