* 0343179
* Dissection of a Molecular Genetic Pathway that Specifies Abaxial Leaf Identity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Randall Kerstetter, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 02/28/2007
* USD 365,000.00

Normal morphogenesis requires the proper specification of dorsal-ventral (or
adaxial-abaxial) polarity during leaf development. The KANADI1 (KAN1) gene is
one of the key determinants of abaxial identity in leaf development and may play
a critical role in patterning the Arabidopsis embryo. KAN1 encodes a putative
transcription factor of the GARP domain family (a recently identified class of
DNA binding proteins in the helix-turn-helix superfamily). Little is currently
known about how KAN1 specifies abaxial identity at the molecular level. In order
to begin to clarify the molecular mechanisms that regulate adaxial-abaxial
polarity in plants, we propose to identify downstream target genes of KAN1 and
upstream regulators of KAN1.&lt;br/&gt;Identifying genes that regulate and are
regulated by KAN1 will provide an entry point into the genetic pathways that
contribute to the specification of polarity in plants. In addition, upstream
regulators and downstream targets of KAN1 will provide a focus for reverse
genetic approaches aimed at elucidating the functions of the many Arabidopsis
genes for which no known function has yet been determined. These genomic and
biochemical studies will provide a framework for understanding the regulatory
network that controls leaf development and will complement ongoing genetic
approaches aimed at characterizing mutants with polarity
defects.&lt;br/&gt;Asymmetry and polarity establishment are fundamental
processes in all multi-cellular organisms. Identifying the molecules and
mechanisms employed by plants will enrich our knowledge of cell fate
specification and provide a meaningful comparison for developmental processes
that are increasingly well understood in animal systems. In addition, since the
bulk of photosynthesis that contributes to plant-derived commodities, such as
food, fiber, wood, and fuel, depends on leaves, understanding leaf morphogenesis
has the potential to provide powerful tools for modifying agricultural
products.&lt;br/&gt;