* 0343760
* Educating 21st Century Power Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Marija Ilic, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2007
* USD 419,997.00

This project will develope a curriculum that will show the exciting, challenging
prospects to undergraduate engineers of working in the electricity industry.
Lack of undergraduate interest in mature industries generally, and the
electricity industry in particular, is due in part to a failure to present the
interdisciplinary challenges that an engineer selecting this industry for a
career would face. Building on Carnegie Mellon's Information Network Institute
(INI) Educational Programs (CMU), we will 1) establish guidelines for this
advanced-undergraduate/MS level program, referred to in this proposal as the MS
Program in Electric Power Systems (MSEPS), 2) develop a sequence of two semester
courses specific to electric power, to be available interactively through the
web, and 3) design and implement an advanced Computer Laboratory in support of
MSEPS. The INI Educational Program aims to give future industry leaders broad
knowledge, emphasizing the Business/Managerial and Policy Cores, in addition to
the Technology Core. &lt;br/&gt;The main intellectual merit of this project lies
in using fundamentals from engineering,&lt;br/&gt;computer science, economics,
policy and business to address the pressing challenges in the evolving electric
power sector. By carefully drawing on these fundamentals, which engineering
students acquire in the early stages of their undergraduate education, this
program will prepare students to think about complex network industries,
including both engineering and business components. By preparing students to
think about the electric power sector in a qualitatively different manner than
power engineering subjects have been taught in the past, this program will
prepare qualified students to engage in doctoral programs and prepare
undergraduates to enter the workforce in this rapidly changing field. Having an
educated workforce that appreciates the benefits of advanced technologies on
industry performance will create a major application for computers and
communications in this seemingly mature industry sector. If done correctly,
this&lt;br/&gt;could provide stimulus in moving the overall economy
forward.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to developing this five year engineering program
at CMU, the CMU faculty will&lt;br/&gt;provide interactive teaching of the two
courses specific to electric power to the undergraduate and first year graduate
students at MIT, Smith College and University of Pittsburgh. The CMU faculty
will work closely with the point faculty and researchers at these schools to
provide an environment in which the courses offered at CMU would be beneficial
to their students. In particular, the CMU faculty will organize the two courses
in a modular structure so that members from other schools can teach particular
subjects of their expertise as the need and opportunities for this
arise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;