* 0343409
* Neuroethological Basis to Evolution of New Olfactory Communication Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Thomas Baker, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 01/31/2007
* USD 446,873.00

Mate finding in most moth species involves long-distance signaling via female-
emitted sex pheromones, which have been shown to include a great diversity of
chemical structures, even amongst closely related species. The critical
importance of these communication signals in the mate recognition system of a
species supports the idea that the evolution of the species-specific signals is
involved in the speciation process. The conundrum, however, is how signal
divergence has occurred because pheromone communication systems appear to
possess strong resistance to any changes in the pheromone blends. A surprising
discovery of an inactive gene in the sex pheromone gland of female European corn
borers that, if it were activated, could be used to produce different pheromone
compounds, has shed some light on how major shifts can occur in pheromone
production. This gene is not only present, but is active, in the pheromone gland
of a closely related and recently (ca. 1 million yrs. ago) evolved species,
Asian corn borer, and creates the different blend used by Asian corn borer
females.

Of equal interest is that 3% of the male European corn borers (rare males) in a
laboratory population possess the ability to be attracted to not only to their
own females' pheromone components, but also to the much different ones emitted
by Asian corn borer females. These broadly responding males might be exactly the
type in an ancestral population that could slowly, over generations, track
females emitting the new pheromone blend and then develop a preference for the
new blend. The shift to preferring the new blend might also include development
of inhibition to some of the previous compounds to shut down the attraction of
these males to the original ancestral pheromone. This would provide the basis
for males from the ancestral population to track slowly over to the new
pheromone blend, possibly with some antagonism developing for the original
ancestral pheromone blend.

In order to understand how male moths can shift their pheromone response from
one blend to that of another composed of different compounds requires a
comparative study of normal and rare European corn borer males and also Asian
corn borer males. The study will include behavioral and electrophysiological
responses to attractive pheromone components and also compounds inhibiting
attraction of these males to characterize olfactory receptor differences that
would allow the shift to occur. It is anticipated that changes in specificity
and agonist/antagonist properties of existing receptors in the European corn
borer have occurred to generate receptor profiles found in Asian corn borer
males.

Additional studies will be conducted to test the hypothesis that a major gene
controls the rare male phenotype, and that the population frequency of the
phenotype can be increased through selection. All the data above should help to
shed light on how pheromone blends can change, and, in turn, influence the
evolution of new species.