* 0343877
* Determination of Cell Shape in Caulobacter
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* James Gober, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/29/2008
* USD 360,000.00

In many organisms a major determinant of cellular morphology is the shape of the
cell wall. In bacteria, the cell wall, or peptidoglycan layer, serves as a
scaffold that dictates both cell shape and reinforces the cell against internal
osmotic pressure. A fundamental problem in bacterial cell biology is
understanding the molecular mechanisms that coordinate peptidoglycan assembly to
generate the diverse forms exhibited by bacteria. In rod shaped bacteria the
proteins encoded by the highly conserved rod shape-determining genes probably
play a critical role in directing peptidoglycan assembly. One of these, MreB has
been recently shown to be the bacterial actin homolog, suggesting that a
cytoskeletal-like structure is responsible for determining rod shape. The
overall objective of this project is to genetically and biochemically define the
molecular mechanisms that result in generating the rod-like morphology of the
bacterium Caulobacter crescentus. The ease at which synchronized populations can
be obtained, plus the intrinsic asymmetry of the predivisional cell make C.
crescentus an ideal organism for tracking the subcellular location of the
proteins that orchestrate cell wall synthesis during the course of the cell
cycle. MreB is required for the maintenance of a rod-shaped cell and forms
spirals that traverse along the longitudinal axis of Caulobacter cells which
switch to a midcell location at a time coinciding with the initiation of cell
division. The penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) also form a banding pattern
that resembles, and depends on, MreB localization. MreB forms a complex with the
PBPs, suggesting that MreB filaments function as a cytoskeleton that serves as
an organizer or tracking device for the PBP peptidoglycan biosynthesis complex
both during cell elongation and septum formation. The project will
systematically examine the role of MreB in coordinating peptidoglycan assembly.
The research consists of three major goals: (a) determining the role of genes
within the Caulobacter rod-shape operon (mreC, mreD, rodA, pbpA, CC1548) in
coordinating cell wall morphogenesis, (b) defining the molecular requirements
for MreB/PBP complex formation by determining the composition of the MreB/PBP
complex, determining whether the periplasmic protein, MreC can also form a
complex with PBPs, and defining the role of an N-acetyl transferase encoded by
the mreB operon in controlling cell shape, and (c) determining the mechanism of
the cell cycle-dependent recruitment of MreB to the midcell.