* 0343975
* Phosphate Transport in the Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Symbiosis: Functional Analysis of a Medicago Truncatula Mycorrhiza-Specific Phosphate Transporter
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Maria Harrison, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2009
* USD 587,469.00

IBN: 0343975&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In natural ecosystems, most
vascular flowering plants live in symbiosis with arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM)
fungi. These mutually beneficial associations develop in the root system, where
the fungus colonizes the root cells to obtain carbon from the plant, while
assisting the plant with the acquisition of mineral nutrients, particularly
phosphorus, from the soil. Arbuscular mycorrhizal symbioses are formed by almost
all vascular flowering plant species and play a significant role in ecosystem
biodiversity and functioning. The underlying mechanisms are not yet understood,
but the contribution of AM fungi to plant phosphorus nutrition, and the
resulting impact on plant health, is clearly a major contributing factor. The
overall objectives of this project are to dissect the mechanisms via which the
plant obtains phosphate from the fungus in an arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis.
A model legume, Medicago truncatula, will be used for these analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;The arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis is a highly co-evolved
partnership, in which the differentiation of both symbionts results in
specialized symbiotic interfaces that enable the exchange of carbon and
phosphate. Within the root cells, the fungus forms highly branched hyphae,
called arbuscules, which are enveloped in a specialized plant membrane, the
peri-arbuscular membrane. Previous studies led to the identification of a unique
phosphate transporter (MtPT4) from Medicago truncatula that is located
exclusively in the peri-arbuscular membrane. Current objectives are to evaluate
motifs implicated in targeting MtPT4 to the peri-arbuscular membrane and to
determine the role of MtPT4 in phosphate transport in the symbiosis. Using
transgenic lines in which MtPT4 expression is disrupted, or loss-of-function
alleles of MtPT4 obtained via TILLING, the hypothesis that MtPT4 is essential
for the acquisition of phosphate released from the fungus will be tested. In
addition, the mutant MtPT4 lines will be used to explore fundamental questions
about phosphate transport and the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis, including
the role of the different symbiotic interfaces and the importance of bi-
directional nutrient exchange in a mutualistic symbiosis. &lt;br/&gt;Currently,
the molecular events underlying arbuscule development are unknown. Comparative
transcriptional profiling of the MtPT4 mutant lines and a M. truncatula
arbuscule development mutant, will provide insights into the transcriptional
events associated with structural and functional components of arbuscule
development and phosphate transport in the symbiosis. &lt;br/&gt;Because
phosphate limits plant production, an understanding of the AM/legume symbiosis
has significant agricultural and ecological implications. Other Broader Impacts
include the training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, as well as
undergraduates and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;