* 0344103
* Increasing US Participation in the 5th Pharmacology, Biochemistry & Behavior International Meeting in Morzine, France
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Marlene Wilson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

This symposium is part of the Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 5th
International meeting being held in Mozine, France in January 4-9, 2004. Funding
will enable trainees and scientists from the United States to maximize their
interactions with European investigators interested in Behavioral Neuroscience
and Neuroendocrinology. The program includes participants with expertise in
neuroendocrinology, animal behavior, and developmental biology. The symposium
will engage both senior and junior ranked scientists in discussions focusing on
the pharmacology and biochemistry of reproductive behavior and cognitive
function. Participants in this program will include undergraduate students,
graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and faculty. The symposium will engage
participants in discussions regarding complex relationships between brain and
behavior. Symposia, poster presentations, meet the professor lunches, and
organized discussions on international research opportunities will encourage
interactions between students, junior scientists, and senior scientists that are
internationally recognized for their accomplishments. The organizing committee
is committed to fostering the development of young scientists. Funds will help
defray travel costs and registration fees for participants to attend the
meeting. The impact of this will extend to numerous fields of study, such as
neuroendocrinology, behavioral neuroscience, animal behavior, and population
biology. Those trainees receiving travel awards will be asked to evaluate the
effectiveness of their experience at this meeting and then these data will be
published as an abstract and poster presentation that will take place during the
education session at the 2004 Society for Neuroscience meeting.