* 0344786
* RUI: Analysis of the Synergistic Interaction Between African Cassava Mosaic Virus and East African Cassava Mosaic Cameroon virus
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Vincent Fondong, Delaware State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 04/30/2008
* USD 358,123.00

Geminiviruses are a major threat to the productivity and quality of many food
crops around the world and have therefore emerged as a serious economic problem.
Two such viruses were isolated in cassava in Cameroon: African cassava mosaic
virus (ACMV-[CM]) and East African cassava mosaic Cameroon virus (EACMCV).
Cassava plants infected by ACMV-[CM] exhibit a recovered phenotype reminiscent
of virus induced gene silencing (VIGS), whereby virus infection causes sequence
specific down-regulation of plant RNA sharing homology with the infecting virus.
However, when plants are co-infected by ACMV-[CM] and EACMCV, a synergistic
reaction occurs, causing more severe disease symptoms compared with plants
singly infected by either virus alone. This synergism has been mapped to EACMCV
component A. In this project the specific gene causing this synergistic
interaction will be determined. Furthermore the mechanism involved will also
elucidated based on two hypotheses: 1) EACMCV encodes a suppressor of gene
silencing that blocks the plant defense mechanism, 2) EACMCV encoded gene(s)
enhance the replication of ACMV-[CM]. Because most gene silencing suppression
studies have focused on transgenic plants, the natural role of most of the
identified suppressors in disease epidemics has not been elucidated. Moreover,
these studies have been on RNA viruses. This project will focus on the role of
DNA virus on recovery, thus expanding research on these mechanisms. Delaware
State University is a historically black undergraduate institution with a 76%
minority enrollment; therefore this project will provide research and training
opportunities to minority undergraduate students and will help them to compete
more effectively for job opportunities in academics and biotechnology. The
project will also consolidate efforts to establish a functional virus and
molecular biology research and training laboratory at Delaware State University.