* 0344312
* Sexual Differentiation in Eusocial Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Bruce Goldman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* J. Steven de Belle
* 03/31/2008
* USD 402,491.00

Sexual differentiation is the process by which males and females become
different. A large number of sex differences have been described in the brains
of mammals and many of them are the result of hormones acting during fetal or
neonatal life. However, most of what we know about the development of sex
differences comes from studying relatively non-social animals, such as
laboratory rats and mice. This proposal will investigate the development of sex
differences in the brain and spinal cord of a highly social species, the naked
mole-rat. Naked mole-rats are small, mostly hairless rodents that live in
underground tunnels in groups of 60-80 individuals. They have been described as
"eusocial" because of their very unusual, rigid reproductive hierarchy: only one
female breeds and she mates with only 1 to 3 of the males. All of the other
animals in the colony are 'subordinates,' which never breed and instead help in
maintaining the burrow system and caring for the young. Subordinates can become
breeders, however, if the breeding animals die, or if subordinates are removed
from the colony and housed with an opposite sex mate. Male and female
subordinates show no sex differences in behavior or body size, and even their
genitalia are remarkable similar. Preliminary data suggest that the nervous
systems of subordinate naked mole-rats may also lack sex differences common to
other mammals. In this project anatomical and biochemical approaches will be
used to examine three different neural areas in subordinates and breeders. The
hypothesis will be tested that naked mole-rats do not undergo sexual
differentiation during early life, but only upon attaining breeding status. This
work will provide a novel model for study of the evolution of sex differences,
and the endocrine and developmental mechanisms of sexual differentiation. The
project will promote collaborative interactions between the University of
Massachusetts, University of Connecticut, and Michigan State University, thus
allowing students exposure to a diverse array of approaches to neuroendocrine
research.