* 0344719
* Experimental Study of the Molecular Basis for Chromatin Motion in Live Cells and Model Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Christopher Bardeen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 12/31/2007
* USD 350,000.00

In the nucleus of a live cell, small structural fluctuations in the DNA-
containing chromatin provide transient opportunities for protein binding, and
thus comprise the initial chemical steps in gene expression. It is therefore
important to characterize the small-scale motions of chromatin inside the nuclei
of live cells, with the ultimate aim of being able to observe in vivo
transcriptional activity in real time. To accomplish this, a combination of
standing wave microscopy and two-photon patterned photobleaching is employed to
attain high spatial sensitivity to translational motion inside living cells.
Using this method, diffusive displacements of less than 100 nm can be measured,
and the motion of intranuclear DNA labeled with the fluorophore Hoechst 33342
has been observed in live cells. The goal is to correlate the amount of
mesoscopic, 100 nm motion with the presence of specific nanoscale biochemical
processes like histone binding and unbinding, which are important for
determining the transcriptional availability of DNA. To relate the two types of
dynamics, a two channel diffusion experiment will be developed to measure the
dynamics of chromatin and GFP-labeled histone proteins in parallel. In addition,
the effects of other environmental factors like acetylation and the presence of
other types of nuclear proteins will be assessed. Finally, the effects of
chromatin motion on the diffusion of other macromolecular solutes in the nucleus
will be measured. This will be done by using inert probes and measuring their
diffusivity as a function of chromatin conformational freedom. By studying
chromatin dynamics in both live cells and isolated nuclei under a variety of
conditions, it should be possible to bridge the gap between in vitro studies of
molecular-level nucleosome dynamics and in vivo studies of chromatin diffusion
on mesoscopic lengthscales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has as its goal
enabling investigators to see the movements of chromatin and proteins during
transcription; this ability should greatly increase their understanding of gene
transcription and its regulation. In order to make the research accessible to
the general public, a portable demonstration will be created that will allow the
visualization of single, giant DNA molecules in a classroom environment, with
the aim of introducing beginning science students to experimental biophysical
research, both at the college and high school levels. The outreach project,
which involves the construction of a specialized fluorescence microscope, will
be carried out by a team of undergraduate science majors under the supervision
of the principal investigator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is being
jointly funded by the Physics Division and the Office of Multidiscipinary
Activities in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, and by the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;