* 0344419
* Neogene Caribbean Biotic Turnover and Evolution of Geminate Mollusc Species Separated by the Isthmus of Panama
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Peter Marko, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/2006
* USD 295,138.00

The rise of the Central American Isthmus (CAI) and the gradual closure of the
seaway connecting the tropical Eastern Pacific (EP) and Western Atlantic (WA)
oceans has long served as a model for understanding the formation of new species
in the sea. Given geological information that dates the final stage of seaway
closure at 3.1-3.5 million years ago, researchers have hypothesized that
hundreds of morphologically similar pairs of species found today on either side
of the isthmus (called "geminate" or twin species) are believed to represent the
descendants of single ancestral species broadly distributed throughout the
tropical EP and WA oceans prior to the isthmus formation. Recent evidence,
however, raises questions about how closure of the CAI actually affected
patterns of species diversity in tropical America. Given that extinction rates
may have been as high as 70% for some groups following isthmus formation,
researchers think that sister-taxa that survived in both oceans should be rare.
How can the apparent survival of so many living geminate species in both the EP
and WA be reconciled with the developing paleontological picture of massive
Caribbean biotic turnover? To answer this question, Dr. Peter Marko of the
University of North Carolina will conduct a combined molecular and
paleontological analysis of speciation and extinction among geminate species
complexes in the bivalve mollusk family Arcidae. Living species will be
discriminated with a combination of phylogeographic surveys of nuclear and
mitochondrial gene variation along with discriminant analysis of morphological
traits. Species discrimination in the fossil record will then be accomplished by
extending statistical tests of morphological differences among genetically
distinct species in the living fauna to specimens from the fossil record.
&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide financial support and training in field
collections, morphometrics, and molecular phylogenetics for two graduate
students plus funds to send students to a national meeting to gain experience
presenting research results. Funds will also offer opportunities for
undergraduate education and training in molecular research and the PI will
actively recruit individuals from traditionally underrepresented groups.
Although not directly funded by this proposal, the molecular phylogenetic work
will also be integrated with a phylogenetic effort conducted by a morphological
systematist in the UK. &lt;br/&gt;