* 0344625
* CRB: Competitive and Demographic Trade-offs:  Restoration of Tallgrass Prairie
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Peter Curtis, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/29/2008
* USD 300,000.00

The restoration of human altered landscapes to natural ecosystems provides an
ideal test bed for ecological theory while yielding practical benefits to public
and private sectors. For practitioners of restoration ecology, the establishment
of native prairie on former agricultural or commercial land is often hindered by
the competitive success of weedy species. Our research entails experiments to
compare the performance of native North American prairie plants with the non-
native species they compete against in restoration projects. We propose that the
overall competitive ability of a population of plants, such as the native grass
Big Bluestem, is the end result of a heirarchy of biological processes, from
seed germination through death. In our study we will develop computer models of
these species' long-term population dynamics under fertile or infertile soil
conditions. By comparing model predictions with results from a prairie
restoration we will test current theories of differential resource use among
plants and the effect these differences have on the final species makeup of
restored ecosystems. Ohio State University at Marion, where our field work will
take place, is a small regional campus serving a largely agricultural community.
We have entered into a science education partnership with an area high school to
develop field exercises in which students will gather data in parallel with
project scientists.