* 0344186
* Constructing a Robust Multi-Gene Phylogeny and Studying Host and Plastid Evolution in the Alveolate Protist Dinoflagellata
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Senjie Lin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 12/31/2006
* USD 213,060.00

0344186&lt;br/&gt;Lin&lt;br/&gt;Dinoflagellata are microscopic organisms that
are critical to the marine ecosystem. While they are food for fish and other
animals, some of them are life support of coral reefs, and many of them cause
environmental problems by forming red tides. Due to the ecological and
economical significance, understanding the evolution and diversification of
these organisms is of high interest. Research by Senjie Lin and Huan Zhang at
the University of Connecticut is focused on studying phylogenetic relationships
among these organisms using nuclear (ribosomal DNA) and mitochondrial gene
sequences for a wide span of dinoflagellate species. Sequences of these genes
will be determined using PCR-based cloning and automated sequencing, and
phylogenetic trees will be constructed using various methods to study
dinoflagellate evolution. Specific objectives of this project include 1)
identifying early-diverging lineages of dinoflagellates and reconstructing the
radiation pattern for dinoflagellates; 2) assessing when the coral reef symbiont
life-style emerged during dinoflagellate evolution; 3) studying how
dinoflagellates diversified their trophic pathways; and 4) assessing how toxic
species evolved. Results from this proposed project will constitute the first
broadly based sampling of multiple genomes for many species of dinoflagellates
and will provide a robust phylogenetic framework for this important group of
organisms. &lt;br/&gt;Insights will be obtained from this project regarding
dinoflagellate relationships with closely related organisms like the malaria
parasite Plasmodium. Furthermore, novel information valuable for policy making
in coastal environment management and conservation is expected. This project
will also broaden graduate student training and enrich the curriculum for
courses through integration of the discoveries into the curriculum. In
particular, the results from this study will help students to appreciate how
diverse and complex these seemingly simple microorganisms can be and how
powerful molecular tools can be used in answering basic evolutionary questions.
Finally, this grant will enable the PIs to continue with their commitment to
encourage minority and female students to participate in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;