* 0344518
* RUI: Quantifying and Interpreting Costs of Phenotypic Plasticity Using Recombinant Inbred Lines of Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Hilary Callahan, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2008
* USD 381,394.00

Variation within species reflects both genetic and environmental factors, and
the term phenotypic plasticity refers to variation in one or more traits
predictably triggered by an environmental variable. The temperate annual plant
species Arabidopsis thaliana will be used to investigate variation in flowering
time triggered by exposure to over-wintering temperatures, emphasizing the
impact of flowering time and its plasticity on fitness. These phenomena are
widely studied in Arabidopsis, but ecological experiments have not yet assessed
whether plasticity is adaptive, neutral, or perhaps even maladaptive.
&lt;br/&gt;We will address two questions using parallel lab and field
experiments in environments mimicking mild and severe winters. First, is there
natural selection on flowering time and its plasticity? We will quantify
plasticity across environments and correlate fitness and flowering time within
environments. We can then assess whether the observed plasticity tends to
increase fitness within one or both environments. Second, is fitness
additionally correlated with possessing the ability to be plastic? Such a
correlation, if negative, is referred to as a plasticity cost and may indicate
that the genes involved in detecting or responding to the environment indirectly
reduce fitness. Theoretical models indicate that plasticity costs can explain
why adaptive phenotypic plasticity is neither optimal nor universal.
&lt;br/&gt;Using Arabidopsis, it will be labor-intensive but feasible to conduct
large, well-replicated lab and field experiments in which flowering time and
fitness are scored. There is extensive natural variation for flowering time,
with some strains possessing extreme plasticity, and others little or none.
Major genes involved in regulating flowering time plasticity have characterized
in many strains, and hybridization of contrasting strains has yielded several
experimental populations now readily available to Arabidopsis researchers. We
have selected several of these for our experiments. The variability harbored by
these populations will enhance our ability to detect natural selection and
plasticity costs, and to relate plasticity and its costs to underlying genetic
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be conducted at Barnard
College, a liberal arts college for women affiliated with Columbia University in
New York City, where the tenure process evaluates faculty as teacher-scholars
who can excel in the classroom while also conducting high caliber research that
involves undergraduates. The projects proposed are consistent with these
criteria. Moreover, by working in a female faculty member's lab, summer student
interns and student employees will gain important skills, mentoring, and
encouragement necessary for successful careers in the natural sciences. Groups
underrepresented in the sciences are well represented in Barnard's student body
and have previously received training in the PI's lab.&lt;br/&gt;