* 0344088
* The Efficiency of Long-Distance Translocation: Retention Properties of Sugars in the Transport Phloem
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Brian Ayre, University of North Texas
* Continuing grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2008
* USD 390,000.00

Plants transport the products of photosynthesis along hydrostatic pressure
gradients established in a specialized vascular system called the phloem. The
phloem network is commonly subdivided into three functional domains.
Photoassimilate produced in leaves is loaded into the collection phloem and
unloaded in areas of growth and storage from the release phloem. The region in-
between is the transport phloem, and constitutes the longest contiguous stretch
of phloem in the plant. For pressure driven transport to be effective, the
osmotic potential generated in the collection phloem must be maintained until it
reaches the release phloem. The transport phloem is thus frequently relegated to
the status of an impermeable pipe, and its role in carbon partitioning and
whole-plant physiology is consequently underrepresented. The transport phloem is
however dynamic, and nutrients are both unloaded and reloaded to nourish
flanking tissues and to mobilize sugars to and from short- and long-term storage
reserves. Events occurring in the transport phloem therefore buffer against
fluctuations in nutrient supply and demand, and ultimately affect resource
allocation throughout the plant, but remain largely unexplored. The specific
objectives of this proposal are to 1) determine the role of sucrose transporters
in sugar efflux and retrieval along the transport phloem by tissue-specific
expression of sucrose transporters in null-mutant plants. Confined expression of
sucrose transporters with tissue-specific promoters will separate their relative
contribution to phloem loading and phloem transport. It is predicted that
sucrose transport is relatively inefficient and energetically expensive, and
that in the absence of active retrieval, transport efficiency through the
transport phloem will be severely reduced. 2) Generate the tetrasaccharide
stachyose in collection phloem through metabolic engineering, and determine
transport efficiency along the transport phloem. It is proposed that larger
oligosaccharides will demonstrate less efflux than sucrose, and therefore move
to nutrient-requiring tissues more efficiently. 3) Modulate sink strength in
plants engineered to translocate stachyose by tissue-specific overexpression of
genes involved in stachyose catabolism, with the goal of manipulating biomass
distribution.