* 0344994
* Testing the Aerobic Capacity Model for the Evolution of Endothermy with Correlational Artificial Selection
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Jack Hayes, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 04/30/2010
* USD 843,433.00

Testing the Aerobic Capacity Model for the Evolution of Endothermy with
Correlational Artificial Selection Jack P. Hayes University of Nevada Reno

One of the most important events in vertebrate evolution was the evolution of
endothermy (i.e., the physiological ability of animals to raise their body
temperature above the ambient environmental temperature). The aerobic capacity
model attempts to explain the evolution of endothermy by hypothesizing that
endothermy evolved as a correlated response to natural selection on aerobic
capacity (maximal oxygen consumption during exercise). A key assumption of the
model is that resting metabolism and aerobic capacity are positively correlated
because they are inescapably, mechanistically linked. To date no study has
falsified this assumption, so the model stands as a viable explanation for the
evolution of endothermy. The proposed studies will use artificial selection
(breeding experiments) to test the key assumption of the aerobic capacity model.
Two types of artificial selection will be used. The first will be artificial
selection on aerobic capacity. This selection will produce lines of mice with
low aerobic capacity and lines of mice with high aerobic capacity. If selection
for increased aerobic capacity produces no response or a decrease in resting
metabolism, the aerobic capacity model will be falsified. The second type of
artificial selection is designed to directly and experimentally test the model's
key assumption (i.e., that a positive correlation between resting metabolism and
aerobic metabolism is a fundamental design constraint that characterizes the
physiology of terrestrial vertebrates). Artificial selection will be used in an
attempt to generate lines of mice for which there is a negative correlation
between resting metabolism and aerobic capacity. If a negative correlation can
be produced, then the aerobic capacity model will be falsified. The
biochemistry, anatomy, and physiology of all the selected lines of mice will be
studied to help elucidate the mechanistic basis for aerobic capacity. These
studies should be of interest to ecological and evolutionary physiologists,
exercise physiologists, and evolutionary biologists.

Broader impacts of the studies will be three-fold. First, the experiments will
develop genetic resources (lines of mice) that can be used as models for
studying the genetic and mechanistic bases of aerobic capacity. Second, diverse
training will be provided to one or more postdoctoral researchers, graduate
students, and undergraduates. Third, building on an existing program that the PI
helped develop, the PI will attempt to recruit local high school science
teachers and students to participate in the research and to pursue related
studies.