* 0344678
* What The Retina Might Know About Natural Scenes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Vijay Balasubramanian, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 07/31/2009
* USD 476,123.00

Biological organisms collect information from the natural environment that is
necessary for their survival. A significant fact about the design of the neural
systems responsible for collecting this data is their massive parallelism. For
example, the retina expresses at least 15 kinds of parallel information channels
which transmit different kinds of information relevant to behaviour to the
brain, rather than using a few general purpose cables with a suitably
complicated code. A prototypical example is the segregation of ON and OFF
pathways in the visual system to process information in bright vs. dark features
of a scene. The parallel channels are strikingly heterogeneous, spanning a
50-fold range in nerve fiber diameter and a 10-fold range in voltage spike
firing rate. What determines this choice of massively parallel design, and the
particular channels that are expressed? This project will explore a basic
hypothesis: parallel channels exist to minimize the metabolic and spatial costs
necessary to extract behaviorally relevant information from natural stimuli and
transmit it to the brain. To accomplish this goal, the PI intends to 1) examine
timing precision, reproducibility, information rate, and information per spike
encoded by different retinal neurons, 2) study how neuronal circuit structure
relates to the structure of natural images, and 3) measure spatial and metabolic
costs of different channels and examine how parallelism affects information
transmission. The project intends to develop new theory and analysis techniques
to study spatio-temporal constraints in neural coding, adaptation to changing
stimulus statistics and the biophysics of why large, expensive cells appear to
be needed to transmit information at high average rates.

This project, joining theoretical physics and experimental biology, will have a
broad inter-disciplinary impact by: (a) training physics graduate students in
the problems and techniques of neuroscience, and (b) transferring analytical and
theoretical tools of physics to neuroscientists. The PI is also involved in
encouraging such synergy between physics and biology by organizing joint
physics-neuroscience workshops at Penn and at the Kavli Institute for
Theoretical Physics.