* 0344449
* Protein Control of Cofactor Function
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Colin Wraight, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/2008
* USD 495,000.00

Light energy conversion in the photosynthetic reaction center (RC) involves an
initial electron transfer, followed by several more steps that stabilize the
charge separation. The primary and secondary electron acceptor quinones, QA and
QB, in the RC of Rhodobacter sphaeroides are chemically identical (both
ubiquinone-10) but exhibit very distinct properties. Thus, they provide an ideal
model for understanding how proteins determine the properties of bound
cofactors. This research focuses on the origins of the distinct properties of QA
and QB, which determine the nature (kinetics and energetics) of the electron and
proton transfer reactions between the quinones. Specific projects will study:
(1) how small weak acids reactivate ("rescue") a wide variety of mutants that
are impaired in proton uptake and proton transfer to QB; (2) QA site mutants at
residue M265, to be further characterized by X-ray structure determination,
ENDOR and pulsed EPR studies on Zn-substituted RCs, and by computational energy
minimization; (3) the origin of the QA- semiquinone IR spectrum - the "anion
band" - using M265 mutants which have striking and characteristically altered
QA- IR spectra; (4) the role of quinone substituents in determining QA and QB
function, using synthetic analogues; (5) the role of the proximal and distal QB
sites in the 1st electron transfer, using mutagenesis, functional assays and
FTIR; (7) the enthalpic and entropic contributions to the temperature dependence
of the 2nd ET. In all projects, free energy levels will be determined by delayed
fluorescence, kinetic and equilibrium consequences by absorption spectroscopy,
and structural implications by FTIR, X-ray diffraction and ENDOR spectroscopy.

Catalysis is absolutely essential to life, and almost all metabolic catalysis is
performed by proteinaceous enzymes. However, the catalytic mechanism is truly
understood for very few enzymes, if any. This is largely because of the limited
observability of the underlying atomic/molecular interactions. However, the
protein-ligand interactions that facilitate enzyme action on a substrate are the
same as those that modify cofactor properties, such as prosthetic groups and
coenzymes, and many of these are spectroscopically well-endowed. This research
describes studies on the photosynthetic reaction center (RC), which has 8
spectroscopically-active cofactors in a highly symmetrical arrangement, but with
strong functional asymmetry. It therefore provides an exceptional system for
identifying the protein-cofactor interactions responsible for the different
functionality of chemically identical cofactors. In addition to at least 8
different electron transfer reactions, the RC also performs proton transfers,
substrate (quinone) binding and chemistry, and protein (cytochrome) recognition,
docking and binding. The intellectual merit of this project is the chance to
observe, understand and manipulate, at a microscopic level, the interactions
that underlie the uniqueness of biological mechanisms. The broader impact
derives from these attributes, which make this project an exceptional one for
training young scientists, with a substantially multidisciplinary component. The
results are expected to contribute to a deeper understanding of photosynthesis
and respiration - processes that are central to global and human survival and
health, and which have formed a strong basis for teaching, mentoring and
motivating students in the classroom, as well as aiding and abetting high school
teachers.