* 0344448
* RUI:Development and Maturation of Olfactory Centers in the Lobster:Influences of Serotonin and Life-long Neurogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Barbara Beltz, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 02/28/2009
* USD 518,217.00

&lt;br/&gt;In the past few years, it has been unequivocally demonstrated that
new neurons are born and integrated into circuits in the brains of many
vertebrate and invertebrate organisms, including humans. This project explores
the process of life-long neurogenesis at three levels: (1) defining factors that
influence the rate of neurogenesis and serotonin levels (Aim I); (2) analyzing
specific effects of serotonin on the lineage of cells producing new neurons (Aim
II); (3) examining the differentiation of the newborn neurons (Aim III). The
lobster Homarus americanus is the focus of study because neuronal proliferation
persists throughout life in the brains of these animals and is regulated by
serotonin, nitric oxide and the day/night cycle. Because the factors that
influence neurogenesis appear to be evolutionarily conserved, these studies may
illuminate mechanisms that are relevant to the variety of species that undergo
life-long neurogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim I: Regulation of neurogenesis:
developmental, behavioral and circadian controls. Dr. Beltz will examine the
regulation of neuronal proliferation and serotonin by light and physical
activity in larval lobsters. Her hypothesis is that the developmental change
from positively phototactic, day-active larvae to negatively phototactic, night-
active juvenile and adult animals, will be reflected in a change in the timing
of maximal neurogenesis and in peak serotonin levels in the brain. She expects
the rate of neurogenesis to be highest early in the day for larvae, in contrast
to the peak at dusk for juvenile lobsters. She will ask whether increases in
brain serotonin levels are a prerequisite for increases in neuronal
proliferation, or whether these two elements are sometimes uncoupled, which
would suggest the involvement of a non-serotonergic signaling pathway in the
control of neurogenesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim II: Mechanisms of
proliferation of projection neurons. The proposed experiments will determine
whether serotonin has a general influence on the speed of the cell cycle, or
whether serotonin exerts a specific effect on this lineage by regulating the
size of the large precursor cell (i.e., neuroblast) pool or the numbers of
intermediate precursor cells (i.e., ganglion mother cells). She also will
determine whether the divisions of the large precursor cells are symmetric or
asymmetric, which has implications for the mitotic potential and fate of
daughter cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim III: Differentiation of newborn
projection neurons. These studies will ask questions such as: Are newborn
neurons integrated into the brain circuitry? Do new neurons innervate the OLs or
ALs? Do altered levels of nitric oxide influence the timing or pattern of
projections of newborn cluster 10 neurons? These experiments will define the
single-cell circuitry and designation of functional identity of neurons that
proliferate throughout the organism's life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Wellesley College is a liberal arts college for women. Therefore, an
important mission of this research, beyond its intrinsic merit, is the training
of our undergraduates, a high percentage of whom will continue their education
in graduate or professional schools. Additional goals are to develop curricular
materials for use in undergraduate courses, to acquire state-of-the-art
instrumentation for teaching and research, and to give public lectures to
educate non-scientists about specific topics in neuroscience, the contributions
of basic research and the use of model systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;