* 0344141
* Plant Cyclic Nucleotide Gated Channels: Functional Characterization Using Cloned Channels and Native Plant Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Gerald Berkowitz, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen M. Wolniak
* 03/31/2008
* USD 537,994.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the molecular characterization of
plant cyclic nucleotide gated nonselective cation channels (CNGCs). CNGCs act in
signal transduction cascades, and also are involved in cation uptake into
plants. Prior NSF-funded work on this project led to the first
electrophysiological analyses of plant CNGCs, focusing on how their molecular
architecture is related to differences in their ion conductance properties.
Animal CNGCs (six genes in humans) all have similar pore architectures (in the
ion selectivity filter region) and nonselectively conduct Ca, Na, as well as K.
The situation with plant CNGCs is more complex; the 20 Arabidopsis CNGCs were
modeled to have different ion selectivity filters. CNGCs were identified as the
first cloned plant channels that conduct Ca (an important cytosolic signaling
molecule) and Na (uptake into plants is a major limitation to crop growth). One
of the channels was shown to have a pore architecture representing a heretofore
unknown molecular paradigm allowing for discrimination between K/Na conduction.
Prior work involved the application of heterologous expression systems (oocytes,
cell cultures, and yeast mutants) for these characterizations. The new project
continues this work, but expands the analysis of plant CNGCs so as to generate
new information about how the cation conduction properties of plant CNGCs are
related to nutrient uptake and movement within plants. Work underlying the
project has led to the first voltage clamp analyses of CNGC currents in native
plant membranes. This accomplishment provides a basis for the project to include
studies using native membranes to characterize the electrophysiological
properties of native CNGC protein complexes in plants, as well as
structure/function studies of cloned plant CNGCs expressed in heterologous
systems. Comparisons will be made between native CNGC currents in membranes of
wild type, and mutant plants that lack specific CNGC genes. These
electrophysiological analyses of native CNGCs will be undertaken along with
studies of CNGC-dependent cation uptake and movement within plants, and analysis
of CNGC mutant plant phenotypes when grown under various nutrient solution
regimes. CNGC isoform-specific antibodies will be employed to generate new
information about the subunit composition of native plant CNGCs and, along with
expression profiling, allow for the dissection of how individual CNGCs
contribute to cation fluxes in plants.&lt;br/&gt;Insight into the
structure/function relationships of these proteins has been aided by three-
dimensional modeling and site-directed mutagenesis of functional domains.
Understanding protein structure/function through modeling is an important basis
for students to understand biological systems at the molecular level. As part of
a continuing outreach program to expose high school biology teachers to these
insights, a teaching practicum will be developed and offered during summer
semester breaks to undergraduate students who are preparing to be secondary
school biology teachers. For each training session, ten of these students will
be recruited and provided with stipends to participate in the two-week summer
practicum that will train students to access web-based protein modeling
software, and learn to work with simple biological systems (i.e. growth of yeast
mutants to test protein function) so as to bring this information into the high
school biology classroom. The broader impact of this project is the focus on a
process of 'teaching the teachers' so that undergraduate students training as
high school biology teachers can participate in the next horizon of biology in
this post-genomic era; i.e. to gain an understanding of how protein structure is
related to biological function.&lt;br/&gt;