* 0344325
* ABR: Genes controlling Fruit development in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Martin Yanofsky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P.  Jack
* 12/31/2008
* USD 747,000.00

The fruit is arguably the most complex plant organ and serves to protect the
seeds as they develop and then disperse them at maturity. Fruits from diverse
plant species come in a wide array of shapes and sizes, and only recently have a
number of the genes that pattern the fruit been identified. The ovary of the
Arabidopsis fruit consists of three main regions: the valves, which are derived
from the ovary walls, the replum, which is the structure that remains after the
valves have detached at fruit maturity, and the valve margins that form at the
valve/replum boundaries. The valve margin is essential for seed dispersal and
consists of two main pattern elements. The first is a cell separation layer,
where separation of cells allows the valves to detach from the replum during the
seed dispersal process. The second element of the valve margin is the lignified
layer that is also proposed to promote seed dispersal at fruit maturity. Valve
margin formation requires the activities of the SHATTERPROOF MADS-box
transcription factors as well as the INDEHISCENT and ALCATRAZ basic helix-loop-
helix type transcription factors. The FRUITFULL MADS-box transcription factor
specifies the valves in large part by negatively regulating the valve margin
identity genes. Similarly, the REPLUMLESS homeodomain transcription factor
specifies the replum in large part by negatively regulating the valve margin
identity genes. Although we now have a handle on the major regulators that
pattern the Arabidopsis fruit, we still know relatively little about how
specific cell types within fruits are specified. A major focus of our proposed
studies is to dissect the cascade of gene activity that leads to differentiation
of specific cell types during fruit development. We propose a multi-pronged
approach to achieve these goals. We will continue our genetic studies by
performing enhancer and suppressor screens of existing mutants with the longer-
term goal of cloning the corresponding genes. We will perform microarrray
experiments to identify targets of the fruit patterning genes. We will
characterize the role of plant hormones in specifying fruit patterning and
cellular differentiation. Together, these and other proposed studies will allow
us to begin to dissect the cascade of gene activity that leads to cellular
differentiation during fruit development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;