* 0344837
* Phylogenetic and Evolutionary Inference in the Collomia-Navarretia Clade (Polemoniaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Leigh Johnson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2008
* USD 339,541.00

Research by Dr. Leigh Johnson at Brigham Young University focuses on a group of
about 50 species of annual plants that belong to the phlox family
(Polemoniaceae). Several species in the genera of Collomia and Navarettia have
very limited distributions and are listed as "species of concern" on federal or
individual state conservation lists. Preliminary investigation of these species
shows two unexpected patterns: substantial morphological divergence with little
genetic divergence between two major subsets of species, and substantial genetic
divergence with almost no morphological divergence between populations of what
have been considered to be the same species. The factors and processes that
cause discordance between morphological and genetic divergence are poorly
understood in general. This group provides a model for investigating these
processes, which are fundamental to understanding the nature of plant diversity
and making informed decisions in species management efforts. The research
proposed encompasses several thrusts: 1) Determining phylogenetic relationships
among the species to provide a solid framework for addressing questions of
morphological and genetic divergence. This will be accomplished from comparative
analyses of DNA sequence variation from multiple genes, and analyzing the plants
morphologically. 2) Revising the taxonomy of the group based on the information
learned, and constructing identification keys for use by specialists and
laypersons that encounter these species. 3) Testing hypotheses of discordance
between morphology and genetic divergence using DNA sequence variation and
morphological variation mentioned above, and examining a specific hypothesis of
genetic control that may contribute to this discordance. 4) Assessing
correlations between morphological features associated with reproduction and the
degree of species rarity to see if predictions of rarity can be made based on
such features. A methodological approach that uses both morphology and DNA
sequence data is being followed to maximize the information available to
characterize the diversity of these species. &lt;br/&gt;Because species are the
basic units of conservation in plants, understanding the relationship between
morphological variation, molecular variation, and rarity is important for
conservation decisions. This research addresses the need for such information in
an educational setting that includes research university faculty, post-doctoral
students, graduate students, and undergraduate students in a mentored learning
environment. Effort is being made to include persons from underrepresented
groups within this research environment. An essential collaborative tie has also
been established with researchers from Argentina that will facilitate fieldwork
in that country as well as co-authorship of publications. In addition to
anticipated peer-reviewed publication of this work, the PI will be author or co-
author of taxonomic treatments of these species for several identification
manuals, such as the Flora of North America, that are intended for non-
specialists as well as specialists. General information on species biology and
identification will be made freely available from the Tree of Life web site on
the internet. &lt;br/&gt;