* 0344463
* Driving Force of Lipid Raft Formation:  A Monte Carlo Simulation of Raft Mixture Phase Diagrams
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Juyang Huang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/2008
* USD 275,346.00

Lipid raft domains are thought to be involved in important cell functions. It
has been suggested that its formation is purely due to lipid-lipid interaction,
which is supported by recent experimental evidence that the liquid-ordered
domains can be reproduced on synthetic liposomes containing unsaturated
phosphatidylcholine (PC), sphingomyelin (SM), and cholesterol. A crucial
question is what is the driving force for lipid raft formation? Current
hypotheses include a strong van der Waals attraction between cholesterol and the
long saturated acyl chain of sphingomyelin, hydrogen bonding between cholesterol
and sphingolipids and an entropy effect of hydrocarbon chains. In this project,
Monte Carlo simulations will be used to reproduce the experimental phase diagram
of DOPC/SM/cholesterol mixtures, through which the hypotheses will be tested and
the key molecular interactions will be identified. Specifically, the PI will use
both pairwise and multibody interactions to build explicit molecular interaction
model for each hypothesis and quantitatively test these hypotheses by simulating
lipid raft phase in PC/SM/cholesterol mixtures. Experimental values on
composition and amount of coexisting phases and the magnitude of interaction
will be used to judge the hypotheses. Entire phase diagrams of the
PC/SM/cholesterol system will be constructed by free energy simulations to
quantitatively identify the headgroup and acyl chain contributions using
experimental phase diagrams of different lipid mixture systems. The goal is to
search for a clear physical model and a set of interaction parameters that can
closely reproduce the experimental phase diagram. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lipid
rafts are cell membrane domains containing membrane proteins,
phosphatidylcholine, sphingomyelin, and cholesterol. These domains are thought
to be very important to cell functions. This research is the first large-scale
theoretical modeling effort to understand the mechanism of its formation. The
success of the project would be a significant contribution to the fields of
biomembrane and lipid biophysics, and would stimulate more experimental and
molecular dynamics simulation studies. Students involved in the project will
receive lecture and hands-on training in lipid biophysics, computer simulation,
and parallel computing using Beowulf cluster. This modeling project combining
with the ongoing experimental research program would attract more students to
Texas Tech University, which has a large minority student population and is
geographically underrepresented.&lt;br/&gt;