* 0344486
* Genetics of Runt-dependent Transcriptional Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* John Gergen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 02/29/2008
* USD 499,000.00

This project uses genetic approaches to investigate the biochemical mechanisms
of transcriptional regulation by the Drosophila Runt transcription factor. Runt
domain proteins comprise a small family of transcriptional regulators that have
pivotal roles in regulating gene expression in diverse developmental pathways
extending from segmentation in insect embryos to hematopoiesis and osteogenesis
in mammals. These proteins function as either activators or repressors of
transcription in a manner that depends on the specific target gene and the
developmental context. This project takes advantage of the wealth of information
available on Drosophila segmentation, as well as several genetic tools that are
available in this system to investigate the mechanisms of activation and
repression by Runt, the founding member of this family of transcriptional
regulators. An ongoing genetic dissection of Runt's activity as a
transcriptional repressor takes advantage of the lethality associated with the
Runt-dependent repression of the segment-polarity gene engrailed (en). Other
factors that cooperate with Runt are identified as suppressors of this lethality
are then molecularly characterized for their specific roles in transcriptional
repression. This project also uses similar genetic approaches to investigate the
mechanism of Runt-dependent activation of fushi tarazi (ftz) a second key target
in the Drosophila segmentation pathway. Molecular and biochemical approaches and
structure function studies that use in vivo assays will be used to investigate
interactions between Runt, Ftz-F1 and Lilliputian, and the relative roles of
these three DNA-binding factors in ftz activation. This project will contribute
to the understanding of the mechanisms of Runt-dependent transcriptional
regulation and will provide insights on in vivo mechanisms for transcriptional
regulation that are not so readily obtained in other systems. In addition,
training opportunities for several students, from the high school to graduate
school level, will be offered through this project.