* 0345619
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Patterns of Practice-Foodways as an Archaeological Measure of Culture Change
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Jerald Milanich, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2005
* USD 11,045.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Jerald T. Milanich, Jane Anne Blakney-Bailey will
conduct a study investigating how indigenous foodways were affected by European
colonization. Foodways describe a wide range of behaviors including food
preferences, procurement, cooking and preparation, and the social contexts of
eating. Studies have shown that foodways are often very slow to change even
during times of extreme hardship, such as colonization, epidemics, and
depopulation. Similarly, food habits of minority groups are frequently one of
the last traditions which changes in an environment dominated by a different
ethnic group.

The focus of this study is the Oconee Indians, descendants of the precolumbian
people living in the lower Chattahoochee River Valley of southern Alabama and
Georgia. This region witnessed severe depopulation following the arrival of
Europeans. By the late seventeenth century, the population had rebounded and
organized into a series of Lower Creek settlements. One town was Oconee (Oconi).
In the 1750s Oconee Indians migrated to north-central Florida where they became
known as Seminoles. By tracing this lineage through the prehistoric and historic
periods, the study will provide detailed information regarding the changing or
persistent patterns in indigenous foodways during this volatile period of human
history.

This project will use a multi-pronged approach to the study of Oconee foodways.
Analysis of food remains will provide information, such as what animals were
exploited and how they were prepared. Ceramic analysis will determine the
specific food-related functions of pottery vessel forms. Innovative techniques
in gas chromatography will be used to analyze organic residues on ceramic sherds
to further support or modify interpretations of vessel functions. Historic maps
and Geographic Information Systems will be applied to evaluate how physiographic
characteristics of settlement locales and proximity and interaction with
European settlements may have affected foodway activities.

The archaeological collections being used for these analyses are from a broad
temporal range of Oconee villages. Collections are curated in museums in Alabama
and Georgia. Because limited archaeological collections are available from
north-central Florida (Oconee) Seminole sites, archaeological fieldwork is
necessary. Fieldwork will be conducted at the Paynes Town Seminole site, located
in Paynes Prairie Preserve State Park in north-central Florida. The site is well
known from historical documents, particularly those detailing battles between
its inhabitants and the U.S. military.

The project will make a positive contribution to the public. Paynes Prairie
personnel will be working with Milanich and Blakney-Bailey to create a site
preservation plan and to develop interpretive information which will be made
available to park visitors. Public and student volunteers will participate in
field and lab work and will learn key aspects of archaeological methods and
theories and Seminole and Miccosukee history. This research has already elicited
great interest from the public. The co-PIs will continue to make information
gathered from the research available to the Park, the greater public, the
Seminole and Miccosukee Indian tribes of Florida, and to the scientific
community.

