* 0345061
* Specificities and Functions of Plant Translesion DNA Polymerases
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2004,08/31/2008
* John Hays, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2008
* USD 576,326.00

DNA polymerases that replicate cellular genomes do so with astonishing accuracy
in all organisms, using a variety of fidelity-enforcing and proofreading
mechanisms. However, these same mechanisms typically prevent replication past
rare damages (lesions) in DNA template strands, risking cell death. Recently,
new families of relaxed-fidelity polymerases, able to synthesis DNA past
lesions, sometimes but not always with increased risk of mutation, have been
discovered in all major classes of organisms. For example, in a rare human
genetic disorder (xeroderma pigmentosum variant), a translesion polymerase (TLP)
able to copy UV-light-damaged template strands relatively accurately is missing;
these individuals suffer from high skin cancer rates. Plants encode four TLPs
highly similar to those in microbes and mammals, and recent studies suggest
important roles in plant genomic stability. The various evolutionarily conserved
TLP families each show different broad specificities for poorly defined sets of
DNA lesions - so-called cognate lesions. The central hypothesis guiding this
project is that among the cognate lesions identified with each TLP family,
evolution will have shaped the specificities of the family members in particular
organisms towards DNA lesions that the organism is likely to encounter. Because
of their obligatory prolonged exposure to sunlight, and their oxygen-
synthesizing (chloroplast) and "breathing" (mitochondrial) metabolism, plants
seem likely to be impacted by UV-induced photoproducts and oxidized bases. In
separate sets of biochemical experiments, purified microbial, human, and plant
(Arabidopsis) TLPs, from four families, will be compared with respect to the
efficiency and accuracy of DNA synthesis past UV-induced and oxidative lesions.
In parallel, responses of Arabidopsis mutants lacking each of the TLPs to UV-
light and oxidative-stress, and thus the respective contributions of the TLPs to
plant genomic stability will be analyzed.