* 0345240
* Reactive Intermediates from Carbene Fragmentation
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Robert Moss, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2009
* USD 844,928.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professors Robert A. Moss of Rutgers University will continue fundamental
studies of organic reactive intermediates, particularly carbenes and
carbocations using direct spectroscopic and fast kinetics methodologies. More
specifically, the fragmentation of carbenes will be studied as a novel entry to
numerous carbocations of special structural significance. Mechanism(s) of
formation, solvent equilibration, and the kinetics of reaction will be examined
and compared with results obtained from older and more traditional methods of
carbocation generation. The role of ion pairs in heterolytic carbene
fragmentation reactions will be closely examined as well as examples of
homolytic fragmentation. Matrix isolation methods will be employed in some of
these cases. The research results should enhance our ability to diagnose the
interplay between polar concerted fragmentation transition states, tight or
contact ion pairs, solvent equilibrated ion pairs, and radical pairs in carbene
fragmentation reactions. It should also contribute to defining the reactivity
and properties of many of the classic carbocations of physical organic chemistry
as generated by a non-solvolytic procedure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic
and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professors Robert A. Moss of
Rutgers University who will attempt to answer fundamental questions on carbene
fragmentation, and examining its mechanism(s) and application to the generation
of carbocations, ion pair, or related intermediates in organic systems.
Professor Moss will gather a team of collaborators who will assist in answering
these questions using fast kinetics methodology, product analysis and
computational methods. He will continue to have a broad impact on the physical
organic chemistry community by distributing the results of his research through
publications and writing scholarly review articles. Professor Moss along with
two co-authors will edit Reactive Intermediate Chemistry, a book of 22 chapters
devoted to a comprehensive study of reactive intermediates that is intended for
graduate students and professional chemists.&lt;br/&gt;