* 0345263
* Preparation of Paramagnetic Coordination Complexes and Molecular Materials with Designed Magnetic Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* David Shultz, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 03/31/2010
* USD 467,160.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports Professor David Shultz of North Carolina State University for research
exploring the molecular design, synthesis, and characterization of new magnetic
molecular solids. These new magnetic coordination polymers will incorporate
ligands including chelating quinone methide semiquinone (QMSQ) ligands or
heterospin biradicals comprised of multiple, chemically distinct paramagnetic
functional groups. The project aims to investigate whether donor-acceptor
interactions in organic molecules can be used to control exchange coupling. The
knowledge gained from these systematic studies will increase our understanding
of fundamental properties in magnetic molecular solids, including electron
transfer matrix elements in donor-acceptor molecules and exchange interactions
in biradicals. This research will stimulate theoreticians working to understand
magnetic interactions in single molecules, and may ultimately advance the
chemistry needed for the applications of these materials, for example, in
information storage technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is aimed at
the development of new spin-electronic or "spintronic" molecular materials that
may provide combined advantages of spin (e.g., bistable, switchable systems) and
molecular functionality (e.g., redox activity, near-IR absorption, etc.). This
research will allow systematic investigations of novel structures to address
significant issues in single molecule magnetism, and could result in new,
switchable, microwave-absorbing materials that could be used for security
applications or in materials for information storage technologies. Graduate
students, undergraduate students and postdoctoral associates will receive
excellent training in synthesis and characterization of new molecular magnetic
materials in a forefront inorganic chemistry program.