* 0345862
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Descriptive Grammar of the Mosuo Language of Southwestern China
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Anthony Woodbury, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2007
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Anthony Woodbury, Ms. Liberty Lidz will collect
linguistic data on Mosuo for her doctoral dissertation. Mosuo is an endangered
Sino-Tibetan language with roughly 40,000 speakers spoken in southwestern China.
Mandarin is increasingly being spoken instead of Mosuo, particularly among
children and people involved in the new tourist economy. The main research
methodologies will be (i) the elicitation of syntactic, phonological, and
lexical data, and (ii) the audio and video recording of naturally-occuring
speech. Under the guidance of Dr. Woodbury, Ms. Lidz will analyze these data and
produce a grammar, dictionary, and transcriptions of oral
texts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation will provide a grammar of a
virtually undocumented language, from a family about which the world has little
data. Linguists want to understand what is common about all language as well as
what unusual things can occur in a language. Data on Mosuo will help linguists
to understand both of these. The Mosuo grammar (with sections translated into
Chinese and glosses in Mosuo) will be an invaluable resource for native
speakers. The audio and video recordings will provide an archive of speech
patterns and cultural information such as folktales, information which is useful
for native speakers, linguists, anthropologists, historians, and sociologists.
Lidz will also work with the Mosuo to create language teaching materials for
community use. Language is a central part of culture and as such, it is crucial
to document minority languages before they disappear, and to create pedagogical
materials to deter language loss.&lt;br/&gt;