* 0345708
* Collaborative Research:  A Workshop Proposal for Integrated EarthScope Research and Education in the Northern Rocky Mountains
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* David Mogk, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 08/31/2006
* USD 38,749.00

An EarthScope workshop in the northern Rocky Mountains (NRM) will provide an
opportunity&lt;br/&gt;for a diverse array of earth scientists to meet and
discuss the opportunities that&lt;br/&gt;EarthScope will provide to improve our
understanding of the wide range of processes that&lt;br/&gt;formed this segment
of continental crust. The NRM (generally defined as northern
Wyoming,&lt;br/&gt;SW Montana, and eastern Idaho) is a unique environment that
provides an excellent natural&lt;br/&gt;laboratory for studying many critical
phenomena associated with the evolution of the&lt;br/&gt;continental crust-
mantle system. We propose to hold a 2.5-day workshop in the early fall of 2005
in SW Montana. The meeting will begin with a general session to inform
participants of the current status of EarthScope and provide overviews of the
overarching scientific questions related to the&lt;br/&gt;geology of the NRM. An
organizing committee will be charged to set the meeting agenda
and&lt;br/&gt;participate in selection of speakers and participants. The
workshop will provide the&lt;br/&gt;opportunity for smaller working groups to
meet and identify scientific objectives and&lt;br/&gt;assess how EarthScope can
help address these objectives. Possible working group topics and&lt;br/&gt;lists
of individuals who have expressed an interest in attending is provided. A
concluding&lt;br/&gt;session will focus on presentations from the individual
working groups. Appropriate and timely announcements will allow ample
opportunity for all interested parties to apply to attend. &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the workshop will be realized through comprehensive web
development&lt;br/&gt;that will support workshop logistics, pre- and post-
workshop activities, posting of all&lt;br/&gt;workshop products (e.g. talks,
posters, discussion summaries, essays, plans), and will&lt;br/&gt;begin to
compile a region-wide digital resource collection. The workshop program will
also&lt;br/&gt;address the EarthScope Education and Outreach (E&amp;O)
objectives by establishing an E&amp;O&lt;br/&gt;working group in parallel with
the research-oriented working groups. The workshop will&lt;br/&gt;also serve to
identify and recruit colleagues who are interested in contributing
to&lt;br/&gt;EarthScope E&amp;O in the NRM.