* 0345538
* Acquisition of Geophysical Field Instrumentation and Computers for Integrated Studies of Continental Geodynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Eric Sandvol, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2007
* USD 148,113.00

0345538&lt;br/&gt;Gomez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial support
for the acquisition of field equipment (field seismographs and GPS receivers)
and computational infrastructure for integrated, multi-disciplinary studies of
continental tectonism and geodynamics at the University of Missouri - Columbia
(UMC). These studies are being conducted through close collaboration of three
PIs (Gomez, Sandvol and Liu) at UMC representing neotectonics, earthquake
seismology, and geodynamic modeling, respectively. Collectively, this team aims
to elucidate the relationship between multi-temporal crustal kinematics,
lithospheric and upper mantle structure, and rheology of the continents. In
addition to facilitating future research, this support directly contributes to
three ongoing, collaborative efforts involving all three PIs: (1) Intraplate
tectonics and geodynamics in the Shanxi rift zone and eastern Tien Shan (China),
(2) Active tectonism and geodynamics of the African plate boundaries in the
eastern Mediterranean region (Turkey, Lebanon, and Syria), and (3) Stress
evolution and earthquakes in the Central-Eastern United States. In addition to
the scientific contributions, results of these ongoing research projects also
have significant implications for assessing the earthquake hazard in each of the
regions. These instruments and facilities will also increase educational
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students at UMC. This will
involve the participation of students in the ongoing and planned research
activities, as well as utilization of these instruments within the classroom,
including the addition of an important, new geophysical component to the UMC
geology field camp in Lander, Wyoming, that attracts ~30 students from different
parts of the country every year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;