* 0345241
* Collaborative Research. Categorical Social Perception and Evaluations: A Research Synthesis
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2008
* B. Ann Bettencourt, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 10/31/2008
* USD 96,483.00

Research on stereotyping has focused on the ways in which perceivers judge
others on the basis of their memberships in stereotyped groups. Theories of
social psychology agree that there are important variables that moderate the
influence of stereotypes on judgments. These moderators include fit between
categorical and individuating information, motives related to interdependency,
motives for accuracy, and cognitive busyness. Also, some theoretical models have
identified the following moderating variables: relative power, subjectivity of
evaluative index, ingroup membership of the target vis-a-vis ingroup membership
of the evaluator, and type of individuating information. No comprehensive
research synthesis has been conducted on this large body of research. Given the
variety of theoretical perspectives that have guided this literature and the
large number of studies that have been conducted on the topic, such a synthesis
will be scientifically valuable and will profitably contribute to future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three broad goals for the research
synthesis proposed. One of our primary objectives is to answer broad questions
about the processes related to stereotyping. Our general question is: What
theoretically-relevant and methodologically-related variables moderate the
influence of stereotypical information on the judgments of others? Another of
our primary objectives is to critically examine this literature to understand
why the relevant studies have revealed a variety of inconsistent results. Our
final goal is specify the issues that remain unresolved and to reveal clear
prescriptions for further research on stereotyping and prejudice. The
accomplishment of these objectives will make a significant contribution to our
scientific understanding of stereotyping and prejudice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish our goals, we will conduct a meta-analysis on the literature focusing
on stereotyping and judgments. The eligible studies will be systematically coded
for the identified moderators. In addition, we will calculate a number of
different types of effect sizes to utilize the available data set as well as to
address a variety of different theoretical approaches. Also in pursuing our
third objective, we will use both quantitative (meta-analysis) and narrative
techniques to take advantage of the strengths of both approaches. The
comprehensive research synthesis will usefully organize the findings on
stereotyping and judgments as well as invigorate research in this area. It is
likely that this project will have a broad impact on research in a variety of
disciplines, including psychology, sociology, education, business, and law.
Additionally, the research synthesis will inform our understanding of
stereotyping and prejudice in important societal realms, including schools, the
workplace, and the courtroom. &lt;br/&gt;