* 0345670
* Time scales across the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary: A new approach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2009
* USD 178,178.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Cyclical variations in the carbonate content, represented by
limestone-marl bedding couplets, in Late Cretaceous-Early Tertiary sediments may
be related to the Earth's precessional period of ~20-24 thousand years (kyr).
However, do all bedding couplets really represent ~20-24 kyr? If so, did orbital
forcing produce these variations by driving fluctuations in carbonate production
in the ocean or was continental weathering equally important? Answering these
questions would provide important checks on timescales derived using
cyclostratigraphy, such as the pace of events across the Cretaceous-Tertiary
boundary, and the response of continents and oceans to Milankovitch forcing.
However, there are few available tools that can be utilized to accurately
constrain events on timescales of a few thousand years. Accumulation rates of
interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) may provide a new tool with which to
investigate sedimentation rates at such high resolution. Prior work has shown
that the accretion rate of IDPs across the K-T boundary is constant. Therefore,
the concentration of these particles in sediments will be governed by
sedimentation rates. Implantation of helium by the solar wind tremendously
enriches IDPs in 3He compared to terrestrial rocks. By using 3He as a tracer of
the IDP concentration in sediments, sedimentation rates at a resolution of 1000
years, and perhaps down to a hundred years, can be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The two primary goals of
this proposal are: 1) use 3He-based sedimentation rates to estimate durations of
limestone-marl couplets across the K-T over a sufficient number of cycles to
verify the claim that they represent precessional cycles and, more importantly,
quantify variability in sedimentation rates within a carbonate cycle.
Independent knowledge of the distribution of time within a bedding couplet will
enable fluxes to be calculated quantitatively on sub-Milankovitch timescales,
crucial pieces of information required to investigate causal mechanisms driving
sedimentary cycles. 2) use 3He-based sedimentation rates to constrain the pace
of climate and productivity changes recorded within the K-T clay, and estimate
the duration of important biostratigraphic zones (such as P1A, P1B) to
characterize the biological/ecological recovery in the first 100 kyr following
the K-T impact. Hence, the proposed research will provide a precise
chronological framework for testing models for biotic recovery and evolutionary
dynamics. To assess the distribution of time in sediments deposited following
the K-T impact event, the well-studied stratigraphic sections exposed in
southeast Spain (Agost and Caravaca) will be sampled for helium measurements. To
test the hypothesis that Milankovitch forcing induces carbonate cyclicity in
Late Cretaceous-Early Tertiary sediments, 3He-based sedimentation rates will be
used to determine duration of well-recognized limestone-marl beds in sediments
from DSDP cores (site 516F on the Rio Grande Rise and sites 528 and 529 on the
Walvis Ridge) and from Agost (Spain).&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed
work will provide an important calibration between two techniques: 3 He and
cyclostratigraphy. Because 3He is preserved in the geological record for at
least 480 Myrs, a detailed study will illustrate the potential of applying 3He-
based sedimentation rates over a large fraction of the Phanerozoic to probe
timescales of climate changes, mass extinctions events, and the biological
recovery following mass extinction events. The proposed research also
incorporates graduate student education and involves them in research with goals
that are of societal significance. Involvement in exciting research is important
for recruiting and retaining talented individuals in the earth sciences. Such
individuals are needed to address the growing environmental challenges facing
humankind.&lt;br/&gt;