* 0345314
* A Basic Grammar of Croatian Sign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2011
* Ronnie Wilbur, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 04/30/2011
* USD 499,997.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Ronnie Wilbur will lead an
international team of American and Croatian researchers in a five year
investigation of the linguistic structure of Croatian Sign Language (HZJ). With
Dr. Ljubica Pribanic at the University of Zagreb, our goal is to construct a
basic grammatical description of HZJ. Many deaf children in Croatia and in the
U.S. will benefit from this collaborative research because it will have
immediate application to the development of curricular materials for teaching
sign language, training sign language interpreters, speech-language
pathologists, audiologists, and educating teachers of the deaf about how early
sign language usage can foster improved literacy and academic achievement with
deaf children.

Two scientific questions motivate this project. First, how divergent are sign
language structures? This question reflects the interest in determining the
effects that modality of perception and production has on the nature of signed
and spoken languages. We will be able to compare HZJ with ASL, Austrian Sign
Language (OGS), and other signed languages. We focus on five general areas of
inquiry: transitive declarative sentences, yes/no-questions, wh-questions,
negation and verbal morphology. These results speak to the core issues of human
conceptual structure and its mapping onto natural languages. Second, what is the
influence of spoken languages on indigenous sign languages? This grammar will be
the first on a sign language used in a Slavic speaking country. The proposed
comparison with other signed languages, and with their local spoken languages,
is novel to the field of sign language research and should yield new insights
into our understanding of the notion "natural human language".