* 0345448
* ORNIS: A Community Effort to Build an Integrated, Distributed, Enriched, and Error-checked ORNithological Information System
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2013
* Mark Robbins, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,571,567.00

Proposal # 0345448&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Peterson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ORNIS: A Community Effort to Build an Integrated,
Distributed, Enriched, and Error-checked ORNithological Information
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Kansas has been granted an award
to build an integrated database system for the rapid integration of specimen
records (including vocal recordings, egg and nest holdings) of avian species
archived in biocollections held in North American institutions. The system will
use globally accepted data exchange standards and internet protocols to
eventually make up to 3.9 million collections available to the global
biodiversity community and to allow the data from those collections to be shared
and combined with data from all over the world. The exceptional merits of the
system lie in both the informatics and community aspects of the project. There
is broad community buy-in from 29 institutions in North America. The use of
globally compatible standards and protocols (e.g. DiGIR) will allow universal
access (e.g. through GBIF &amp; IT IS and other potals). There is also broad
collaboration with similar projects based on other taxa (e.g. MaNIS, HerpNET
&amp; FishNET) in collaborative georeferencing as well as the integration and
enhancement of advanced machine assisted georeferencing techniques. Finally, the
project will be using innovative data mining and cleansing techniques to greatly
improve the quality of the database, all in a high throughput
context.&lt;br/&gt;