* 0345784
* Phonological typology in geographical perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Ian Maddieson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2006
* USD 199,999.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Ian Maddieson will develop and
analyze a database of phonetic and phonological information on 1000 genetically
diverse languages to establish a phonological typology of languages. Languages
may be classified into types according to differences in the number and nature
of the sounds they use and how these sounds are combined and employed in larger
units such as syllables and words. Based on the large sample in the database,
the frequency with which the different types occur as well as the inter-
relationships of different characteristics will be studied. For example, whether
languages that use a large number of different consonants also tend to use a
large number of distinct vowels or a wide range of different syllable structures
will be examined. These statistical studies will demonstrate the range of
variation among spoken languages as well as showing which of the features and
patterns of relationships can be considered typical of human language and which
represent more marginal properties. In addition, the geographical distribution
of these characteristics will be plotted on maps to show how languages
indigenous to different regions vary. This will help to highlight cases where
similarities between languages may be due to historical contacts between their
speakers rather than to independent development. Particular features or patterns
of relationships between features that are widely distributed around the world
are more likely to reflect very general design properties of human language.
Patterns that are locally limited in their distribution are more likely to
reflect accidents of history.

The basic objective of this research is to contribute to understanding both the
shared properties underlying human languages and the range of variation in the
sound structure among spoken languages, all of which can express the full range
of human needs. The database will be developed into a web-accessible tool that
can be accessed by other scholars and the public. Making it available in this
way will help to educate the public about the great (though diminishing)
diversity of languages still spoken around the world, and help to create respect
for this diversity. It will also permit scholars to search for other or
differently defined patterns than those selected for examination by the original
compiler.

