* 0345518
* Conservation, Rehousing, and Computerization of the Invertebrate Paleontology Collection at the University of Michigan Museum of Paleontology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Daniel Fisher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 07/31/2008
* USD 303,623.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. T. Baumiller at the University of Michigan to
make improvements to the invertebrate fossil collection in the Museum of
Paleontology (UMMP). Funding is being used to correct a number of urgent
conservation problems in the collection and to partially replace antiquated
wooden cabinets with modern, archival-quality metal cabinets. The collection is
used widely in research and training of future paleontologists. Included in the
collection are over 6500 "type" and "figured" specimens as well as many
exquisitely preserved fossils from classic field localities that are no longer
accessible. These are among the most important specimens to science because they
are the essential reference material that scientists depend upon when evaluating
potentially new species or new occurrences. National Science Foundation support
will help to ensure that this important collection is properly housed and
conserved for future use. &lt;br/&gt; Many fossils contain the mineral pyrite
(iron disulfide), and the oxidation of pyrite is a serious problem in many
natural history collections. In the presence of water and oxygen, pyrite breaks
down, forming secondary minerals that may obliterate surface detail of the
fossil and produce stress fractures that lead to physical disintegration of the
specimen. Caustic sulfuric acid may also be produced during the breakdown
reactions, causing further damage to specimens, labels, and storage trays.
Byne's "disease" is also a problem in the collection and occurs when corrosive
volatiles, particularly organic acids emanating from the breakdown of wood and
paper products, react with calcium carbonate in specimens. These reactions cause
the growth of secondary crystals that can also damage specimens severely. A
large number of the finest and most important specimens in the UMMP collection
contain pyrite are thus at risk. A smaller number show signs of Byne's
"disease". A protocol for remedial and preventive conservation using state-of-
the-art methods will be implemented to salvage damaged specimens and protect the
collections from future damage. The treatments are based on proven conservation
techniques and will include 1) brush-cleaning, 2) de-acidification of specimens
with ethanolamine thioglycollate and ammonia gas, 3) dry-cleaning with anhydrous
ethanol, 4) the use of desiccants to remove reactive water, and 5) creation of
protective oxygen, moisture, and corrosive-free microenvironments using barrier-
film bags. Non-archival quality materials in the collections will be replaced
with archival quality materials. The antiquated wooden cabinets now housing the
specimens at greatest risk will be replaced with archival quality metal cabinets
and all specimens will be moved to a newly renovated, larger, secure facility.
The metal cabinets will provide an added measure of protection because wooden
cabinets are known to release corrosive volatiles such as formic and acetic
acid, which can lead to Byne's "disease", promote pyrite decomposition, and harm
specimen labels and trays. The new cabinets will also provide much more
efficient storage and with the added space in the new facility allow a much
greater ease of use. &lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of this project include
safeguarding the collection and improving access for scientists and students.
The collection is widely used in research and teaching and contains many
vulnerable specimens from localities that no longer exist or are no longer
accessible. Our knowledge of life's history depends on the integrity and
longevity of collections such as this. The project will involve graduate student
assistants and provide valuable training in critical aspects of collections-care
to future paleontologists. The UMMP invertebrate collections are also widely
used in public education and exhibits, and their preservation will ensure that
the general public continues to benefit from them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;