* 0345798
* DMUU:  Climate and Related Decision Making in the Face of Irreducible Uncertainties
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* M. Granger Morgan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2011
* USD 7,604,412.00

Discussions of climate-related decision making often assume, either implicitly
or explicitly, that accurate predictive models can be developed of how the
climate will change, what the ecological and socio-economic impacts of those
changes will be, and what the relative costs and implications will be of
alternative policies and strategies for adapting to those changes and to limit
the emissions of greenhouse gasses. In reality, there are serious limitations on
how accurately any of these things can be predicted. The Climate Decision Making
Center will develop and demonstrate methods to characterize these irreducible
uncertainties. It will focus in particular on uncertainties about climate and
uncertainties about the future of the energy system because the energy sector is
a leading source of emissions of greenhouse gasses. The center will work to
create, illustrate, and evaluate decision strategies that incorporate such
uncertainties. It also will develop methods to examine the broad social
consequences, particularly for energy systems, of choices by individual and
institutional decision makers. Recognizing that climate and climate policy often
will play a small role in the considerations of many decision makers, the
center's approach will be to treat climate in the broader context of the public
policy, economic, and social environments in which decision makers operate.
Center investigators have backgrounds in both the natural and the social
sciences. The center is based in the Department of Engineering and Public Policy
at Carnegie Mellon University, but its work involves investigators at Stanford,
UC Berkeley, the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory-University of Maryland
Joint Global Change Research Institute, the University of British Columbia, the
University of Calgary, and the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
(PIK).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Climate Decision Making Center will develop and
demonstrate a set of new methods and decision analytic tools for addressing
problems that involve high, and often irreducible levels of uncertainty. At the
same time, because working on real problems is the best way to advance basic
methods in a complex domain such as climate change, the center also will address
specific problems faced by public and private sector decision makers. This
applied work includes problems faced by: insurance managers with exposure to
direct and indirect risks posed by climate change and by low carbon energy
technologies; forest, fisheries, and ecosystem managers in the Pacific Northwest
and Western Canada; Arctic-region decision makers concerned with balancing
economic development and traditional indigenous life styles; and electric
utility managers facing capital investment decisions about generation and multi-
pollutant emissions control. The methods and approaches being developed and
demonstrated by the Center will have general applicability to a wide range of
other problems beyond the domain of climate change and energy technology. The
doctoral students the center will educate will combine strong technical, social
science, and decision-analytic skills that will prepare them to work on a wide
variety of important societal problems. This award was supported as part of the
Fiscal Year 2003 Human and Social Dynamics priority area special competition on
Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU).&lt;br/&gt;