* 0345988
* Human-Environment Interactions and Socio-Political Change in Southwest Iran, 4500-3500 BC
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Abbas Alizadeh, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2006
* USD 34,776.00

With the support of National Science Foundation, Drs. Abbas Alizadeh, Nicholas
Kouchoukos, and Tony Wilkinson as well as Iranian and international colleagues
will conduct a series of archaeological excavations and
geomorphological/landscape surveys in lowland Khuzestan (ancient Susiana),
southwestern Iran. The expedition consists of archaeologists, geomorphologists,
landscape archaeologists, and a zooarchaeologist and a palaeobotanist, from
U.S.A., England, France, and Iran.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present understanding of
cultural development in lowland Susiana is the product of numerous excavations
and, especially regional surface surveys. While settlement patterns revealed by
archaeological surveys provide considerable information about how settlements
positioned themselves spatially, there has never been a systematic effort to
understand the effects of geomorphological features and the changing landscape
as major variables in the location and distribution of sites. This is
particularly important in the transitional period from the late prehistoric
phases to the emergence of urban centers (4500-3500 BC), when subsistence
economy was changing and irrigation agriculture was presumably a major
development associated with the rise of urban centers in both lowland Susiana
and southern Mesopotamia. Therefore, an understanding of the use of land, the
effect of the regimes of Susiana's 3 major rivers, and the adaptive responses of
the local cultures to geomorphological and landscape features is crucial to the
interpretation of urban development in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Canal
irrigation agriculture is considered a major adaptive response to both
environmental and demographic variables in southwestern Iran and southern
Mesopotamia. Some scholars consider the emphasis on cultivation of barley and
raising sheep, both more tolerant to heat and salt than goats and wheat, in the
early 4th millennium BC as a reflection the perceived salinization in these
regions that was caused by climatic changes and over-irrigation. One of the
goals of this project is to test this assumption by collecting and analyzing
sedimentary deposits, faunal, floral, and phytolith (fossilized plant cells)
samples, as well as finding traces of ancient irrigation canals and farm lands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precise chronology is another problem associated with the
interpretation of the evidence concerning the nature of the transition from a
basically subsistence economy of prehistoric times to one based on large-scale
irrigation agriculture and a network of regional trade controlled by urban
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is designed to collect
physical evidence of such developments to ultimately reach a deeper
understanding of geomorphology of the region and patterns of land-use (almost
completely lacking) that are crucial in the reconstruction and interpretation of
the crucial millennium that led to the rise of urban centers and transformation
of subsistence economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;