* 0345766
* The Relation between Parsing and Production
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Amy Weinberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2004
* USD 18,175.00

The National Science Foundation will support a workshop on The Relation between
Parsing and Production, to be held at the University of Maryland, College Park,
as a part of the 17th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, March
25-27, 2004. The workshop will bring together leading researchers on language
production and language understanding from psychological, computational and
neuropsychological perspectives, with the goal of generating a new synthesis of
the parallels and differences between production and comprehension. Until
recently, research on speaking and understanding investigated largely different
phenomena, using largely different methodologies; this led to the view that
sentence comprehension and sentence production are largely independent cognitive
systems. Recent advances in both fields now suggest a different picture:
parallel experimental and computational investigations of speaking and
understanding indicate that there is substantial overlap in the mechanisms used
for both tasks. The specific questions addressed at the workshop will include
the following: What do sentence comprehension and production have in common,
beyond the fact that they use the same language? Do comprehension and production
operate on the same time-scale? How can experimental findings of close parallels
between speaking and understanding be reconciled with the finding of
dissociations between speaking and understanding in language disorders? What
methodologies will allow closer comparison of comprehension and
production?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will have broad impacts for both
research and education. A proper understanding of the relation between language
production and language comprehension is important for a number of different
fields, including language learning and especially the study of language
disorders, where language comprehension and language production have often been
found to be differentially impacted. An improved understanding of the relation
between comprehension and production also has implications for the development
of computational models of interactive natural language agents. The workshop
will foster interaction among researchers in different fields, and by supporting
the participation of students, it will enhance the training of a new generation
of researchers. Results of the workshop will be made available through
publication in a special journal issue.&lt;br/&gt;