* 0345910
* Orogeny, orography, and the origin of the first rainforests: Paleobotany of the temporally-calibrated synorogenic Denver Basin, Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Kirk Johnson, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2009
* USD 659,132.00

OROGENY, OROGRAPHY, AND THE ORIGIN OF THE FIRST RAINFORESTS: PALEOBOTANY OF THE
TEMPORALLY-CALLIBRATED SYNOROGENIC DENVER BASIN,
COLORADO&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kirk Johnson and Robert Raynolds&lt;br/&gt;EAR-
0345910&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strata and fossil
plants of the time-calibrated Denver Basin provide a unique, natural laboratory
in which to evaluate and quantify the influence of regression, orogeny,
orography, and extinction on the evolution of ancient ecosystems. Evidence from
the basin suggests that the tropical rainforest ecosystem first evolved in areas
of extremely high rainfall on the eastern flanks of the uplifting Laramide Front
Range in the extraordinarily low biodiversity World that followed the
Cretaceous-Tertiary (K-T) cataclysm. This project will test three major
hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Floras and Landscapes: Fossil floras and
their proxy climate data can be mapped onto paleogeography and linked to
significant environmental events such as the regression of the Western Interior
Seaway, the Laramide Orogeny, and the K-T extinction event to provide insight
about the evolution of floras, climates, ecosystems and landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Origin of Rainforests: Orographic conditions caused by the Laramide Orogeny and
an adjacent seaway resulted in localized high rainfall. These conditions, in the
warm but biologically depauperate post-K-T world of the early Paleocene, set the
stage for the evolution of tropical rainforest ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;3. Ghost
Canyons and Ancient Fans: Alluvial fans form on the margins of synorogenic
basins during times of high relief due to the localization of mountain-sourced
river systems into incised valleys. These fans are paleogeomorphic features that
controlled ancient vegetation patterns and strongly influence modern day
hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate research across
broad areas of paleontology, geology and hydrology to answer specific questions
about biotic evolution and extinction on an evolving synorogenic landscape. This
work will also provide data that is directly relevant to the understanding of
the distribution and quantity of groundwater resources of the Colorado Front
Range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;