* 0345840
* DMUU: Individual and Group Decision Making Under Climate Uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2012
* Roberta Balstad, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 6,480,654.00

The Center for Research on Environmental Decisions (CRED) at Columbia University
will coordinate a series of studies of decision processes underlying human
adaptation to uncertainty and change-in particular climate-related uncertainty
and climate change. The Center's mission is to address decisions made at
multiple scales: by individuals, by small groups, and by organizations that face
climate-related problems. Center research will be conducted by Columbia students
and faculty affiliated with the Institute for Social and Economic Research and
Policy (ISERP) and with various units of the Earth Institute (EI), a consortium
of natural and social scientists and engineers committed to improving our
understanding of the Earth, its environment and climate, as well as by students
and faculty at six partner institutions (Bard College, University of California
at Davis, University of Georgia, University of Miami, University of Pittsburgh,
and University of Oregon). CRED research will (a) extend insights about the
constructive nature of individual decision making to the context of group
decisions, (b) integrate social motives more fully into theories of decision
making, and (c) study individual and group processes in the laboratory and in
field settings as climate-change and climate-variability related decisions
occur. A carefully designed set of four laboratory projects, four historical and
theoretical projects, and eight field projects around the world will provide
interdisciplinary and complementary insights on five substantive objectives: (1)
understanding the nature and impact of mental representations and framing in
both individual and group climate decision settings; (2) understanding the role
in decision making of affective, experiential information vs. analytic,
statistical information; (3) understanding the effects of individual and group
goals, group composition, and group processes in climate decisions; (4)
improving the presentation format and delivery of probabilistic climate
information; (5) developing microeconomic theories that incorporate knowledge
gained about individual and group decision processes making and macroeconomic
theories that integrate climate models and their impacts. Five field projects
examine the use of seasonal climate forecasts in individual, group, and
institutional decision processes. Three field projects deal with long-term
climate change and examine the role of direct personal experience vs.
statistical information in detecting and responding to climate change.

CRED's research contributions are only the first of four areas of contribution.
Research results will feed directly into the design and testing of educational
interventions, decision tools, and institutional strategies that will help
people, organizations, and governments to better understand the risks and
possible benefits associated with climate change and variability and the
response options they have. Regarding education and training, the Center will
work with several educational programs under the aegis of the Earth Institute at
Columbia, Columbia's Teachers College, local New York colleges and high schools,
and the Office of Minority Affairs in the Columbia Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences. The Center's curriculum and decision tools development will utilize
the expertise of Columbia's Center for New Media Teaching and Learning, and the
Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN). The large
and dense contact network of the International Research Institute for Climate
Prediction (IRI) will facilitate dissemination of these products. In addition,
the Center will work with the Weather Channel to produce educational segments on
climate change and climate variability that will allow for audience feedback.
This award was supported as part of the Fiscal Year 2003 Human and Social
Dynamics priority area special competition on Decision Making Under Uncertainty
(DMUU).