* 0345925
* DMUU: Improving Decisions in a Complex and Changing World
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2012
* Anthony Michaels, Rand Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,684,820.00

This project will conduct fundamental research on two key questions important to
the design and use of decision tools for supporting climate-change
decisionmaking: (1) What are the best ways to represent uncertainty for
decisionmakers and (2) What tools and methods work best in practice in providing
these representations to decisionmakers? In particular, the project will
strengthen the scientific foundations of robust decisionmaking (RDM), a
promising new approach to computer-assisted support for decisions under
conditions of deep uncertainty; that is, when decisionmakers are unsure of the
system model or the prior probability distributions across the inputs to the
system model(s). RDM helps decisionmakers to identify robust strategies whose
satisfactory performance is largely independent of the resolution of most
"unknowns" and in characterizing the residual deep uncertainties via their
impact on the choice among strategies. RDM has the potential to significantly
improve decisionmaking for climate-related and other policy areas. Interest in
RDM is motivated by increased understanding of the processes of decisionmaking
and the new capabilities of modern information technology which enable
unprecedented interactions between groups of decisionmakers and tools for
quantitative decision support. This research will draw on interactions with
decisionmakers in two policy areas: (1) long-term planning for the management of
water supplies by the California Department of Water Resources and (2) the
design of scientific observation systems that could provide actionable warning
of abrupt climate change. In each policy area, the project will employ
integrated assessment models to characterize policy-relevant uncertainty in
different ways (e.g., best estimates, probability densities, and vulnerabilities
of robust strategies), perform Judgment and Decision-Making (JDM) experiments to
determine how decisionmakers respond to different characterizations of
uncertainty, deploy with decisionmakers tools that employ promising
characterizations of uncertainty, and assess how these uncertainty
characterizations perform in actual use. The project also will conduct basic
research that identifies and evaluates the best statistical and other algorithms
for supporting robust decisionmaking under a variety of
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly enhance the
scientific foundations of new approaches to climate-related decisions under
conditions of deep uncertainty, and it will enrich understanding of
decisionmaking processes under these ubiquitous conditions. The research will
provide important new insights into the types of algorithms that can best be
used to support these new decision approaches. The project will improve
understanding of two important climate-related policy areas, water policy and
abrupt climate change. Not only will the project's findings directly aid
decisionmakers in these two domains, the project will improve methods to support
decisionmaking under conditions of deep uncertainty useful in addressing a very
wide range of public and private sector decision challenges. This award was
supported as part of the Fiscal Year 2003 Human and Social Dynamics priority
area special competition on Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU).