* 0345920
* The neural basis of visual priming
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Kalanit Grill-Spector, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 09/30/2006
* USD 175,001.00

The ability of the human brain to continuously change and update with experience
is one of the fundamental properties that distinguishes it from artificially
constructed devices. One manifestation of experience-dependent changes in the
human brain is visual priming, in which performance on repeated objects is
improved compared to performance on new stimuli (responses are both faster and
more accurate). Despite the rich knowledge on the behavioral aspects of visual
priming, much less is known about the underlying neural mechanisms. Recent
advances in brain imaging have allowed Dr. Kalanit Grill-Spector to examine the
brain changes that occur with stimulus repetition. For example, she and her
colleagues have found that repeating object images reduces the brain activity in
object-selective areas in the human visual cortex. However, it is
counterintuitive why reduced cortical activity would be associated with improved
behavioral performance? With NSF funding, the goal of Dr. Grill-Spector's
project is to understand the neural mechanisms underlying visual priming and to
understand how these mechanisms produce changes in cortical activity in object-
selective areas in the human brain. These experiments are designed to
distinguish between alternative theories explaining visual priming and to rule
out non-specific processes, such as changes in the overall attention level. To
do so, Dr. Grill-Spector will combine brain imaging experiments and behavioral
measurements. By manipulating repetition parameters, top-down attention and
stimulus strength, and measuring the effect of these factors on both behavior
and brain activation, she will determine which mechanism is more relevant. The
results of this project will be critical for understanding the neural basis of
experience-dependent changes in the visual system and will have a large impact
on the fields of perceptual learning, implicit memory and visual
cognition.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These experiments will have an important
contribution in understanding the physiological basis of a fundamental and
intensively studied cognitive process: visual priming. Elucidating the cognitive
and neural bases of visual priming will impact understanding of perceptual
learning and plasticity of object representations in high-level visual areas,
which in turn will affect a range of fields from clinical aspects of implicit
memory to AI models of object recognition. For example, better understanding of
the neural basis of perceptual learning or skill learning will facilitate better
rehabilitation programs for patients who experienced strokes or other localized
brain damage to sensory cortical areas. Furthermore, the proposed work will
provide substantial novel insights into the neural processes associated with
visual memory, which has important implications for the acquisition of novel
object recognition skills. This type of skill is an important aspect of many
forms of scientific and medical training (e.g., understanding radiological
photos or learning to visually distinguish between chromosomes). In sum, by
providing a greater understanding of neural plasticity, this work will inform
our understanding of experience-dependent changes in the visual system as well
as a wide range of learning and memory phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;