* 0345472
* Inaugural Conference of Generative Approaches to Language Acquisition - North America
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Bonnie Schwartz, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2005
* USD 25,000.00

The National Science Foundation will support the inaugural conference of
&lt;br/&gt;Generative Approaches to Language Acquisition - North America
(GALANA), to &lt;br/&gt;be convened at the University of Hawai`i at Manoa on
17-20 December &lt;br/&gt;2004. The GALANA meeting is conceived as the North-
American sister to the &lt;br/&gt;Europe-based conference, Generative Approaches
to Language Acquisition &lt;br/&gt;(GALA), which has been held biennially since
its inception in 1993. GALANA &lt;br/&gt;and GALA, both roving conferences, will
henceforth alternate from year to year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GALANA will
complement other existing broad-based and specialized language
&lt;br/&gt;acquisition conferences, and it will provide an outlet for the
growing body &lt;br/&gt;of generative acquisition research. A major aim of
GALANA is to bring &lt;br/&gt;together generative researchers in all subfields
of language acquisition, &lt;br/&gt;including first language acquisition, second
language acquisition, &lt;br/&gt;bilingual language acquisition, creole and
pidgin studies, and disordered &lt;br/&gt;language development. Notable features
of the conference designed to &lt;br/&gt;entice and excite wide participation
include: (i) invited presentations by &lt;br/&gt;distinguished scholars from
both the U.S. and abroad, more specifically, &lt;br/&gt;two plenary addresses
and one half-day tutorial; (ii) two special thematic &lt;br/&gt;sessions, one on
the acquisition of Mood/Aspect and the other on child &lt;br/&gt;second language
acquisition; (iii) three poster sessions, one of them&lt;br/&gt;reserved for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GALANA's broader impact occurs at
several levels: First, we are initiating &lt;br/&gt;a conference that will
benefit researchers for many years to come. Second, &lt;br/&gt;GALANA will
promote the participation of beginning researchers, including &lt;br/&gt;those
from under-represented minorities, by offering merit-based travel
&lt;br/&gt;fellowships to approximately 15 graduate students. In addition, the
&lt;br/&gt;conference will have a major impact on the infrastructure of
linguistics &lt;br/&gt;scholarship at the University of Hawai`i by fostering
cross-over between &lt;br/&gt;the two co-sponsoring departments (Linguistics;
Second Language Studies), &lt;br/&gt;providing undergraduate and graduate
students in both departments with &lt;br/&gt;numerous intellectual and
professional opportunities, and spurring Pacific &lt;br/&gt;Islanders' interest
in the study of the acquisition of their own &lt;br/&gt;languages. Finally, as a
roving conference, GALANA will encourage &lt;br/&gt;collaboration among centers
of generative studies in the U.S., thus &lt;br/&gt;strengthening the
infrastructure of generative acquisition research in
&lt;br/&gt;linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;