* 0346227
* Adult Neurogenesis, Regulation and Potential Function
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Miles Orchinik, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* john godwin
* 04/30/2008
* USD 409,889.00

For most of the 20th century, the adult brain was thought to lack the neural
plasticity seen in young brains and, particularly, to be incapable of generating
new neurons. This perspective is falling from favor, as one of the most exciting
areas of biological research is the study of adult neurogenesis - the
proliferation and differentiation of neuronal progenitor cells. Researchers have
recently suggested that the regulation of neurogenesis in adult humans is
important in the physiology or pathophysiology of many processes, including
cognition, affect, and aging (to name a few). Such avenues of research are
likely to become increasingly prominent in biomedical research, but the
significance of naturally occurring neurogenesis in adults of any species
remains unknown. While neurogenesis in adult songbird brains appears to support
seasonal cycles of song learning and memory, the definitive studies remain
elusive. The current studies will take advantage of the relatively simple brain
of the bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana, to enhance our knowledge of this complex
process. We will combine field studies, primary cell culture, and double-
labeling using laser confocal microscopy to investigate the fate of cells born
in adult frog brains, attempt to identify regulatory mechanisms, and address the
potential significance of adult neurogenesis from the perspective of
neuroendocrine cells rather than complex behaviors. Specifc aims are to: 1)
Characterize the distribution and extent of cell proliferation and the fate of
newly generated cells in adult bullfrog brains; 2) Investigate seasonal and sex
differences in cell proliferation and/or cell survival; 3) Characterize the
proliferation, differentiation and identity of ependymal progenitors in primary
culture; 4) Test the hypothesis that stress hormones alter cell proliferation,
differentiation or survival; 5) Test the hypotheses that two neurochemicals that
may regulate neurogenesis in mammals, serotonin and brain-derived neurotrophic
factor, regulate neurogenesis in amphibians; 6) Begin investigating the
potential significance of adult neurogenesis by testing the hypothesis that cell
proliferation in the preoptic area and hypothalamus leads to generation of cells
with known neuroendocrine functions. All the preliminary data presented in this
proposal have been obtained by a group of undergraduate researchers representing
diverse ethnic, age and socioeconomic groups, and a major goal of these studies
is to continue providing opportunities for undergraduate and graduate student
research. More than an opportunity to participate in cutting edge neuroscience,
research in adult neurogenesis is intrinsically interesting to scientists and
the media, making it a wonderful topic for developing student's critical
reasoning skills.