* 0346435
* NSF-EC Cooperative Activity in Materials Research: Dynamics of Nanostructured Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Jovan Mijovic, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 03/31/2008
* USD 281,000.00

This award is for a collaborative study between the groups of Professor Jovan
Mijovic (JM, Polytechnic University, New York) and Professor Jose' Kenny (JK,
University of Perugia, Italy), under the aegis of the NSF-European Commission
(EC) Cooperative Activity in Materials Research. The proposed study is in the
area of nanotechnology, an emerging field that is currently receiving enormous
attention worldwide. Professors Mijovic and Kenny have had extensive and
prolific collaboration over the past 15 year and are eminently qualified to
conduct the proposed research. Intellectual Merit: A study of dynamics addresses
issues that deal with the molecular origin, the length scales and the time
scales of different motions in polymers, typically under an applied field, such
as electric or mechanical. The resulting knowledge is important; (1)
fundamentally - because it provides guidance for the emerging theoretical and
computational studies, and (2) practically - because it helps optimize
processing and properties of materials. Towards that goal, it is proposed to
conduct a systematic investigation of the dynamics of a series of polymer-
functionalized nanoparticles, nanotubes and nanonetworks. This marks the first
time that such systematic effort is proposed and that the set of complete data
of this kind will be provided. The challenge is to revisit the conventional
processing-structure-property correlations and develop new principles for
creating structures of controlled (nano) length scales that would result in
novel materials with distinct (unusual) properties. Broader Impact: The broader
impact of the proposed research will result from the development of fundamental
understanding how the functionalized nanoparticles and nanotubes affect the
dynamics and, in turn, the processing and the properties of nanocomposites and
nanonetworks. It is anticipated that this fundamental understanding will be
directly relevant to a host of other systems. One example is dendritic
macromolecules, where chains are tethered to functionalized nanopartciles, yet
little is known about their dynamics. We also anticipate that our findings will
have a significant impact in the field of biopolymers; DNAs, proteins and
membranes. There are various examples of bio-related issues, ranging from gene
therapy, polynucleotide tethering used to create DNA chips, and protein folding,
to loops and "cruciforms" (junctions) in coiled DNA, where dynamics are thought
to play an important role and where new insights could emerge based on the
results of our study. Finally, the graduate education in an interdisciplinary
environment coupled with international exchange is conducive to producing PhDs
with a unique background. The proposed work will also contribute to the
enhancement of ethnic diversity by accommodating (in the PI's lab) and involving
in research a number of under-represented minority students from New York City
high schools under the aegis of the YES (Youth in Engineering and Science)
summer program at Polytechnic. The results of our work will be broadly
disseminated within the scientific community through presentations at
international meetings and publications in first-tier journals. In addition, an
attractive, interactive website will be created and advertised immediately
following the approval of the proposal.