* 0346733
* Problems in Fluorocarbon Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2004,06/30/2007
* David Lemal, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2007
* USD 360,000.00

In extreme bonding situations the contrasts between fluorinated molecules and
their hydrocarbon analogues are often especially sharp, resulting in novel
properties and reactivity for the fluorocarbons. This project will explore the
synthesis and properties of highly strained fluorocarbons - [2.2.2]propellanes,
a [2.2.1]propellane, bicyclo[2.1.0]pentanes, bicyclo[1.1.0]butanes and a
bicyclo[2.2.0]alkene - as well as highly fluorinated derivatives of an unusual
aromatic system, the nonbenzenoid hydrocarbon azulene. These molecules are of
interest not only for their reactivity, but especially for their electronic
spectra and photophysics, which will be explored collaboratively. Methods for
functionalization of fluorocarbon liquids will be applied to fluoropolymer
surfaces. In contrast to other methods of functionalizing fluoropolymer
surfaces, which are non-selective in nature, the approach to be used will
introduce a specific functional group at specific sites on the surface. The
result should be novel properties for the polymer, including the ability to
chelate metals. Also to be explored is the synthesis of perfluorinated triplet
carbenes that should display extraordinary thermal stability without the
electron delocalization characteristic of the only known stable triplet
carbenes. The synthetic plan is predicated on the size difference between alkyl
and perfluoroalkyl groups, together with the great strength of carbon-fluorine
bonds.

Fluorocarbons and derived materials enjoy an wide variety of uses in our
society, for many of which they are without equal. They owe their special
character to the fact that substitution of fluorine for the hydrogens in organic
molecules results in dramatic changes in properties and chemical behavior. With
the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor David
M. Lemal, of the Department of Chemistry at Dartmouth College, is extending what
is known regarding the structure, reactivity and synthesis of highly fluorinated
molecules. Through these studies, Professor Lemal is enhancing our understanding
of the contrasts between these molecules and their better known hydrocarbon
counterparts.