* 0346871
* CAREER:     Sensory Information for Interaction in Single-User and Collaborative Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Andrea Mason, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2010
* USD 498,901.00

When virtual environments achieve their full potential, they will have the
capacity to make a significant impact in several promising application domains
including scientific visualization, medical diagnosis and surgical training,
flight simulation, educational tools, and 3D games. However, due to
technological limitations, the graphic and haptic feedback available in current
interactive virtual environments cannot match the sensory feedback available in
the natural environment. In virtual environments, providing an abundance of
integrated sensory feedback to users comes at a significant cost. Technological
limitations, such as system latency, cumbersome tracking/feedback equipment, and
computationally expensive graphics and haptic rendering, make it impractical to
provide subjects with rich sensory feedback about all aspects of interaction.
Further, these limitations are amplified when we consider a collaborative system
where multiple users share the environment across a
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's premise is that virtual environments will
only reach their full potential when we have a deeper understanding of the human
user. Because humans constitute an essential component in the interaction
equation, knowledge about human behavior is essential to the design and
evaluation of these systems. In this project, the PI's goal is to understand how
sensory feedback conditions in virtual environments affect the planning and
performance of simple and collaborative object manipulation movements. A multi-
disciplinary approach, using methodologies from computer science, engineering,
human motor control, biomechanics and neuroscience, will be used to achieve this
purpose. Specifically, the PI will investigate what sensory (graphics and
haptic) information users require to move effectively in single-user and
collaborative computer-generated environments, when that information is
required, and how best to present the information so that it can be effectively
used. Basic motor control measurement and predictive modeling techniques will be
employed to understand how sensory feedback is used, to quantify the negative
effects of lag, and to suggest methods for improving the presentation of sensory
information to users under a variety of task-specific conditions. By gaining a
comprehensive understanding of the role of graphics and haptic information for
interaction in computer-generated environments, the PI expects it will be
possible to make evidence-based recommendations to designers of virtual
environments regarding how to provide the most effective sensory feedback to
users at the most efficient times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Beyond
the research activities, this project includes several educational goals.
Because the PI believes that all students should be exposed to research efforts
being undertaken at their university, she will ensure that students in her
undergraduate and graduate classes spend at least one session collecting data,
participating in an experiment, or observing the research process. . New and
innovative approaches, including active learning techniques and web-based
teaching, will be investigated to make the teaching/learning process active and
interesting.