* 0346481
* ACT/SGER:      Biofuel Cells Operating on Ambient Organic Fuels for Distributed Sensor Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Scott Calabrese Barton, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Scott A. Calabrese Barton, Columbia University, is supported to create high-rate
biocatalytic electrodes for biofuel cells using ambient organic fuels in plants.
The work draws on results from ongoing studies in biocatalytic electrodes and
will focus on (1) fuel composition and glucose-fructose-sucrose proportions; (2)
enzyme systems such as glucose oxidase, oligosaccharide dehydrogenase and
invertase-mutarotase-glucose oxidase; (3) electron mediation through redox
polymers to facilitate high-rate electron transfer at low electrode potential;
(4) highly porous carbon fibers as optimized anode support structures; and (5)
convection effects and how they will impact electrode porosity and overall cell
geometry. Mathematical models will be used to direct implementation in the anode
system and in the complete biofuel cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
lead to enhanced understanding of biocatalytic energy generation from plant
sources. In addition to the technological impact, this project also includes
outreach to the public school systems and the integration of research and
education. This award is supported jointly by the NSF Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Intelligence Community. The
Approaches to Combat Terrorism Program supports new concepts in basic research
and workforce development with the potential to contribute to national security.