* 0346022
* Collaborative Research:  Brittle fracture, deformability, permeability, and seismic anisotropy adjacent to and inside the San Andreas Fault Zone through SAFOD
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Teng-fong Wong, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 02/28/2007
* USD 160,261.00

A collaborative research project is underway at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison and the State University of New York-Stony Brook, the principal
objective of which is to investigate brittle fracture, deformability,
permeability and seismic anisotropy adjacent to and inside the San Andreas Fault
Zone, as part of the EarthScope science program. This laboratory study is being
carried out on core extracted from the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth
(SAFOD) hole. The geophysical properties that are characterized through this
study are fundamental in efforts to understand the mechanisms that bring about
earthquakes along the San Andreas Fault. &lt;br/&gt;A unique true-triaxial
apparatus available in the Madison laboratory is used to obtain empirical
strength criteria for the rocks in and adjacent to the San Andreas Fault,
information that is crucial to assessing the tectonic stress conditions when
used in conjunction with the dimensions of borehole breakouts logged along the
hole. The true triaxial tests also provide necessary information on mechanical
properties like the elastic moduli, volumetric strain, dilatancy onset, and
brittle fracture of the exhumed fault and country rocks. The study seeks to
answer questions such as how these properties vary across the fault zone and
beyond; how they depend on environmental factors like situ stress, mineralogy,
pore pressure, and temperature; how mechanical properties measured on core
samples compare with properties inferred from borehole logs and surface-based
geophysical observations. &lt;br/&gt;Permeability and seismic anisotropy
measurements are conducted in the Stony Brook laboratory. The retrieval of core
samples in the vicinity of the fault zone and the systematic measurement of
permeability as a function of stress provide significant background data on the
San Andreas Fault architecture, as well as critical constraints on whether
certain mechanisms for pore pressure excess and fault weakening can be
operative. No previous systematic studies of seismic anisotropy on fault cores
have been conducted. While fairly sophisticated theoretical models relating
stress-induced damage and velocity anisotropy are available, laboratory
measurements of such velocities under controlled stress and pore pressure
conditions as well as quantitative characterization of the damage are necessary
to elucidate the mechanics of such phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;This comprehensive
study of some mechanical and hydraulic properties of the fault material and
country rock in the San Andreas Fault Zone is a prerequisite in accomplishing
the SAFOD general goal of understanding fault zone processes and earthquake
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;