* 0346154
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Testing the Stress/Heat-Flow Paradox of the San Andreas Fault with Fission-Track and U+Th/He Data from Zircon from the SAFOD Drill Hole
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* John Garver, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 04/30/2007
* USD 22,909.00

The strength of large faults such as the San Andreas fault must be known to
better understand their behavior and hopefully to predict future damaging
earthquakes. There has been a longstanding debate, however, regarding the
strength of large faults in the San Andreas system: Do they have normal or
anomalously low strengths? There have been numerous field- and laboratory-based
studies focused on this problem, but the strength of these faults is still not
well known. One of the most widely accepted and oft-quoted arguments in support
of anomalously weak faults is the absence of high heat flow in the vicinity of
these faults. At stress levels typical of the earth's crust, seismogenic slip on
normal-strength faults generates significant heat due to frictional sliding;
however, for weak faults, the amount of frictionally generated heat will be much
less. This affect has been coined the "stress / heat-flow" paradox. This
research provides new data directly related to resolving the stress / heat-flow
paradox by providing information regarding the integrated time-temperature
history (and ultimately, the strength) in the San Andreas fault near Parkfield.
The data are from zircons collected from cuttings and cores of the SAFOD drill
hole. Four evenly spaced samples are being collected from the vertical drill
hole of phase one drilling; thirteen more samples are being collected across the
fault in the inclined hole of phase two. One aliquot of the zircon separates is
being analyzed in the fission-track laboratory at Union College to determine
fission-track ages and track length distribution. Another aliquot is being
analyzed in the geochronology laboratory at Yale University to determine the
U-Th/He ages of the zircons. A third aliquot of the zircons are being chemically
analyzed with an electron microprobe to determine the chemistry and chemical
zonations of the zircons. The results of these analyses provide constraints for
our finite-element computer model of the San Andreas fault. The computer model
incorporates the strengthes of the seismogenic upper crust and creeping lower
crust of the fault with the time-temperature history deciphered from the
fission-track and U-Th/He data of the zircons. The results of the modeling
provide insight into the strength of the San Andreas fault near Parkfield.
Outcomes of this research and the SAFOD project will benefit society because we
will better understand the seismic hazard associated with this and other active
fault systems. Our results will help earthquake scientists gain a greater
understanding of the mechanics of faulting and thus better predict the
occurrence of damaging earthquakes along the San Andreas system.

