* 0346021
* Interseismic and Postseismic Deformation and Stress Evolution:  Effects of Rheology, Rupture History, and Fault System Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Bradford Hager, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 12/31/2007
* USD 187,788.00

Intellectual Merit: Earthscope and associated activities are about to provide an
avalanche of data from many disciplines about how Earth's crust deforms on a
wide range of space and time scales. Interpreting data from diverse sources
(e.g., stress measurements, geodesy, paleoseismology, structural seismology) in
terms of the underlying processes requires models - both conceptual and
numerical. Model-based inference of how deformation on geologic, geodetic, and
seismic time scales are related requires descriptions of the rheology, geometry,
and forcing by earthquakes. To be useful, a model must be simple enough to
understand, while still being sufficiently realistic. The more simply model
predictions can be parameterized, the more likely it is that the model will be
used in building intuition and understanding about how the system behaves. Rocks
in Earth's interior deform by a wide range of mechanisms in response to the
stresses and stress changes associated with the seismic cycle. Most of the
simple models of postseismic and interseismic strain-accumulation that are
straightforward to calculate and in wide-spread use, guiding the development of
intuition by the community, have significant limitations. These include
assumptions about the rheological behavior of the crust that contradict
geophysical observations of the importance of transient creep, the reality that
the background stress in the crust is typically an order of magnitude or more
greater than coseismic stress changes, that earthquakes almost never create new
faults, but are almost always preceded by many previous earthquakes on the same
structures, and that earthquakes are almost never periodic and rarely rupture
fault patches large enough to be adequately approximated by the infinitely long
fault ruptures implicit in 2D models of viscoelastic relaxation. In order to
gain better understanding of earth processes, as well as to take advantage of
the high quality data from Earthscope for geodesy, paleoseismoogy, stress
measurements, and seismology, it is crucial that substantial effort be devoted
to improving our models. While ultimately a large-scale computational effort
will be needed, in the short term (important for siting of instruments, guiding
development of more sophisticated approaches, and interpretation of existing
data), significant progress is being made with relatively simple models - some
analytic, some numerical. The goal is to obtain understanding of the importance
of more realistic rheological assumptions, to provide useful numerical
parameterizations and to make this new understanding easily useable by the
broader community, e.g., as Matlab codes, and as animations on the web. Broader
Implications: Tools are being developed that implement rheological descriptions
of the crust and upper mantle that have an improved basis in materials science.
These tools allow scientists to address crustal deformation over a broad range
of time scales. This effort is improving model-based inference of the processes
associated with the seismic cycle, leading to improved quantification of seismic
risk, better understanding of the physics of earthquakes, and a link between
these processes and processes associated with longer-term dynamics of the crust.
This project provides unique educational experience for MIT graduate students
and includes undergraduates in exciting research of relevance to both science
and society.