* 0346191
* ``````Duke Participation in SAFOD:  Two Collaborative Seismic Profiling Studies using the Geophone Array in the SAFOD Pilot Hole
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Peter Malin, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 02/28/2006
* USD 276,700.00

`We propose a seismic-while-drilling (SWD) study of the San Andreas Fault Zone
using the geophone array in SAFOD Pilot Hole. The study adds the downhole
components to the currently-funded surface-seismic profiling and drilling
projects at the SAFOD site. The scientific objectives of the SWD study are to:
(1) establish the subvertical fault structure and material properties of the
SAFOD site and (2) begin the time-lapse monitoring of these structures and
properties. In the field portion of our study, we will collect data with the
Pilot Hole geophones. The purpose of this study is to determine the subsurface
rock properties adjacent to and within the San Andreas Fault and in monitor
their time dependent changes. In particular we are seeking to determine the bulk
properties of the materials surrounding the source zones of SAF
microearthquakes. We will examine all the SWD data we collect for wave
propagation effects such as anisotropy, attenuation, and complex reflection and
refraction effects. By utilizing the seismically quiet downhole environment of
the Pilot Hole geophone array, we will also be establishing a high-resolution
baseline data set for future "time-lapse" geophysical monitoring of the SAFZ.
Such data are used to follow the rock-fluid-stress evolution of energy
reservoirs, a procedure we wish to eventually apply at the SAFOD site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;