* 0346837
* Coupled Nitrogen and Calcium Cycles in Forest Ecosystems:  New Insights from Multiple Stable Isotopes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Kermit Cromack, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Russell
* 02/29/2008
* USD 404,444.00

Nitrogen is a key essential nutrient that regulates plant productivity and the
cycling of calcium in temperate forest ecosystems. Increases in nitrogen
availability beyond the threshold of plant and ecosystem needs may drive
fundamental, non-linear changes in forests that include excess nitrate leaching
and potential calcium depletion from soils. These changes expose forests to
unprecedented nitrogen-rich, calcium-poor conditions that can impact long-term
forest health and sustainability. This interdisciplinary research will take
advantage of a wide gradient in nitrogen status for coastal Douglas-fir forests
of the Pacific Northwest as a way to examine couplings between cycles of
nitrogen and calcium. Natural abundance and enriched stable isotope studies of
calcium, strontium, and nitrogen will be used to examine: 1) the relative
importance of atmospheric vs. weathering sources of calcium to forests growing
across a gradient in soil nitrogen; 2) how ecosystem nitrogen and calcium status
influences the retention of new calcium inputs, and; 3 the utility of strontium
as a tracer for calcium in plant-soil-mycorrhizal systems. Results from this
work will contribute to the sound management of forests of the Pacific
Northwest, and will refine broader-scale predictions of how temperate forests in
general will function in an increasingly nitrogen-rich world.