* 0346236
* Ultra-low frequency electromagnetic monitoring of earthquakes within the Earthscope Plate Boundary Observatory
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2004,09/30/2011
* Simon Klemperer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 09/30/2011
* USD 189,514.00

On an annualized basis, earthquakes in California kill several people and cause
several billions of dollars of property damage every year. There is a natural
societal interest in understanding whether earthquakes are predictable; and if
they are predictable, developing ways to obtain even a few minutes of warning.
We are attempting to address this societal need by studying electromagnetic
emissions as one of the most promising potential pre-seismic transients. Our
network of monitoring stations complements commercial "earthquake prediction"
services operating magnetic monitoring stations in California by providing an
independent source of data for the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of the
mission of the National Science Foundation's Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) is
to learn whether earthquakes are predictable. We are building a network of three
ultra-low frequency electromagnetic (ULF-EM) recording sites in northern
California in order to understand earthquake physics and to detect pre-seismic
transients if they exist. Our electromagnetic sensors include ultra-sensitive
magnets to detect tiny changes in Earth's magnetic field, and low-noise electric
cables to detect tiny electric currents inside the Earth. Our ULF-EM sensors are
collocated with existing PBO sites, so that any anomalies observed on our
electromagnetic sensors can be cross-checked against more-conventional
earthquake detection instruments: strain meters and seismographs. All our data
is transmitted to a public data archive on a continuous basis, 24 hours a day.
We monitor our instruments on a daily basis to confirm that they are recording
valid data, and we run the data through a set of standardized programs to search
for possible anomalies. It is possible that we will recognize a major change in
signal levels or character before an earthquake, but it is more likely that
after a major earthquake we will have a valuable dataset that we can use to test
hypotheses about the way earthquakes initiate, and to help us understand future
earthquake cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are recording ULF-EM data because
ultra-low frequency (0.01-10 Hz) magnetic field anomalies prior to and following
large earthquakes (magnitude greater than 6.5) have been reported from a number
of different regions of the world. If real, these signals contain important
information about the physics of earthquakes, particularly fluid motion in and
around the fault before during and after seismic activity. We are collocating
our magnetic sensors with PBO strain-meters and seismometers in order to allow
signals from earthquakes to be separated from artifacts related to sensor tilt.
We are recording with identical, spatially separated recorders in order to
exclude other potential sources of magnetic signals (including man-made
signals). Continuous recording of the magnetic and electric field before, during
and after, and spatially close to, a significant earthquake, is required to
demonstrate the reality or absence of ULF-EM signals. We are locating our ULF-EM
recording sites along the San Andreas and other major faults in San Francisco
Bay Area, because these faults have a large potential for a major earthquake in
the next decade. &lt;br/&gt;