* 0346686
* CAREER: Building Intuitive Mobile Systems with Self-Tuning Parameter Translation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Jason Flinn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 05/31/2010
* USD 444,425.00

The proposed research will investigate how to build intuitive systems that
manage the complexity of mobile computing. The approach, self-tuning parameter
translation, inserts a software translation layer above the mobile system - this
layer exposes only a small number of meaningful, well-calibrated parameters to
the user. By drawing from a toolbox of techniques that includes on-line modeling
of application workloads, off-line benchmarking, adaptation, feedback,
application hints, and cost-benefit analysis. This layer transforms user input
provided through the simple intuitive interface into policies that continuously
tune the complex set of parameters exposed by the underlying mobile
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two case studies are planned to demonstrate the
feasibility of this technique. First, a translation layer will be build that
provides self-tuning power management for mobile computing systems. Second a
layer will be built that guides the migration of mobile services. A mobile
service is the resource-demanding, remote component of a partitioned, latency-
sensitive application - it migrates between servers in response to user mobility
in order to maintain high-bandwidth, low-latency connectivity to the client. A
toolbox of reusable components that can be shared across translation layers will
be developed, as well as a methodology that provides guidance about when to use
each component.&lt;br/&gt;