* 0346539
* Are Plant Root-Mycobacterium Interactions Beneficial in Remediation of Polyaromatic Hydrocarbons?
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Anne Anderson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2009
* USD 398,336.00

PIs: Anderson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Are plant root-mycobacterium interactions
beneficial in remediation of polyaromatic hydrocarbons?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
PAH-contaminated soils pose environmental and health hazards. Phytoremediation
is a cost effective method for on-site clean-up. It is well suited for large
surface areas such as those designated as Brownfields within urban settings or
sites where soil excavation and removal is difficult. This proposal focuses on
understanding more of the ecology of the group of mycobacterium that has PAH-
degrading potential. Currently there is little knowledge of how such
mycobacteria interact with plant roots and whether this association has positive
impacts on the metabolism of the plant and/or the microbe to promote
bioremediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypotheses to be tested are:
&lt;br/&gt;1) The presence of roots colonized by PAH-degrading mycobacteria
improves the bioavailability of a model, recalcitrant PAH, pyrene.&lt;br/&gt;2)
The mineralization of pyrene is enhanced by the interaction of the roots with
the mycobacterium. &lt;br/&gt;3) Colonization of the root requires discrete
interactions between the mycobacterium and root surface.&lt;br/&gt;4)
Colonization of the root permits the expression of the gene in the mycobacterium
encoding the first enzyme involved in PAH degradation, dioxygenase.
&lt;br/&gt;5) Root phenoloxidases, which may participate in PAH-remodeling, are
changed in activity in the roots colonized by
mycobacterium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve the collaborative
efforts of engineers and biologists at Utah State University. The
undergraduates, graduates and faculty involved will be exposed to the theories
and practices of both scientific disciplines. Strong involvement of minorities
in the program will be supported through integration with the ADVANCE program at
Utah State University recently awarded to Utah State University from NSF and
GAANN grant, "Increasing the number of environmental engineering Ph.D. students
at Utah State University with an emphasis on strengthening diversity." Already
active in both colleges are summer placement programs for high-school students
through engineering and the Biotechnology Summer Academy. Undergraduate
involvement will be assisted by application to the USU Undergraduate Research
Cooperative Program that will assist travel to meetings including national level
conferences for presentation of data. Graduate mentorship will include regular
group meetings and assistance from the USU Graduate School for tuition and for
travel to national meetings. Research information will be conveyed through
university publications, peer-reviewed journals and by presentations at national
and international meetings. The findings will improve our abilities to predict
and manage on-site phytoremediation of PAHs and will have national and
international impact. &lt;br/&gt;