* 0346405
* Excavating Culture in Parenting and Socialization Processes among Diverse Families
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2005
* Ruth Chao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 10/31/2005
* USD 15,175.00

The purpose of this innovative working conference is to more deeply address
cultural variations in research on parenting and socialization in diverse
families. The working conference will provide the opportunity to present a
number of collaborative research projects that begin to remedy gaps in the
literature on diverse families and deepen the study of culture and parenting
processes. The projects discussed at this conference will be developed from a
cross-section of more than 20 existing data sets accessible to members of the
Study Group on Race, Culture and Ethnicity (SGRCE), a diverse group of scholars
who have collectively been working toward advancing research on family
functioning and child development. The primary activity of the group will be to
develop a series of studies/papers that share constructs within two main areas
of study-- parenting and, ethnic identity and socialization. During the
conference collaborators will present findings from the various studies
conducted and discuss the convergence across data sets and cultures. Finally,
plans will be made to fuse data sets based upon what we have learned from the
research and presentations to guide future research. More broadly, the
conference is meant 1) to further the development of a more in-depth and
inclusive study of diverse families, which we are calling an excavation of
culture; 2) to incorporate and embrace an approach to research on families of
color that is responsive to policy and practice concerns; 3) to advance each
particular set of joint analyses through consultation with expert statistical
consultants; and 4) finally, to publish the resulting group of papers on these
issues.