* 0347705
* Career:  Fostering Innovation in Organizations Through Geographically Dispersed Teams and Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Jonathon Cummings, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Teams are the building blocks of innovation in modern organizations, yet we know
little about how the knowledge that flows through team members and their social
networks results in the successful implementation of creative ideas, tasks, or
procedures. One explanation for this gap in research about the antecedents of
innovation is that scholars have often focused on either the team level of
analysis or the organizational level of analysis, not on the intersection of
teams and their managers, colleagues, and other contacts who make up the
organization. Recent developments in the field of social networks offer both
theory and methods for building a more comprehensive model of the innovation
process in organizations, including conditions under which information and
communication technologies should be used for sharing task-relevant knowledge
within and outside of the team. One feature of organizations, in particular,
that has complicated our understanding of the innovation process is a rise in
the number of spatially and temporally separated employees. Geographic
dispersion increases coordination costs by making the exchange of knowledge
through distant tie s more difficult, however it also has the potential to
expose individuals to unique sources of knowledge through local ties, thus
creating opportunities for innovation.

In this project, the PI will explicitly address the tradeoffs of geographic
dispersion in organizational teams (i.e., coordination and innovation). His
premise is that integrating social network theory with existing research on
teams and organizations provides a more complete picture of how knowledge
sharing through geographically dispersed teams and networks can foster
innovation. In order to test the proposed model of dispersed innovation in
organizations, multi-year field studies will be conducted within firms that: (a)
have a clearly defined sample of collocated and dispersed teams, (b) maintain a
corporate database with background information on team members, (c) administer
surveys to assess knowledge sharing within and outside of teams, and (d) employ
a standardized measure of innovation to permit evaluation of performance quality
across teams. In the final year, the PI will compare and contrast results from
these field studies with findings from another longitudinal project that
explores predictors of success for scientific collaborations dispersed across
multiple institutions. Building on the his prior work, which showed that
knowledge sharing outside of teams was more strongly associated with innovation
when teams were more geographically dispersed, this project will extend current
thinking in four important ways by: (1) examining the direction of knowledge
sharing instead of assuming knowledge flows equally in and out of teams, (2)
identifying the sources of knowledge to learn specifically where contacts are
located, (3) probing the awareness of knowledge to see the extent to which team
members know what others know, and (4) considering the dynamics of knowledge
sharing to learn when it is critical for teams to share knowledge externally.

Broader Impacts: As demand mounts for knowledge-intensive work in the US and
other countries, innovation in organizations will continue to be a key component
of global economic growth. Understanding how organizations can build
capabilities for a dispersed innovation process through teams and networks will
benefit industry, students, and researchers alike. To ensure access to the
substance of this research, online tools developed to collect and analyze the
team and network data will be used in the classroom and made publicly available
along with measures of geographic dispersion, knowledge sharing, and innovation.