* 0347411
* CAREER:  Compiler-Directed Synthesis of Application Specific Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Scott Mahlke, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 12/31/2009
* USD 410,000.00

CAREER: Compiler-directed Synthesis of Application Specific
Processors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application-specific instruction
processors (ASIPs) have great potential to meet the challenging performance,
cost, and power demands of the next generation pervasive computing platforms.
Three critical issues with ASIPs are design time, design cost, and post-
programmability. Automatic design is the key to simultaneously addressing these
issues and enabling ASIPs to proliferate. The central vision of this research is
to perform architecture synthesis based on compiler technology. Compilers employ
sophisticated analyses that are adept at understanding, modeling, and
transforming applications. These technologies will be reshaped from producing
software customized for a predefined processor to producing hardware specialized
to a software application. In this research, an automatic compiler-based
synthesis system for ASIPs is being developed, including advances in
architecture description technologies, instruction set, datapath, and memory
synthesis techniques, and compiler scheduling and code generation
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad significance of this work is
potentially reshaping the world of pervasive computers. Currently, a select few
companies have the necessary resources, expertise, and ability to accomplish a
completely designed and verified hardware solution. By creating the enabling
technology to go from a software prototype to a specialized-programmable
hardware solution, individuals without the necessary hardware expertise will
gain the ability to innovate in the pervasive computing domain&lt;br/&gt;