* 0347801
* CAREER: Computational Methods for Learning Dynamic Networks of Biological Regulation and Control
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Alexander Hartemink, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2009
* USD 487,344.00

The objective of this research program is twofold: first, to
develop&lt;br/&gt;and apply new computational inference methods for elucidating
the&lt;br/&gt;underlying mechanisms of complex biological systems, and second,
to&lt;br/&gt;develop and enhance a series of courses that incorporate
various&lt;br/&gt;aspects of computational biology into both the undergraduate
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network inference methods
based on dynamic Bayesian networks are being&lt;br/&gt;implemented and extended
to discover models of complex biological&lt;br/&gt;systems. In addition,
simulation systems capable of generating&lt;br/&gt;biologically plausible data
are being developed to evaluate and&lt;br/&gt;improve the inference methods. The
aim is to apply the most effective&lt;br/&gt;methods to real experimental data
to produce models of the underlying&lt;br/&gt;biological systems. The inference
methods being developed are widely&lt;br/&gt;applicable to biological and non-
biological problems where models of&lt;br/&gt;complex systems need to be
recovered from noisy or incomplete data.&lt;br/&gt;Both the inference algorithms
and the simulators are designed to be&lt;br/&gt;flexible and adaptable to other
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights gleaned during the course of this
research program are being&lt;br/&gt;folded into new courses on machine learning
and the dynamics of&lt;br/&gt;complex biological systems. These courses are
intended to accompany&lt;br/&gt;the three existing computational biology courses
previously developed&lt;br/&gt;by the PI. Collectively, these five courses will
contribute to&lt;br/&gt;shaping both undergraduate and graduate programs in
computational&lt;br/&gt;biology at Duke University.&lt;br/&gt;