* 0347479
* CAREER:    Biomechanics and Energetics of Human Locomotion With Powered Exoskeletons
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Daniel Ferris, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 03/31/2009
* USD 429,218.00

0347479&lt;br/&gt;Ferris&lt;br/&gt;This five-year CAREER Development project
will examine the biomechanics and energetics of human locomotion with powered
lower limb exoskeletons. The Human Neuromechanics Laboratory at The University
of Michigan has developed carbon fiber lower limb exoskeletons that can
comfortably supply active torque assistance at the ankle, knee, and hip during
walking and running. Artificial pneumatic muscles attached to a carbon fiber
shell provide high power outputs while minimizing exoskeleton weight.
Myoelectrical signals from biological muscles control force in the artificial
muscles in a physiologically appropriate manner. Although the exoskeletons are
limited to laboratory use because they require a large source of compressed air,
they are ideal for studying human responses to powered locomotor assistance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research plan is to quantify the
effects of powered assistance on the energetics of walking and running. The
investigators will measure the metabolic efficiency of external power assistance
at the ankle, knee, and hip during walking and running over a range of speeds
and added loads. The results will provide important insight into the mechanical
factors that determine the metabolic cost of locomotion and much needed guidance
for creation of future lower limb exoskeletons. The biomechanical and metabolic
benefit of adding external power to the ankle vs. knee vs. hip will be
quantified. These data will be instrumental in performing cost-benefit analyses
of actuator and exoskeleton design for gait rehabilitation and human performance
augmentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the educational plan is to
use exoskeleton research to introduce problem-based discovery learning into the
curriculum of students preparing for health science careers. The plan includes:
a) creating an upper division course on gait biomechanics that incorporates
hands-on experimentation and testing related to exoskeletons for human
augmentation and rehabilitation, b) recruiting and training female and minority
undergraduate students for exoskeleton research projects in the Human
Neuromechanics Laboratory, and c) creating an interactive web page on robotic
exoskeletons that can be used as an educational resource for secondary and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;