* 0347929
* CAREER: SMUDGES: A Survey for Dwarf Galaxies in the Local Universe
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Liese van Zee, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Scott Fisher
* 06/30/2010
* USD 709,649.00

CAREER: SMUDGES - A Survey for Dwarf Galaxies in the Local
Universe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AST 0347929 van
Zee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Liese van Zee, at Indiana University will undertake
an optical imaging and spectroscopic survey to identify dwarf galaxies in the
local universe. The program centers on the SMUDGES (Systematic Multiwavelength
Unbiased catalog of Dwarf Galaxies and Evolution of Structure) survey. The
outcome of this research will be a catalog that includes morphology, colors,
redshifts, and star formation rates for tens of thousands of galaxies, unbiased
by their star forming activity. The catalog will provide a resource for the
determination of the "typical" mode of star formation in dwarf galaxies, a
census of dwarf elliptical galaxies in clusters and low-density environments,
number counts for faint galaxies in the local universe, and a means to
investigate the connection between large-scale structure and galaxy
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SMUDGES catalog will be made available to
the astronomical community with a web-based interface that is compliant with the
National Virtual Observatory. Additionally, the PI will integrate research and
education into undergraduate astronomy courses at Indiana University. She will
teach and evaluate an inquiry-based introductory astronomy course that serves as
the science content course for pre-service secondary school teachers. The PI
also plans to adapt telescope data for student research projects in an advanced
undergraduate astronomy course. The research projects will be intended to build
on the inquiry-based pedagogy developed in the introductory astronomy courses,
and form an intermediary step between laboratory exercises and open-ended
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;