* 0347860
* CAREER: An Extensible Compiler Framework for Modular Seamless Language Extensions
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Eric Van Wyk, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 05/31/2009
* USD 410,998.00

Software development is an expensive and error-prone process at least partly
because of the large semantic gap between the programmer's high-level
understanding of the problem and the relatively low-level language in which the
problem solutions are encoded. No language contains all of the general purpose
and domain specific constructs that may be needed for the unique problems faced
by programmers. Thus, they cannot ``say what they mean'' but must encode their
ideas as programming idioms at a lower level of abstraction. Simply stated, this
wastes time and money and is the source of many errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This project is directly addressing this problem by developing framework for
extensible languages that enables programmers to use languages whose level of
abstraction has been raised closer to their problem domain by importing new
language features into their programming language. These features include domain
specific language constructs, semantic analyses to ensure the correct usage of
new language constructs and optimizations and code transformations to ensure
that efficient target code is generated. Furthermore, these language extensions
are modular and thus can be easily imported by programmer into his or her
programming environment and analyzed to ensure that they will not interfere with
one another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Such an extensible compiler framework for a
complete modern language will also be a catalyst for research in programming
languages. It will allow researchers to study their ideas in a complete, not a
toy, language and, as language extensions, they can be easily disseminated to
other researchers and users.&lt;br/&gt;