* 0347518
* CAREER: Leveraging Field Data to Test Highly-Configurable and Rapidly-Evolving Pervasive Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2010
* Sebastian Elbaum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2010
* USD 412,594.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0347518&lt;br/&gt;Sebastian Elbaum&lt;br/&gt;University of
Nebraska-Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Leveraging Field Data to Test
Highly-Configurable and Rapidly Evolving Pervasive
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software test engineers cannot predict, much less
exercise, the overwhelming number of potential scenarios faced by their
software. Instead, they allocate their limited resources based on assumptions
about how the software will be employed after release. Yet, the lack of
connection between in-house activities and how the software is employed in the
field can lead to inaccurate assumptions, resulting in decreased software
quality and reliability over the system's lifetime. This project will address
those challenges by developing profiling techniques with a small footprint to
capture field data and adaptive testing techniques that can leverage that
information. The two primary objectives are: 1) to design profiling mechanisms
for large pools of users and&lt;br/&gt;resource-cognizant monitoring schemes to
reduce execution overhead, and 2) to develop adaptive testing techniques that
continuously characterize software behavior to identify testing inadequacies,
realign testing&lt;br/&gt;resources, and extend existing test suites to overcome
their limitations. Empirical studies will be regularly employed for technique
evaluation and exploration. The educational component of this work aims at
bringing an earlier appreciation of the real-world validation problems to the
undergraduate classroom and prepare students well-versed in software quality and
empirical validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;