* 0347100
* CAREER: NMR Insights into the Influence of Dynamics on SH3 Domain Mediated Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Ranajeet Ghose, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2009
* USD 708,308.00

The objective of this project is to develop novel techniques to characterize
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) relaxation of proteins in the solution state.
The development and implementation of these techniques will be facilitated by
(i) advances in theoretical methods for experimental design and analysis, (ii)
major improvements in commercially available instrumentation, and (iii) the
development of cost-effective methods for the bacterial expression and
purification of labeled proteins. These methods will be applied to study protein
dynamics over a wide range of timescales, with special emphasis on the
characterization of protein sidechain dynamics since sidechains play a central
role in defining protein-ligand interactions and hence physiological function.
These methods will alleviate many of the deficiencies of current experiments by
(i) providing information on the details of local dynamics on the fast, ps-ns
timescale, (ii) allowing complete characterization of slow, correlated motions
on the microsecond-ms timescale, and (iii) being applicable to larger proteins
and protein complexes. The PI will utilize molecular dynamics simulations in
conjunction with theoretical modeling to identify specific dynamic modes that
contribute to the measured relaxation rates. This combination of experimental
and computational techniques will allow the identification of key functional
modes and the changes thereof on protein interactions. The PI will apply this
methodology to elucidate the dynamic determinants of the intra- and inter-
molecular interactions involving two cytosolic components of the NADPH oxidase
complex - p47phox and p67phox. A very important structural module, the SH3
domain plays a central role in defining protein interactions in these cases.
Thus, information gleaned from these studies will provide a self-consistent,
space-time view of SH3 domain-mediated protein
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will place special emphasis on
recruiting students from various backgrounds and at various levels of
sophistication, undergraduate and graduate, into his research program. He will
redesign undergraduate courses to provide students with the knowledge of cutting
edge biophysical techniques and develop a new course on NMR spectroscopy
targeted towards advanced undergraduates and graduate students. This course will
introduce students to both the theoretical as well as the applied aspects of
modern biomolecular NMR spectroscopy both through lectures as well as a series
of "hands-on" workshops. The PI currently participates, and will continue to do
so, in science outreach programs such as ACS-SEED. This program is designed to
facilitate underprivileged high-school students to gain research experience over
the summer. CUNY City College has a large minority population. Thus the research
and teaching components of this project will encourage those sections of society
underrepresented in the sciences to pursue scientific careers both in academia
and in industry. Facilitating minority participation in the sciences through
teaching, mentoring, career counseling and participating in outreach programs
for disadvantaged students is a key goal of this CAREER project.&lt;br/&gt;