* 0347011
* CAREER: Large-Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flows with Dynamically Moving Boundaries
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Elias Balaras, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 01/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0347011&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATORS: E. BALARAS&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: LARGE-EDDY SIMULATIONS OF
TURBULENT FLOWS WITH DYNAMICALLY MOVING BOUNDARIES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is focused on improving understanding of turbulent and transitional
flows in biofluids applications. High fidelity methods to model turbulence and
transition such a Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS) and Large-Eddy Simulations
(LES), have contributed invaluable information on the structure and dynamics of
a variety of engineering flows. However, such methods have received considerably
less attention for applications in biology and physiology due in part to
exceedingly complex (moving) boundary conditions. A characteristic example is
that of blood flow in the heart and large arteries. New computational tools will
have many important applications in cardiovascular medicine, including such
topics as disease research, surgical planning and medical/biomemetic device
design. Recent advances in material technologies and actuator miniaturization
has sparked new interest in biomemetics. Broad impacts of the work include
significant societal and outreach components. By developing the proposed
computational methodology, a large number of problems can be solved leading to
the advancement of knowledge across several fields in engineering. Specifically
computations of the flow around prosthetic heart valves will provide an accurate
description of the detailed flow physics and provide a solid basis for
multiscale simulations designed to illuminate the mechanics of blood damage and
thrombus formation. Such information will assist the biomedical community in
interpreting physiological data and designing novel experiments. Fish swimming,
insect locomotion and bird flight are further examples where massive
computations using DNS/LES can help bring to fruition novel devices (such a
Micro-Aero Vehicles) and contribute a new fundamental understanding to the
science of their locomotion. The PI is participating in high school outreach via
the ESTEEM mentorship program (Engineering Science and Technology to Energize
and Expand Young Minds). He also plans to involve undergraduates in research via
the GEMSTONE program at the University of Maryland, which is for honors students
and integrates technological and societal issues into research projects
undertaken throughout an entire 4-year program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;