* 0347290
* CAREER:  Take Your Vitamins:  Robust Parallel Software Through Supplement Oriented Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2004,03/31/2008
* E. Christopher Lewis, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2008
* USD 241,677.00

Lewis, Christopher University of Pennsylvia CCF-0347290

Parallel programs are notoriously difficult to write and growing application
requirements (e.g, ease of development, reliability, security, etc.) are only
exacerbating the problem. Ad hoc dynamic techniques that observe, limit, or
otherwise control running applications (e.g., array bounds checks, assertions,
bug isolation) have helped satisfy some of these requirements in sequential
programs, but performance overhead and implementation challenges have limited
their general utility. This research develops and evaluates supplement-oriented
programming as a programming paradigm for conveniently and efficiently enhancing
parallel systems with dynamic checks and monitors. Supplement-oriented
programming is a style of programming in which abstract computations (called
supplements) implement supplemental behaviors that are added to a running
application in order to dynamically observe, limit, or control it without
changing its core functional behavior. Supplement-oriented programming
transforms the use of supplemental behaviors from an awkward, ad hoc art to a
well-supported programming paradigm. The logical separation of functional and
supplemental behaviors allows for simpler supplement-enabled programs, plug-and-
play supplement libraries, language and tool-based support, and (ultimately)
higher quality, easier to build parallel programs. This work also explores novel
implementation techniques, such as backfill processing, that efficiently
implement supplements using the often underutilized parallel resources of
typical systems.

Supplement-oriented programming is an enabling technology. It will not only
improve the robustness of parallel software, it will allow people with broader
abilities, interests, and backgrounds to use parallel systems, magnifying their
creative power so that they may find new and important uses for these machines.

