* 0347229
* CAREER:     Agile Speech and Audio Coding and Transmission over Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2011
* Manohar Narayanamurthi, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 01/31/2011
* USD 406,000.00

During emergencies, communication networks are characterized by their high
degree of variability in terms of link failure and packet loss. However, current
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) methods deliver dissatisfactory performance
during emergencies, lacking both the agility to adapt to demanding network
conditions, and a systematic framework for measuring voice Quality-of-Service
(QoS). The goal of this research is to provide a VoIP framework and methods
suitable for demanding network situations. By furnishing methods for achieving
voice communication during emergencies or other demanding situations such as
distance-learning, this research will provide an immeasurable benefit to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The highly dynamic nature of channels and
networks necessitates cross-layer design approaches in which parameters across
all layers of a protocol stack are optimized to efficiently maximize application
QoS. To integrate VoIP into a cross-layer design framework, this research offers
a new paradigm for speech and audio coding together with several novel error
control and transmission methods. In particular, this research provides a
functional layering approach to speech and audio coding, breaking up the
operation of the coder into three ascending, hierarchical layers: the Waveform
Layer, the Statistical Layer, and the Expected Distortion Layer. At the Waveform
Layer, a signal is decomposed into perceptually relevant objects whose evolution
through time is tracked at the Statistical Layer. Quantization is performed at
the Statistical Layer with direction from the Expected Distortion Layer. The
Expected Distortion Layer calculates voice QoS for various coder, error-control,
and transmission parameter settings, allowing cross-layer optimization based
adaptive resource allocation. This paradigm engenders a unique unified model for
coding and packet loss concealment, enabling perceptually-adaptive packet
protection, transmission, and traffic engineering over time-varying
heterogeneous wired and wireless networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;