* 0347623
* CAREER:  Biologically Motivated Models for the Dynamics of Computer Networks: Performance, Growth and Pathological Conditions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Biplab Sikdar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* carl landwehr
* 07/31/2010
* USD 402,682.00

CNS-0347623

CAREER: Biologically Motivated Models for the Dynamics of Computer Networks:
Performance, Growth and Pathological Conditions

Biplab Sikdar

The overarching goal of this project is to develop biologically motivated models
for characterizing the dynamics of computer networks including their
performance, growth and pathological conditions. In contrast to existing
frameworks which typically focus on the steady state behavior, this work will
develop models for the dynamic behavior of networks. The research focuses on
three topics: (1) Models for the dynamics and propagation of network
instabilities which encompass models for malicious worm attacks, network and
human factors influencing them, and developing mechanisms to detect such
attacks; (2) Models for the spatio-temporal aspects of performance metrics like
traffic characteristics, delays and packet losses in large scale networks; (3)
Models for the dynamics of wireless networks like growth patterns, battery
consumption and network life, and spatial characteristics of cluster formations.
Four groups of models from biological sciences including population models,
genetic models, models based on pattern formation and epidemic models are used
to address these research topics.

The broad impact of this proposal will be manifested through both its research
and educational objectives. The demonstrations of the applicability and
suitability of biological models to a wide range of networking issues has the
potential to open a new perspective for modeling and developing control
mechanisms in computer networks. The education program primarily focuses on
outreach to local high school and K-8 students and leverages ongoing programs at
RPI to motivate high school students towards science and engineering.