* 0347478
* A Numerical Modeling Investigation of Infrasound Generated by Tornadic Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Roger Pielke, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 11/30/2006
* USD 406,981.00

Observations have shown that tornadoes and severe storms produce acoustic waves
at a frequency below the range of human hearing (called infrasound). Tornado
infrasound has a frequency range of about 0.5-10 Hz, which is higher than other
infrasound emanating from severe storms and above the range covered by
conventional infrasound studies. If tornadoes can be detected by this distinct
frequency signature, it may be possible to develop new advance-warning systems
that could be of substantial societal benefit. In this project, the
investigators will use a numerical model to simulate the generation of
infrasound from tornadic storms. Preliminary simulations have provided the basis
for a set of hypotheses regarding how the infrasound is generated, including
radial vibration of the vortex core which appears to be the most promising.
Existing observations covering this frequency range provide benchmarks for the
simulations and will also be examined as case studies in this project. The
expected outcome is a better understanding of the mechanisms by which tornadoes
generate infrasound. This understanding will also establish a better basis for
considering if a detection system based on infrasound could serve as an advance-
warning system for tornadoes. Because infrasound propagates over long distances,
detection by this method might provide a valuable contribution to public safety.