* 0347395
* CAREER:     Towards Unified Theory of Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Lizhong Zheng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 01/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Due to the difficulties in precisely computing some of the
key&lt;br/&gt;quantities, such as the channel capacities and the detection
error&lt;br/&gt;probabilities, most of the current analytical work in
wireless&lt;br/&gt;communications has been limited to asymptotic analysis in a
number of&lt;br/&gt;mutually separated regimes. As a result, the engineering
conclusions&lt;br/&gt;based on these studies are sometimes incompatible, making
it hard to&lt;br/&gt;apply the analytical results in the designs of practical
systems. The&lt;br/&gt;goal of this research is to develop novel approaches to
address the&lt;br/&gt;interactions among several key system parameters, to
understand the&lt;br/&gt;joint impacts of them, and to synthesize the different
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;results into one unified
picture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project studies the emerging
new technologies in&lt;br/&gt;multi-input multi-output (MIMO) channels and
ultra-wideband&lt;br/&gt;channels. Most current research on these systems has
been focused on&lt;br/&gt;different limiting cases, including high/low signal
power, wide/narrow&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth, and fast/slow time-variation of the
channel. Such&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic analysis greatly simplifies the problems.
However, since&lt;br/&gt;usually one parameter is isolated and taken to its
limit, the relation&lt;br/&gt;among different parameters is sometimes distorted,
resulting in&lt;br/&gt;inconsistent conclusions. This project aims to solve such
problems by&lt;br/&gt;developing new approaches to asymptotic analysis that
address the&lt;br/&gt;interactions among several key system parameters,
including channel&lt;br/&gt;time-variation, power and energy efficiency,
bandwidth scaling,&lt;br/&gt;reliability and delay requirements, and peak-to-
average ratio&lt;br/&gt;constraints. A key component of the new approach is to
take multiple&lt;br/&gt;parameters to their limits together, but keep a
carefully chosen&lt;br/&gt;relation among them. Such an approach, while
maintaining the&lt;br/&gt;simplicity of the asymptotic analysis, helps to
describe a continuum&lt;br/&gt;that bridges the gap between the current results
for different extreme&lt;br/&gt;cases.&lt;br/&gt;