* 0347282
* CAREER:  Efficient Learning Algorithms for Rich Function Classes
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Rocco Servedio, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Petros Drineas
* 05/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Systems which learn from data are by now widely used in many areas, and such
systems will doubtless be&lt;br/&gt;even more ubiquitous in the future. As
learning-based systems proliferate and are applied to larger and larger domains,
the need for provably effective and efficient learning algorithms grows
correspondingly more acute.&lt;br/&gt;The object of the proposed research is to
design and analyze such algorithms. More specifically, building&lt;br/&gt;on the
PI's previous work in this area, the two main research goals of this career
development proposal are:&lt;br/&gt;1. To develop algorithms which can
efficiently learn rich and important classes of Boolean functions&lt;br/&gt;in
well-studied models of computational learning. Major focuses of this work will
be (a)&lt;br/&gt;learning Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF) formulas, which are a
standard form of knowledge representation;&lt;br/&gt;(b) learning various
classes of Boolean circuits, which can be substantially more
expressive&lt;br/&gt;than DNF formulas; and (c) learning in the presence of
irrelevant information, i.e. learning functions&lt;br/&gt;which depend only on a
small unknown subset of domain attributes.&lt;br/&gt;We note that previous work
in this area has uncovered many interesting and useful connections
between&lt;br/&gt;these learning problems and complexity-theoretic structural
questions about Boolean functions.&lt;br/&gt;An important aspect of this
research (and indeed a key component of our methodology) is to
continue&lt;br/&gt;to explore and exploit these connections between learning and
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;2. To develop and analyze other well-motivated models for
computational learning, and to develop&lt;br/&gt;efficient learning algorithms
for Boolean function classes in these models. Anticipated
research&lt;br/&gt;directions here include (a) giving efficient average-case
learning algorithms for important concept&lt;br/&gt;classes for which no
efficient worst-case algorithms are known; (b) developing a theory of
learning&lt;br/&gt;from nonmalicious random examples; and (c) studying the role
of quantum computation in learning&lt;br/&gt;theory. Each of these directions
has the potential to yield positive learning results which go
beyond&lt;br/&gt;what can be achieved in current standard learning
models.&lt;br/&gt;This research plan is closely integrated with a plan to
achieve broader impact through education which&lt;br/&gt;involves students at
all levels. Highlights of the education plan include: (a) developing new
computational&lt;br/&gt;learning theory courses and other theory courses at
Columbia University for target audiences ranging from&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates
to advanced graduate students; (b) introducing undergraduates to the excitement
of research&lt;br/&gt;by actively engaging them in research, both in
undergraduate courses and in extracurricular projects; (c)&lt;br/&gt;advising
and guiding graduate students in their development as researchers and educators;
and (d) building&lt;br/&gt;a strong theory group at Columbia by maintaining
regular theory group meetings and organizing events such&lt;br/&gt;as Theory
Day.