* 0347289
* CAREER:     Type-Directed Programming in Object-Oriented Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2009
* Stephanie Weirich, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 11/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0347289 CAREER: Type-Directed Programming in Object-Oriented Languages Stephanie
Weirich University of Pittsburgh

Type-directed programming is an important paradigm in the design of software. By
using this form of programming to analyze the structure of data, many
operations, such as serialization, equality and iterators may be defined once,
for all types of data. As software evolves, these operations need not be updated
---they will automatically adapt to new data forms. Although object-oriented
languages are widely used in the implementation of modern software systems, they
have only primitive support for type-directed programming. Therefore, this
project proposes to adapt and extend the mechanisms for type-directed
programming to those languages.

The specific goals of the project are threefold. The first goal is to extend the
existing theory of type-directed programming to object-oriented programming
languages. The second is to validate and refine that theory by developing an
implementation of an object-oriented language that supports type-directed
programming. Finally, the third goal is to use this implementation to
investigate new patterns of type-directed programming to inspire new
developments in language support for these patterns. Experiments with type-
directed programming will be included to better understand its role in
programming in the context of object-oriented languages.