* 0347568
* CAREER:  Microarchitecture Considerations for Soft-Error Tolerance in Future Microprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* James Hoe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 12/31/2008
* USD 428,000.00

CAREER: Microarchitecture Considerations for Soft-Error Tolerance in Future
Microprocessors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the pressing issue of increasing susceptibility to soft errors in
future deep-submicron microprocessor implementations. The study develops and
evaluates three candidate approaches for detecting and recovering from soft
errors. The three approaches are dynamic instruction re-executions in a
superscalar processor, redundant executions over two mirrored processor cores
facilitated by an efficient crosschecking mechanism, and an all-software
approach for unmodified simultaneous multithreading (SMT) processors or chip-
multiprocessors (CMP). The study evaluates the potential of each approach and
analyzes their trade-off in terms of performance, fault coverage, design
complexity and implementation cost. A goal of this research is to overcome the
performance and implementation penalties associated with these approaches. An
education component of this project applies executable and synthesizable high-
level hardware description formalisms to improve the preciseness of in-class
discussions and to enable more insightful out-of-class independent
exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following decades of exclusive focus on
performance, soft-error reliability is one of the key challenges in the
continuing advances of microprocessor designs. The results of this research have
direct bearing on the multi-billion-dollar microprocessor industry, which in
turn will impact our daily experiences from professional to recreational. The
results of this research will not only be applicable in the near term to deep-
submicron VLSI microprocessors, but may also be extensible to address the
reliability of emerging technologies such as quantum, molecular and nano-
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;