* 0347239
* CAREER: Model Reduction for Control of Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Clarence Rowley, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 02/28/2010
* USD 409,912.00

Model reduction for control of fluids&lt;br/&gt;C. W.
Rowley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many powerful
techniques are available for analyzing and controlling &lt;br/&gt;dynamical
systems, if one has a tractable mathematical model, for &lt;br/&gt;instance in
the form of a differential equation. For fluids, and many &lt;br/&gt;other
systems of interest, models are well known, but are too complex &lt;br/&gt;for
traditional techniques from dynamical systems and control theory to
&lt;br/&gt;be practical. This program develops techniques for obtaining simpler
&lt;br/&gt;models of complex systems, in order to provide a bridge between
&lt;br/&gt;interesting multiscale applications, and the mathematical tools
useful &lt;br/&gt;for their analysis and control. The techniques will then be
used to &lt;br/&gt;address problems in fluid mechanics, focusing on controlling
transition &lt;br/&gt;to turbulence in a plane
channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific model reduction techniques addressed will
include balanced &lt;br/&gt;truncation and Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
(POD), and symmetry &lt;br/&gt;reduction methods from geometric mechanics. Each
of these techniques &lt;br/&gt;has severe limitations when applied to fluids
problems. POD often &lt;br/&gt;produces highly unreliable models, and often the
accuracy of the models &lt;br/&gt;does not improve as the number of modes
increases. Balanced truncation &lt;br/&gt;applies to stable linear systems, and
has good error bounds that &lt;br/&gt;improve as the number of modes increases,
but the method is not &lt;br/&gt;tractable for very large systems such as
fluids. A central component &lt;br/&gt;of the research involves a new method for
performing "balanced POD," &lt;br/&gt;which may be viewed as form of weighted
POD that more heavily weights &lt;br/&gt;states of large dynamical importance.
In addition, ideas from symmetry &lt;br/&gt;reduction, and heirarchical finite-
element modeling combine to guide &lt;br/&gt;the development of local versions
of POD and balanced truncation, which &lt;br/&gt;will capture traveling
structures better than the global basis &lt;br/&gt;functions produced by
standard POD and balanced truncation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
components of the program include developing an &lt;br/&gt;exchange program with
Brazil, in order to promote engineering education &lt;br/&gt;in an international
setting. In addition, a new outreach program will &lt;br/&gt;help local
elementary school teachers introduce engineering into K-6 &lt;br/&gt;classrooms,
by organizing undergraduates to volunteer their time to &lt;br/&gt;assist with
the technical aspects of engineering projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;