* 0347955
* CAREER:    Programmed Robotic Self Assembly
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Eric Klavins, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 01/31/2009
* USD 524,000.00

Self-assembly (SA) occurs when many building blocks are placed in an environment
that thermodynamically favors their forming structured aggregates. For example,
capillary forces between millimeter scale tiles floating on a liquid-liquid
interface produce regular arrays of various shapes as the system is gently
shaken. Similar phenomena play crucial roles in the assembly of viruses,
organism development, growth of silicon crystals, electronics, pathogen
detectors, artificial tissue, ad hoc wireless networks and reconfigurable
robotic devices. However, most examples of engineered SA usually produce rather
simple, regular arrays of parts. Engineering a system that self assembles
something as complicated and irregular as, for example, a virus is well beyond
our capabilities both theoretically and
technologically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to address this problem by
supplying the parts to be assembled with active control over the binding
interactions in which they participate, developing a theory and practice of
Programmed Robotic Self-Assembly. In particular, the PI proposes to implement
programmed robotic SA in a test-bed where programmable parts have micro-
controllers, local sensors and mechanical or magnetic latches. The idea is to
approximate organic SA where changes in molecular conformation (shape) guide the
assembly process. A task that the test-bed should be able to perform is: "Given
a desired assembly specification input by the user, download programs onto each
robotic part so that, when they are placed in a suitable environment, the parts
self assemble into copies of the desired assembly." The success of this agenda
will yield a useful class of robotic self-assembling structures as well as a
theory for their design and operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research involves theoretical models from computer science, dynamical systems
and control, robotics and embedded systems. Thus, the interdisciplinary
education of students of all levels is required. To address this need, the PI
will develop two new courses, on Self Organizing Systems and Specification and
Control, and interdisciplinary collaboration aimed at creating graduate and
undergraduate students well versed in computer science, robotics, controls and
the information-rich physical settings in which these fields are increasingly
applied. The PI recognizes that not all students have equal experiences leading
up to and while in college. Therefore, the PI will collaborate with the
University of Washington College of Engineering's Mathematics Engineering
Science Achievement program to employ high school student interns in the PI's
laboratory. Furthermore, to make the results of the proposed research and
curriculum development accessible to the public, the PI proposes to create
interactive demonstrations of SA and robotics more generally. This material will
be made available on the web as well as in the PI's lab and will be used by the
PI and his students for education and outreach in conjunction with the
University of Washington Electrical Engineering Department's K-12 outreach
program&lt;br/&gt;