* 0347840
* CAREER: Reconciling Patterns of Phylogenetic Rate Heterogenity in Ferns with Morphology, Ecology, and Life History
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2010
* Kathleen Pryer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan L. Perkins
* 04/30/2010
* USD 688,779.00

0347840&lt;br/&gt;Pryer&lt;br/&gt; Nearly co-equal in geographic extent with the
dominant flowering plants of the world are the ferns, the second largest group
of vascular plants, with an estimated 12,000 or so living species. Dr. Kathleen
Pryer at Duke University continues a productive program of molecular and
morphological studies of ferns, one aim being the construction of a framework
phylogeny for all the families of ferns, integrated where possible with fossil
forms and with estimated dates of divergence and diversification determined from
mutation rates and fossil evidence. Primary new data will be acquired from DNA
sequencing of genes from all three genomic compartments: nucleus, mitochondria,
and chloroplasts; these new data are to be integrated with morphological
characters to improve fern classification systems, and to evaluate patterns of
species diversity in different lineages of ferns. Different rates of molecular
evolution will be explored in such groups as the tropical filmy ferns, pteridoid
ferns, and tree ferns, with efforts to relate molecular-rate differences to
aspects of habitat and life history. Productive collaborations will continue
with specialists in fern taxonomy, morphology, and fossils, both in the U.S. and
abroad. &lt;br/&gt; Research will be conjoined with educational and outreach
activities, on campus, in the local school community, and abroad including
through the OTS, Organization for Tropical Studies consortium operating in Costa
Rica. Prof. Pryer teaches general courses in plant biology and "plants in the
news" for non-majors, works with Durham-area middle and high school teachers in
summer "reach out" workshops, and participates in the tropical courses conducted
annually in Costa Rica to introduce undergraduate and graduate students to
tropical plant diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;