* 0347220
* CAREER: The Interaction of Ions with DNA: An X-ray Scattering Study
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2010
* Lois Pollack, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2010
* USD 527,931.00

Two of the most important molecules of life, DNA and RNA, are uniformly
negatively charged. Nature takes advantage of the strong interactions between
charged particles (e.g., the strong attraction of particles with opposite
charges or repulsion of the ones with like charges), to control the shape and
function of these nucleic acids. This research project uses x-ray scattering, a
newly demonstrated experimental technique, to address fundamental questions
about the interaction of positively charged counter-ions with negatively charged
nucleic acids. To maintain electrical neutrality in solution, DNA is associated
with positively charged partners ranging from small ions to large proteins.
Numerous biological processes, including gene regulation and DNA repair, are
regulated by the interactions of DNA with charged molecules. These strong
interactions are also exploited in the design of pharmaceuticals, small
molecules that target and modify DNA. This importance of DNA-charge interactions
provides strong motivation for fundamental studies of the properties of these
systems.

This experimental project is designed to probe these interactions using model
DNA systems. This work builds on recent experiments performed at the Cornell
High Energy Synchrotron Source in which anomalous small angle x-ray scattering
was used to distinguish the scattering signature of a single ionic species (e.g.
Rb counterions) from all other atoms/ions in a multi-component system (e.g. DNA
in a solution of RbCl). These preliminary measurements enabled unprecedented,
quantitative measurements of the spatial distributions of these counterions
around the DNA. This project will provide new data to rigorously test
conflicting theoretical models of the pertinent interactions. The long-term goal
of this project is to exploit this new technology to address biologically
relevant questions, such as the role of charged ligands in facilitating
attractive forces between DNA strands. This attraction is of fundamental
importance to our understanding of how DNA is packaged and stored in our cells.
Broader Impacts: This work will have impact in a number of arenas linked
together by the theme of promoting interdisciplinary work to a wide audience.
The activities range from participation in K-12 outreach through the development
of a program to establish a pipeline from predominantly female undergraduate
institutions to the Applied Physics graduate program. A successful pilot version
of this pipeline program will serve as a model for future efforts. In addition,
an Engineering Distribution course will be developed for Cornell undergraduates.
The course focuses on interdisciplinary science by introducing important,
current topics in molecular biology to students of engineering and physical
sciences. Research and Education will be integrated through this course by
introducing three new modules. These modules are inspired by the proposed
research program and leverage on Cornell's unique research facilities.