* 0347653
* CAREER:    Cooperative Payload Transport by Robot Collectives
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Venkat Krovi, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2010
* USD 524,000.00

In this career development proposal, the Principal Investigator (PI) examines
the development of frameworks to create, analyze, implement and validate
cooperative payload transport capabilities in distributed robot collectives. The
principal research questions pertain to the investigation of the nature and
selection of the underlying physical and informational infrastructure, system
architecture, and mechanisms of cooperation, with the goal of realizing
implementations with quantifiable performance benefits. Such investigation is
proposed in the specific context of creation, control and active reconfiguration
of marching formations with variable numbers of mobile manipulators for
cooperative payload transportation tasks. The three aspects of research
identified for examination under the common theoretical but computationally
tractable framework, include: (i) methodologies for design and optimization of
formations for pre-specified tasks; (ii) scalable schemes for control and
adaptation of formations for changing tasks; and (iii) quantitative examination
of the role of modularity, sensing, communication, modeling and decentralization
on cooperative performance. A two-pronged approach of extensive simulation-based
study and rigorous experimental ratification is proposed to evaluate the
performance of candidate systems. The key contribution from this investigation
is the development of a flexible unified framework for design, analysis, control
and validation of such cooperating systems and the broad applicability of the
framework for uniformly treating: cooperative material-handling by a fleet of
decentralized manipulation agents; hybrid articulated-wheeled systems with
enhanced locomotion capabilities; and distributed haptic collaboration with a
common virtual object within a shared virtual environment; is discussed. The
overall educational goals are to develop the courses, tools and the human
resource base to conceive, investigate, implement and validate such systems-of-
systems. Specific educational initiatives include: (i) developing and
integrating new undergraduate and graduate courses in robotics and mechatronics
into the curriculum; (ii) strengthening and modernizing existing undergraduate
courses in design and systems; (iii) creating educational technology curricular
modules for encapsulating knowledge and providing a mechanism for outreach
within the university, with local high schools and industry and the educational
community at large.