* 0347336
* CAREER:   Molecular Biology of the Terminal Nerve System
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Celeste Wirsig-Wiechmann, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Karen A. Mesce
* 06/30/2010
* USD 398,801.00

Animal behavior is greatly influenced by sensory inputs to the brain. For
example, "olfactory" or smell neurons in the nose send signals to the brain
where odors are perceived and acted upon. Sensory pathways can be influenced by
neurons in the body or brain that reflect the animal's physiological condition.
The "terminal nerve" in the nose secretes a sex hormone (gonadotropin-releasing
hormone) onto olfactory neurons. Experiments in this laboratory have shown that
the hormone alters odor detection at the cellular level. What controls the
secretion of the hormone from the terminal nerve is still unknown. These
experiments will investigate whether pheromones increase GnRH gene expression
and/or production in the terminal nerve and whether these changes are mediated
through olfactory brain centers. This project will incorporate an array of
procedures including molecular-biological, biochemical and neural-activity
techniques in the salamander model, Plethodon shermani. Alterations in
olfactory-receptor-neuron activity in the presence of GnRH are expected. This
work will help to show how hormones can modulate sensory systems, thus giving us
a much better understanding of animal behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational plan is to involve underrepresented minority students and teachers
(Native American Indian, African-American and Mexican-American) in conducting
research and in engaging the community in neuroscience. Students and teachers
will participate in research, in developing Website and teaching materials, and
in giving neuroscience workshops and seminars in secondary schools and outlying
communities and interacting with international colleagues. The broad impact will
be to (1) integrate research, teaching, and community outreach activities for
students, (2) make available scientific and program information on the Internet,
by public communications and to international colleagues, and (3) present our
scientific knowledge to disadvantaged communities located at a distance from
institutions of higher education.