* 0347747
* CAREER:  Functional Optical Coherence Tomography for Neural Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Stephen Boppart, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 03/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

0347747 Boppart Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is an emerging high-
resolution biomedical imaging modality with potential applications in a wide
range of medical and biological specialties. Studies to date have used OCT
primarily to non-invasively image morphology. Doppler and polarization-sensitive
OCT have been used to assess functional properties of tissue, but most commonly
in blood flow and tissue injury, respectively. The capabilities of OCT, however,
extend far beyond microanatomical imaging. Just as functional magnetic resonance
imaging has had a significant impact on our understanding of cognitive processes
in the brain, functional OCT (fOCT) techniques have the potential for
investigating neural activity and communication patterns at the cellular and
molecular level.

For this CAREER Development Award, fOCT methods will be developed to visualize
not only anatomical microstructure but also physiological function in neurons
and in neural tissue. Novel optical methods will be developed to non-invasively
characterize electrical and molecular function. To investigate and demonstrate
the capabilities of these imaging methods, fOCT will be used in three
representative cell culture and small animal models. Functional OCT detecting
scattering and birefringence changes will be used to non-invasively detect
electrical neural activity in cultured neuron populations without the addition
of exogenous fluorophores and without the need for multiple electrode arrays and
electronics. In the abdominal ganglion of Pleurobranchaea (sea slug), neural
pathways will be mapped out using real-time fOCT imaging and compared to known
networks. Differences in functional molecules (oxygen, acetylcholine, Fragile X
mental retardation protein [FMRP]) in the brains of normal and Fragile X mouse
models will be characterized using spectroscopic and nonlinear OCT methods. This
project will develop novel fOCT methods that comprise an integrated imaging
system. This system will establish fOCT and these methods as powerful neural
imaging tools for a wide-range of investigations.

The research will be integrated with educational plans to engage K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows of highly diverse
backgrounds. Two exhibits will be designed and constructed for the local Science
Museum targeted toward the K-12 audience, one on "Biophotonics" and the other on
"Nature's Optics." Research results will be integrated into existing
undergraduate courses in Optical Imaging and Biomedical Instrumentation and
efforts will intensify to develop an optics track and initiate a new course in
Biophotonics. An international graduate student exchange with colleagues'
laboratory will be arranged and a graduate-level seminar series on Biophotonics
will be initiated.