* 0347791
* CAREER:     Quantifying and Controlling Error and Uncertainty in Computational Inverse Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Robert Kirby, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2009
* USD 430,262.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0347791&lt;br/&gt;Robert M. Kirby&lt;br/&gt;University of
Utah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heart disorders are a malady, which affect many
Americans each year. Although techniques such as electrocardiography allow
physicians to postulate as the probable cause of patient discomfort, cardiac
source localization cannot currently provide the physician with the precise
location within the heart of a bioelectric abnormality, nor can current
techniques provide the physician with confidence measures based upon the
numerical (discretization) errors, modeling errors and variability/uncertainty
errors which exist in the inverse problem. This research involves the
development of methods for quantifying and controlling error and uncertainty in
computational inverse problems. The specific driving application is to make the
computational source localization procedure a viable tool for diagnosing cardiac
bioelectric field problems. This research is valuable for both its multi-
disciplinary influence and its expansion of computational science and
engineering (CS&amp;E) techniques beyond the original applications for which
they were designed. The academic merit of this research is its fundamental
contribution to the solution of computational inverse problems and its practical
contribution to the bioengineering problem of cardiac source localization. In
the true spirit of CS&amp;E, this research is the synergy of a domain specific
task and computational science tools. The broader impact of this research
results from its extendibility to a much larger class of computational inverse
problems. The educational objectives of this proposal are focused on training
young scientists to properly view simulation science as a tool in the validation
of and extension of scientific inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
research is partitioned into two aims: (1) to quantify and minimize the effects
of numerical modeling errors in the ECG source localization computation through
the judicious use of high-order methods and the discontinuous Galerkin method;
and (2) to quantify and minimize the effects of uncertainty and variability in
the source localization process through the exploration of the polynomial chaos
methodology for uncertainty quantification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;