* 0347871
* Biosynthesis, Structure, and Regulation of Nitrous Oxide Reductase
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* David Dooley, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 02/28/2007
* USD 505,901.00

This research focuses on the biochemistry and structural biology of the key
enzyme in the denitrification pathway. The environmental biology of nitrogen
fixation, assimilation, and denitrification substantially impacts agricultural
productivity and water quality. Denitrification may release N2O to the
atmosphere, thereby contributing to ozone depletion and global warming. Hence
there exist clear and direct linkages between basic research on the biology and
biochemistry of denitrification and numerous issues of substantial societal
interest. Specifically, studies of the structure, mechanism, and metal cluster
assembly in nitrous oxide reductase will be conducted. This research will
directly address questions regarding the mechanism of assembly of the novel
copper sites in nitrous oxide reductase, and their roles in catalysis.
Periplasmic proteins coded by the nos cluster genes nosD, L, and X (which are
involved in the biosynthesis) and nitrous oxide reductase (coded by nosZ), will
be purified and characterized. Investigation of cluster assembly in vitro will
be conducted with purified nitrous oxide reductase and other nos proteins.
Functions of the nos proteins in vivo will be probed by the generation and
characterization of knockouts. Site-directed mutagenesis, together with
structural, spectroscopic and kinetic methods will be used to probe the
structure, bonding, and reactivity of the electron-transfer catalytic sites.
Mechanistic, spectroscopic, and structural studies of the reductively-activated
form of nitrous oxide reductase will be emphasized owing to the recent
demonstration that this form is catalytically
competent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Undergraduate and graduate
students will be directly involved in the research project, including students
from baccalaureate colleges and groups underrepresented in science. Further, the
research is conducted as part of MSU-Bozeman's IGERT program in Complex
Biological Systems and therefore may contribute to institutional improvement in
graduate education. Given the importance of the global nitrogen cycle and
denitrification, there will be numerous opportunities (both formal and informal)
to present the linkages between basic research and issues of broad interest and
importance to society. &lt;br/&gt;