* 0347083
* CAREER: Using Multiple Nuclear Introns to Reconstruct the History of Plumage Dichromatism in Orioles (Icterus).
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2012
* Kevin Omland, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2012
* USD 714,494.00

Recent advances including the use of DNA sequencing in systematics have made
Darwin's vision of a Tree of Life, showing evolutionary relationships among all
organisms, a feasible goal. However, there are still challenges that must be
addressed before this vision can become reality. One of the main challenges is
that virtually all current molecular phylogenies (evolutionary trees) for
closely related animals are based on maternally inherited mitochondrial DNA
sequences. Mitochondrial DNA works well for many reasons, but independent
nuclear sequences are needed to test these mitochondrial trees where they are
controversial. The published mitochondrial tree for orioles is one of the most
controversial in all of bird systematics, so it is an ideal phylogeny to test
using nuclear sequences. Five different nuclear intron regions will be sequenced
to evaluate the oriole evolutionary tree. Nuclear introns are free to mutate
more rapidly than protein coding gene regions, so they are good candidate
regions for rapidly evolving sequences in the nuclear genome. The resulting
evolutionary tree will be used to infer the history of plumage color differences
(dimorphism between the sexes) in orioles. In some groups of animals, changes in
female color may be the main cause of gains and losses of dimorphism. In orioles
and many other groups of birds, females in temperate migratory species are
generally dull colored, whereas females in tropical non-migratory species are
generally elaborately colored. These orioles therefore present an excellent
opportunity to reconstruct changes in plumage color dimorphism, and investigate
the possible causes of changes in female plumage brightness. In addition, this
project will test and demonstrate the value of combining data from introns,
mitochondrial DNA and morphology. Combining multiple nuclear intron sequences
may provide a basis for constructing whole genome trees for all closely related
animal species.&lt;br/&gt; This research program by Prof. Kevin Omland at
University of Maryland Baltimore County provides many opportunities for
education and outreach activities. The project includes an international student
exchange program between the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) and
the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM). Over the last six years,
Prof. Omland has been developing a research and undergraduate exchange program
with researchers at UNAM. This exchange model will be expanded to include UMBC
students, especially from UMBC's well-known minority science programs, who will
assist with field and museum research in Mexico. Undergraduate students from
Maryland and Mexico will have the opportunity to travel internationally and
participate in a wide range of systematics research. The research team will
produce a bilingual website on orioles to help disseminate findings to both
English and Spanish speakers, and to promote understanding of evolution,
systematics and biodiversity. In the classroom at UMBC the oriole research
program will be used as an extended case study in active learning exercises to
help illuminate the process of science. The Baltimore Oriole is the state bird
and the mascot of the local baseball team, which helps make this research
accessible to students and the public. This international research and exchange
program will foster US-Mexico collaboration, and promote systematics research to
a diverse audience.&lt;br/&gt;