* 0347631
* CAREER: Statistical Learning Theory for Natural Language Processing: Theory, Algorithms and Representations
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Michael Collins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

The focus of this project is the further development of statistical methods in
the context of natural language processing (NLP). The project involves research
in three core theoretical or algorithmic areas, and in three application areas
within NLP. The core areas are supervised learning for natural language tasks; a
study of the issues of efficient search and parameter estimation, particularly
by exploring connections between NLP models such as weighted context-free
grammars and work on search and estimation in graphical models; and finally, a
study of unsupervised or partially supervised learning. The three application
areas are syntactic analysis; learning in natural language interfaces; and
learning approaches to information extraction.

A first aim is to further develop a theoretical understanding, and new
algorithms, for machine learning approaches to natural language. A second aim is
to apply these algorithms to natural language problems, and in particular to
develop an understanding of the representations which lead to good performance
on these tasks.

Improvements in core technologies for machine learning in natural language
processing domains could have impact on a wide range of NLP applications. Our
aim is to make it relatively simple to build a natural language interface, or
information extraction system, in a new domain. Advances in our theoretical
understanding of learning in language problems could also have an impact in
linguistics, in studies of learnability or language acquisition. Finally, an
important goal of the research and educational plan is to build connections
between computational linguistics and other fields, particularly machine
learning, and probabilistic representation and reasoning in artificial
intelligence.