* 0348000
* CAREER: Pattern Matching, Realistic Input Models and Sensor Placement. UsefulAlgorithms in Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2012
* Alon Efrat, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 427,162.00

Computational geometry algorithms developed by practitioners in areas such as
geographic information science, computer graphics, robotics, and pattern
matching tend to be efficient for typical inputs, but inefficient for more
complicated inputs. On the other hand, algorithms developed by computational
geometry researchers are proved to be valid and efficient even in worst cases,
but they are too often difficult to implement or slow in practice. These
drawbacks have limited the widespread use of computational geometry techniques
in fulfilling the practical needs of application areas. The goal of this
research is to bridge the gap between practice and theory by developing
algorithms whose correctness and bounds are proven, yet are simple to implement
and perform efficiently on real-world inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
focus is two fold. First is geometric pattern matching with biological and
medical applications, such as patient positioning in radiation therapy of
cancer. Second is an investigation of effective algorithms for realistic input
models. The project examines computational geometry algorithms for general
classes of inputs that capture realistic data, yet have special properties that
enable developing efficient algorithms for them. In particular, the notion of
fatness plays an important role in this context. A convex object is called
"fat'" if the ratio between its diameter and the radius of the largest ball
enclosed in the object is at least some predetermined threshold. For non-convex
objects the definition is more involved. In many cases, the worst-case scenario
for an algorithm is exhibited only for input objects that are not fat, and these
seldom appear in realistic scenarios. The goal of the research here is to
develop algorithms, either by tailoring known algorithms or by inventing new
ones that are easy to implement and run fast on these classes of inputs. The
investigator is developing efficient algorithms for different variants of
realistic input models, and also has shown that known algorithms can be executed
efficiently for "fat'' objects. The investigator's research (and complementary
studies) shows that often these algorithms have guaranteed small asymptotic time
bounds, as well as fast running time in practice.&lt;br/&gt;