* 0348948
* Technical Support for the New MC-ICP-MS Laboratory at University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Thomas Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2007
* USD 225,000.00

EAR-0348948&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a
technician who will play a key role in the new NSF-funded multiple collector
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) facility at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). The facility will be used to
make high-precision isotope ratio measurements, which are critical in NSF-
supported research in several areas of Geology, Anthropology, and Environmental
Chemistry at UIUC. Specific applications of the instrument
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;n Tracing chemical reactions involving potentially
toxic selenium, chromium, and mercury in ground water and surface
water&lt;br/&gt;n Revealing the processes through which magmas are generated and
migrate toward the earth's surface&lt;br/&gt;n Determining ages of earth
materials that hold records of climate change &lt;br/&gt;n Determining ages of
mountain-building events and the processes involved in them&lt;br/&gt;n Tracing
migration of human ancestors and archaeological artifacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technician will be the central person charged with
coordinating the proper operation and efficient use of the instrument, and will
enable the facility to serve a large and highly diverse community of students
and researchers. The MC-ICP-MS will be difficult to run, but with assistance in
setup and oversight afforded by a full-time technician, less experienced users
can analyze their own samples successfully. The proposed technician will be
responsible for getting users started, configuring the instrument for some
users, evaluating and maintaining the stability of the instrument, performing
maintenance and calibration, advising and assisting outside users with sample
preparation, and performing a limited number of routine analyses for outside
users who cannot analyze their own samples. The efforts of the technician will
greatly increase the educational impact of the instrument, allowing a wider
range of users hands-on access to the instrument and enabling its use in
classes. Graduate students and other researchers from outside the P.I.s' groups
will greatly benefit from technical support that will enable them to obtain
high-quality analyses with limited training. Undergraduate research will be
similarly reliant on the efforts of the technician, to an even greater extent.
&lt;br/&gt;