* 0348611
* CAREER: Improving the Optimization and Re-Optimization of Mixed Integer Programs through the Study of Continuous Variables
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,09/30/2009
* Jean-Philippe Richard, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 09/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research proposes to develop new
methodologies for the optimization and e-optimization of mixed integerprograms
through the study of the particular nature of continuous variables. The premise
is that continuous variables are an important source of difficulty in the
solution of mixed integer programs that is often ignored. A better understanding
of their specificity will yield improved methods for the optimization of mixed
integer programs. The approach proposed consists in the development of a general
theory for the lifting of continuous variables. This theory will be applied to
enhance various standard branch-and-cut features (linear programming-based
heuristic, cutting planes) and less traditional methods (primal algorithms). It
will also be applied to the design of computationally efficient e-optimization
techniques for mixed integer programs. Computational experiments will be carried
out to validate the approaches on practical problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this project will result in the improvement of the capabilities and
performance of the current mixed integer programming technologies. It will yield
general-purpose software capable of solving time-consuming problems more
efficiently and capable of solving intractable problems. The benefactors of
these improvements are in virtually all sectors of the economy including
finance, forestry, and manufacturing. It will yield software with built-in
capabilities to perform efficient scenario-based analysis of optimal solutions.
These improved features are essential in an environment where decision problems
are considered more globally and where uncertainty is omni-present. Through its
educational component, this research project will provide a reference accessible
to practitioners about how, when general-purpose software fails, to solve
problems with the most advanced mixed integer programming technologies.