* 0348358
* CAREER: Geometry and Interference in Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Alexander Abanov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award is co-funded by the Materials Theory program of the Division
of Materials Research and the Topology program of the Division of Mathematical
Sciences under the umbrella of the NSF-wide Mathematical Sciences Priority Area.
This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education involving the
application of topological methods and new theoretical methods to outstanding
problems in condensed matter theory. The research will establish a basis for
further studies of the physics of strongly correlated and disordered systems.
Research thrusts include: (i) calculating the probability of phase slips in
superconducting wires with applications to existing experiments, (ii) developing
an effective low energy description in the presence of singular configurations,
(iii) applying topological analysis and instanton calculus to the Coulomb
blockade problem, (iv) developing a hydrodynamic approach as a non-linear
bosonization to calculate the asymptotic behavior of correlation functions.
&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to the symmetry analysis broadly used in condensed matter
theory, topological analysis has not yet been widely accepted by the condensed
matter community. This type of analysis has the potential to solve or to help
solve many open problems. The proposed research will promote the use of
topological methods in condensed matter theory and will strengthen connections
with quantum field theory and mathematical physics. Some of the problems
considered are deeply rooted in modern mathematics. Pursuing topological studies
in condensed matter should turn out mutually beneficial for both condensed
matter theory and mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;The educational component
involves several activities that will be integrated with the research: (i) A
review and lectures on topological methods in condensed matter physics will fill
an important gap in graduate student (and more generally, condensed matter
physics) education. These methods play an increasingly important role in modern
physics. Creation of a new course on the use of topological methods with
supporting materials on the Internet will reach a broader segment of the physics
community and students. (ii) A new graduate course on Quantum magnetism will be
developed to enhance graduate education and to bring together students from
different research groups. (iii) Student symposia will be organized which,
together with a strategy for attracting visitors to stay for longer times, will
enhance education of graduate and undergraduate students from different research
groups and will facilitate their active participation in research at earlier
stages of their careers. (iv) A 'minimal set' of problems will be created for
every mandatory graduate course to establish a common core for the physics
department. It will be available online and may provide a resource for students
and teaching faculty outside of the department.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award is co-funded by the Materials Theory program of the Division of
Materials Research and the Topology program of the Division of Mathematical
Sciences under the umbrella of the NSF-wide Mathematical Sciences Priority Area.
This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education involving the
application of advanced mathematical methods based on geometry and topology to
outstanding problems in condensed matter theory. The PI will combine these
methods with other advanced theoretical techniques and focus on a set of
problems that seem ripe for advance from this viewpoint. Work on these problems
will lay a foundation to attack the notoriously difficult and important problem
of the nature of electronic states that arise from strong electron-electron
interactions and disorder.&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to the symmetry analysis
broadly used in condensed matter theory, topological analysis has not yet been
widely accepted by the condensed matter community. This type of analysis has the
potential to solve or to help solve many open problems. The proposed research
will promote the use of topological methods in condensed matter theory and will
strengthen the connections with quantum field theory and mathematical physics.
Some of the problems considered are deeply rooted in modern mathematics.
Pursuing topological studies in condensed matter should turn out mutually
beneficial for both condensed matter theory and mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;The educational component involves several activities that
will be integrated with the research: (i) A review and lectures on topological
methods in condensed matter physics will fill an important gap in graduate
student (and more generally, condensed matter physics) education. These methods
play an increasingly important role in modern physics. Creation of a new course
on the use of topological methods with supporting materials on the Internet will
reach a broader segment of the physics community and students. (ii) A new
graduate course on Quantum magnetism will be developed to enhance graduate
education and to bring together students from different research groups. (iii)
Student symposia will be organized which, together with a strategy for
attracting visitors to stay for longer times, will enhance education of graduate
and undergraduate students from different research groups and will facilitate
their active participation in research at earlier stages of their careers. (iv)
A 'minimal set' of problems will be created for every mandatory graduate course
to establish a common core for the physics department. It will be available
online and may provide a resource for students and teaching faculty outside of
the
department.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;