* 0348233
* CAREER: Self-Assembled Light-Sensitive Fluids with Tunable Rheological Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Srinivasa Raghavan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2009
* USD 399,690.00

Raghavan, Sirnivasa&lt;br/&gt;U of Maryland - College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"CAREER: Self-Assembled Light-Sensitive Fluids With
Tunable Rheological Properties" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle underlying
"smart" tunable fluids is that one can tune the self-assembly of amphiphilic
systems containing a photoactive component by light irradiation in the UV or
visible range. The PI proposes to use this concept to cause reversible and
dramatic changes in the rheological properties of the fluid. Rheological
transitions include: (a) switching the low-shear viscosity by a factor of 1000
or higher; (b) switching the type of rheological behavior from shear-thinning to
shear thickening; and (c) switching sample response from elastic solid to
viscous liquid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes three strategies for
engineering such photorheological (PR) fluids. The first two strategies involve
the self-assembly of wormlike micelles from surfactants. In these cases, a
photochemical transformation decreases the micellar contour length or induces a
transition from linear to branched micelles, both of which serve to dramatically
reduce the fluid viscosity. The third strategy involves the formation of a
vesicle gel, i.e., a&lt;br/&gt;self-assembled network of vesicles, upon addition
of a telechelic associating polymer.&lt;br/&gt;Light irradiation disrupts the
vesicles into spherical micelles, thus converting the sample&lt;br/&gt;into a
low-viscosity liquid. The fundamental goals in this study are to closely
investigate&lt;br/&gt;the correlation between self-assembly, microstructure, and
rheology in all these fluids.&lt;br/&gt;The use of light to tune self-assembly
will permit novel experimental studies into these&lt;br/&gt;mechanistic
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Photorheological (PR)
fluids offer a new alternative for tunable rheology and are likely to have
practical applications. Their nanoscale structure and homogeneous nature will
make them especially suitable for exploitation in microfluidics or other
emerging microscale technologies. The use of light to tune rheology will provide
a degree of spatial control on submillimeter length scales that is difficult to
achieve by other means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also will be
integrated with educational, mentoring and outreach activities centered on the
subject of complex fluids. The PI proposes to develop a new elective course on
Complex Fluids, Self-Assembly and Soft Nanostructures, with the aim of unifying
concepts from traditional subjects like polymers and colloids. In this course,
he will attempt to impart an understanding of complex fluids based on their
inherent&lt;br/&gt;mesoscopic structure, and he will highlight the links between
chemical and biological systems. The mentoring activities will target talented
undergraduate chemical engineers, especially women and minorities, to work with
graduate students in studying the self-assembled PR fluids. The diverse student
body in the department will facilitate such recruitment efforts. The PI also
proposes to create simple and appealing demonstrations using various complex
fluids, both household materials as well as the tunable PR systems, that can be
taken to K-12 science classrooms in Maryland public schools. Pictures and movies
of these demonstrations will also be featured on an interactive web page.
&lt;br/&gt;