* 0348982
* CAREER: Design of Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Lanthanide and Actinide Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Christopher Cahill, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 07/31/2009
* USD 576,746.00

This goal of this project is to synthesize and characterization the structure
and properties of novel f-metal containing organic/inorganic hybrid materials.
These compounds, in particular the metal-organic framework materials (MOFs),
have importance and potential applications to areas such as spent nuclear fuel
storage, magnetic and optical materials, sensing, catalysis, and separations.
Novel approaches to the generation of these materials are presented and include
the use of heterofunctional ligands to promote heteronuclear compounds, organic
template 'aging' to control the oxidation states of the metals and examination
of formation pathways using time-resolved in situ x-ray diffraction at
synchrotron facilities. By design, this research program contains a particular
commitment to the education and training of students at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels. Various degrees of participation incorporated into this
research project include fundamental and/or exploratory syntheses and
characterization efforts designed for undergraduates, as well as longer term
projects for graduate students that include establishing crystal chemical
systematics and structure-property relationships.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
research project aims to synthesize and characterize novel organic/inorganic
hybrid materials for potential applications areas such as catalysis, molecular
recognition and separation, sensing, electronic materials and environmental
stewardship and remediation. The research project is designed specifically for
the involvement of undergraduate and graduate students and maintains a
particular commitment to educating and training the next generation of
scientists and critical thinkers. Students will be exposed to cutting-edge
research techniques such as novel synthesis routes and 'big science' facilities
found at National Laboratories. Public support of this effort is justified
considering the tangible scientific output, as well as the longer-term
investment in the education of its participants.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;