* 0348209
* CAREER: Designing Integrated Supply Chain Systems and Practical Market Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Zuo-Jun Shen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 10/31/2006
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)proposes to fund the development
of tools, algorithms, and systems that address the integrated supply chain
design and management problem and the efficient market design problem. There are
three major components in this development. The first one focuses on the
strategic supply chain design models, in which results and insights from
inventory theory will be incorporated into the location models. Once the supply
chain configuration is established, the second component emphasizes the better
management of supply chain inventory. The objective at this stage is to minimize
the total shipment and inventory holding costs, which can be achieved by
coordinating the inventory replenishment strategy with the shipment plan that
exploits the quantity discount effect. Finally, in order to reach system-wide
efficiency, market mechanisms will be developed that can provide both buyers and
sellers with enough incentives to participate in the market and to achieve
efficient resource allocation. This research will be fully integrated with the
educational program through the participation of both graduate and undergraduate
students. One primary goal is to stimulate undergraduate students' interest in
advanced graduate study by involving them in the proposed research efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research can help
companies design reliable and efficient supply chains, better manage their
inventories to achieve very high customer satisfaction at minimum costs, and
further increase their profits by providing a fair and efficient market
environment. It will also contribute to our understanding of market mechanism
design under real supply chain settings, which constitutes a major step towards
the development of the knowledgebase on the important interfaces between supply
chain management and market design.&lt;br/&gt;