* 0348150
* CAREER:  Collaborative Information Processing of Distributed Sensor Networks for Manufacturing Quality Improvement
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Yu Ding, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) proposes to develop, teach, and
implement collaborative information processing methodologies for distributed
sensor networks in manufacturing quality improvement to support an integrated
research and education program. Recent research has focused on development of
hardware (sensor devices) and network techniques. The challenge now is to
provide decision support capabilities that will allow the full potential of
distributed sensor networks to be realized for manufacturing quality control.
Toward that goal, the proposed methodology includes: (i) collaborative fault
diagnoses in networked sensor systems; (ii) in-service sensor system self-
diagnosis; and (iii) diagnosis-oriented optimal design of sensor distribution.
The CAREER project will employ a multidisciplinary approach, where engineering
knowledge, multivariate statistics (such as spatio-temporal analysis), as well
as control theory (such as parity space approaches) will be integrated to
address the technological challenges. The CAREER project will undertake various
collaborative efforts to expand research opportunities for undergraduate
students and teachers/students from local high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this CAREER project will advance the state of the art on distributed
sensor networks by contributing new concepts, criteria, and algorithms to its
information-processing capabilities and create an enabling methodology for next-
generation manufacturing diagnostic systems. Accomplishing the goal will lead to
a remarkable cost reduction as a result of improved quality and reduced
downtime, boosting the competitiveness of US industries and our nation's
economy. The CAREER education program will make a positive contribution to
workforce training through curriculum and lab development, teaching innovations,
and other outreach activities. Collaboration with a minority-serving university
and local high schools will enhance engineering education for underrepresented
groups. Broad dissemination through conference/journal publications and
international/industrial collaborations will lead to wide application of the
resulting methodology to many other distributed sensor networks that are of
vital importance to the nation's economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;