* 0348442
* Collaborative Research: Microbial Observatory in the Cariaco Basin - Dynamics of Protistan Diversity across Time, Space, and Chemical Gradients
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Gordon Taylor, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2009
* USD 132,882.00

The long term goal of this project is to build a biosphere-wide record of
protistan life in time and space and elucidate their roles in global ecology and
biogeochemistry. The project is obtaining an exhaustive record of protistan
diversity and its dynamics in the largest marine anoxic system, the Cariaco
Basin. The project is: conducting a comprehensive survey of protistan 18S rDNA
diversity in suboxic and anoxic habitats in the Cariaco Basin 1) by sampling
several ecological guilds in the water column and sediments, by systematic
recovery of the protistan 18S rDNA sequences, by extensive coverage of the clone
libraries and by analysis of the phylogenetic positions of the detected
protists; 2) by recovering numerically and phylogenetically significant species
for direct SEM examination and characterization of their properties by using new
methodology including FISH and light and SEM ultrastructural characterization;
efforts are being made to enrich for and cultivate unique species for
physiological, biochemical and morphological investigations; 3) by assessing the
ecological importance of recovered protistan species by using FISH on
representative sets of environmental samples and quantitatively describing the
species dynamics over time and space and across environmental gradients and 4)
by disseminating information resulting from the project via a Knowledge Center
of Protistan Diversity by integrating the traditional taxonomy with the
molecular data and compiling the information on species identification,
occurrence and distribution. The internet-based Knowledge Center is working in
concert with other data sets, principally micro*scope
(http://www.mbl.edu/microscope), created by one of the co-PIs.&lt;br/&gt;
Broader impacts of the project include the integration of data into modern
knowledge network technologies and training a large number of graduate students
and undergraduates, including students of Venezuelan collaborators. This project
is working closely with the Chistoserdov project in the Cariaco Basin, where the
focus is on the investigation of prokaryotic diversity in the redox zone of the
basin. &lt;br/&gt;