* 0348339
* CAREER:     An Integrated Research and Education Program in Engineering Functional Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Yueh-Lin (Lynn) Loo, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2007
* USD 359,000.00

This proposal seeks to address the governing physics - phase behavior and
structure-function interrelationships - of functional block copolymers uniquely
derived from living free radical polymerization techniques, and to exploit the
physical properties of these novel materials in selected advanced applications.
Specifically, two classes of materials will be examined: polymers containing
fluorinated blocks, and concentrated polyelectrolyte block copolymer solutions
and gels. Fluorine-containing block copolymers provide the opportunity to
explore the very strongly-segregated regime of the phase diagram at moderate
molecular weights. Incorporation of a sacrificial block within these materials
will produce nanoporous thin films with inherently low dielectric constants,
making them attractive candidates for intermetal insulators in micro-
electronics. As for concentrated polyelectrolyte solutions and gels, their
amphiphilicity and ionic character render additional morphological richness and
complexity. Adding moderate amounts of selective solvents (e.g., water) and
adjusting pH can induce changes in microdomains sizes, and even transformations
between ordered phases. The versatility of these materials will be further
demonstrated through the construction of stimulusresponsive device and device
components, such as mechanical switches and valves. An improved understanding of
these materials - their nanoscale structures and how these structures affect
macroscopic properties - will lead to the ability to engineer functional block
copolymers with tailored properties a priori.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
research program is highly interdisciplinary; students involved will be fully
immersed in polymer synthesis, structural characterization, device design,
fabrication, and testing. The broad range of concepts and techniques they are
exposed to will build self-confidence, and will provide flexibility in their
future careers. Central to the educational outreach component of this proposal
is undergraduate and graduate curriculum development. Current and emerging
research concepts, characterization techniques, and processing technologies
relevant to the proposed work will be implemented in an undergraduate core
Chemical Engineering laboratory course to accurately reflect the changing trends
in the profession. A graduate survey course on polymer characterization that
emphasizes hands-on experimentation with existing state-of-the-art facilities on
campus will be developed simultaneously. One of the missions of the proposed
educational program is to strengthen and solidify the science curriculum in
Austin's public elementary and middle schools by encouraging hands-on, inquiry-
based learning. The learning materials and assessment tools that are being
developed will be published on the internet so they are accessible to elementary
school science teachers elsewhere. To promote science and engineering awareness
among school children, a Nano-Exploratory Exhibit will be set up in Austin's
Children Museum. The PI and her group will also be hosting exchange students and
teachers from UT Pan America, UT Brownsville, and UT El Peso through the
"Nano@Border" Educational Outreach Program.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;