* 0348203
* CAREER:     Fluid - Sediment Interactions over Complex Coastal Topography
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2004,10/31/2009
* Diane Foster, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 10/31/2009
* USD 430,625.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0348203 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: D. FOSTER INSTITUTION: OHIO
STATE UNIVERSITY

CAREER: FLUID-SEDIMENT INTERACTIONS OVER COMPLEX COASTAL TOPOGRAPHY

The proposed research will significantly advance predictive capability for non-
cohesive sediment transport over complex topographies in shallow coastal waters.
The coastal environment exhibits complex feedback between waves, mean currents,
and beaches at scales ranging from sand grains to coastlines. This effort
concerns the transport of sediment over small-scale flat and rippled beds. A
combined modeling and observational effort provides an exciting opportunity to
gain new knowledge of the dominant processes that govern the fluid-sediment
interface in the coastal region. A new process-based model will couple three-
dimensional flow, sediment transport, and morphologic modules for the prediction
of bedform generation, migration, and total sediment transport. A key feature of
the simulations is the validation against experimental data at the exact same
conditions. Broad impacts of the work include improved fundamental understanding
of non-cohesive sediment transport potentially leading to significant advances
in predictive capabilities of large-scale beach evolution. A lecture series will
be developed based on the research and a laboratory course on sediment transport
will be incorporated into an existing course. The integration of research,
education and diversity capitalizes on the existing resources at Ohio State
University for a successful outreach program. Efforts to diversify the
engineering field will focus on providing a culturally and gender diverse
environment for graduate students and mentoring young women to develop the
skills and interests needed to thrive. Participation with the Future Engineers
Summer Workshop to stimulate the interest of young women in junior high school
in coastal engineering is especially noteworthy.

