* 0348681
* Microbial Observatory: Metabolic Activity of Microorganisms in Alaskan Tundra and Permafrost
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Vladimir Romanovsky, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2007
* USD 223,998.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Nicolai S. Panikov (Stevens Institute of
Technology, NJ) and Vladimir Romanovsky (University of Alaska Fairbanks) to
establish a Microbial Observatory project in the Alaskan tundra. The long-term
challenge is to identify, characterize and monitor over time and space the
psychrophilic (ultracold-loving) microorganisms active in frozen ground likely
to be responsible for recently discovered sizeable winter CO2 emissions in the
Arctic. The particular goal of this 2-year 'proof-of-concept' project is to
present convincing evidence that such microorganisms exist and can be studied by
a combination of isolation and culture-independent molecular techniques. Growth
and activity of psychrophilic microorganisms will be assessed from the in situ
rates of carbon incorporation into cells and cellular constituents (DNA,
phospholipids) in laboratory incubation studies. Testing of various substrates,
temperatures (from 0 to -40 oC) and other growth conditions will allow the
investigators to develop an optimized protocol for microbial enrichment, and to
isolate 13C isotope-enriched DNA of microorganisms growing in frozen
soil.&lt;br/&gt;Alaskan tundra was found to be an important trigger in recent
global climatic changes: warming caused degradation of permafrost and stimulated
microbial decomposition, converting the tundra from a 'sink' to a net source of
carbon. The understanding, prediction and mitigation of the observed climate and
atmospheric changes critically depend on knowledge of permafrost microbiology.
Broader impacts of the research include more reliable climate predictions,
insights into life on other planets under ultracold temperatures and development
of highly efficient biocatalysts functioning at below freezing temperatures. To
facilitate dissemination of information about this exciting effort, a web site
will be established for the project.&lt;br/&gt;