* 0348271
* CAREER: New Device Opportunities enabled by Polar Dielectric and Semiconductor Heteroepitaxy
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* William Doolittle, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2009
* USD 398,344.00

The five-year career plan of W. Alan Doolittle, proposed herein, merges
multidisciplinary education objectives with innovative research including the
creation of an entirely new field of study; single crystal ferroelectrics
integrated with wide bandgap semiconductors (WBGS) through epitaxy. The
epitaxial toolsets developed under this initiative, thin film ferroelectrics
grown on WBGS and thin film WBGS grown on ferroelectric substrates opens up a
plethora of opportunities for unique devices and highly integrated systems of
devices. Several novel device demonstrations will be undertaken including
integrated optoelectronic modulators with III-Nitride transistors and
photosensors, novel surface acoustic devices with greatly enhanced speed (>3x),
power transistors with 50-100 times higher power density than is currently state
of the art, high speed, low voltage LiNbO3 optoelectronic modulators with
intelligent phase and amplitude control, unique lateral polarization engineered
devices such as deep UV frequency converters, lateral polarization
heterostructures and lateral p-n junctions for photodetector applications.
Support for statewide, historically rural and international education
opportunities is also proposed in the form of an "Adopt-a-High-School" outreach
program, statewide distance learning program participation to reach economically
depressed regions of Georgia and an educational collaboration with a talented
research center in Italy. Certain institute specific barriers to
multidisciplinary education are also identified, with solutions proposed.

The broader impact of this proposed effort includes outreach to minorities in
the form of a summer internship participation, education and motivation of high
school and junior high students thru the proposed "adopt-a-school" program,
better multidisciplinary integration and improved communications among
departments at Georgia Tech, universities in the state of Georgia and research
centers/universities around the world. Given the novelty of several of the
devices proposed herein, new companies are expected to form, providing an
economic benefit as well.