* 0348501
* CAREER:  Semiconductor Lasers for Generating High Energy Ultrashort (sub-50 fs) Optical Pulses:  From Nanotechnology to Ultrafast Optics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Farhan Rana, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0348501&lt;br/&gt;Rana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here for the
NSF CAREER award endeavors to develop radically new technologies that will
enable semiconductor lasers to generate ultrashort optical pulses. The goals of
the proposed research are to develop semiconductor modelocked lasers that can
produce stable optical pulses shorter than 50 fs with pulse energies larger than
100 pJs. These goals will be accomplished through a synthesis of ideas from
nanotechnology, ultrafast optics, material science, and device physics, such as
a) quantum dot gain mediums to achieve wide gain bandwidth, zero chirp, and zero
group velocity dispersion all at the same time, b) ultrafast devices based on
intersubband transitions in nanostructures for generating stable ultrashort
pulses with high pulse energies, and c) soliton-like pulse shaping mechanisms
using artificially created Kerr nonlinearities in semiconductor nanostructures.
In addition, fundamental aspects of ultrashort pulse generation in semiconductor
lasers will be explored both theoretically and experimentally including issues
related to pulse stability and noise, ultrafast carrier dynamics in
semiconductor nanostructures, and pulse shaping mechanisms in the sub-100 fs
regime where pulse widths are of the same order as the carrier intraband
relaxation times in semiconductors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A successful
demonstration of electrically pumped semiconductor laser sources that are
compact, produce high energy stable ultrashort pulses, and cost 100 times less
than solid state lasers will have a significant impact in many different areas
including nanotechnology and materials research, biomedical research, healthcare
and medical research, chemical and reaction kinetics, detection, sensing,
diagnostics, imaging, and optical communication systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact on education of the proposed career plan will
be in the development of course curricula for the Electrical Engineering
Department at Cornell University that will synthesize various perspectives of
electrical engineering, semiconductor optoelectronics, ultrafast optics,
nanotechnology, and device physics at the undergraduate and graduate levels. In
addition, summer workshops for high school students and lectures and
demonstrations for middle school students will be organized. A program will be
initiated to promote interest in sciences among middle school students from a
local native Indian school through hands on experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;