* 0348287
* CAREER:  Growth, Properties and Reactivity of Oxygen Phases on Noble Metal Catalysts: Bridging the Pressure Gap with Gas-Phase Oxygen Atoms
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Jason Weaver, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 01/31/2010
* USD 400,001.00

Oxide-supported noble metals are widely used as catalysts in commercial
oxidation processes, typically operating at atmospheric pressure. Unfortunately,
many of the oxygen phases that exist on these catalysts at this pressure are
poorly understood at the atomic level due in large part to difficulties in
generating such phases under well-controlled ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions.
The main objective of this CAREER research plan is to advance the fundamental
understanding of the growth, properties and reactivity of oxygen phases prepared
on model noble-metal (Pd, Pt, Rh) catalysts under conditions that effectively
simulate a high-pressure oxidizing environment. In this project, model catalysts
will be prepared by growing thin oxide films in UHV and then vapor depositing
the catalytic metals onto the films. A low energy atomic oxygen beam will then
be used to enhance the rate of oxygen chemisorption on the noble metals so that
the oxygen phases important at commercially relevant pressures can be prepared
and investigated in the UHV environment. Several surface analytical methods will
be used to investigate the development and properties of the surface oxygen
phases, and molecular beam methods will be employed to investigate the reactions
of CO and other simple molecules on the oxygen-modified catalysts. The use of an
atomic oxygen beam in these experiments affords an opportunity to generate high-
coverage phases of oxygen over a wide range of conditions on metals that are
difficult to oxidize in UHV. Moreover, preparing model catalysts in situ
provides a means for varying the sizes and morphological characteristics of the
oxide-supported metal nanoclusters in a controllable way. This research is
expected to provide new insights for understanding how specific catalyst
properties and oxidizing conditions govern the growth and properties of the
surface oxygen phases that are important to real-world catalysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing high quality technical training
to undergraduate and graduate students, the educational component of this CAREER
plan will involve the development, evaluation and assessment, and dissemination
of instructional modules that can be integrated into high school chemistry
courses to convey current technological applications of surface science. The
objectives of the modules are to enhance the educational experiences of high
school chemistry students and to improve student attitudes toward science and
engineering, with the ultimate goal of attracting more students to careers in
science and engineering. Each module will focus on a standard high school
chemistry topic and will present an application that relates directly to the
topic. As such, the modules will support the existing chemistry curriculum while
also introducing students to exciting technological applications. The modules
will be tested at a local high school and their impact on student knowledge,
attitudes and behavior assessed. &lt;br/&gt;