* 0348694
* CAREER:  A Flexible Flow- and Error-Control Protocol-Integration Architecture for Multicast Services Over Mobile Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Xi Zhang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2010
* USD 404,223.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobile multicast provides a highly efficient and flexible
way of simultaneously disseminating data or information from one source to
multiple location-independent receivers. However, providing the efficient flow
and error-control for multicast services over the mobile networks presents many
chal- lenges that are not encountered in the wired or unicast networks. First,
multicast itself imposes the scalability problems in both flow and error control
protocols. Second, random-loss probability over the wireless links are much
higher than the wired networks due to the wireless noise, channel fad- ing, and
frequent handoffs. Third, wireless link introduces non-congestion losses and
heterogeneous loss properties, which requires the new flow and error-control
schemes. Finally, the coexistence of unicast with multicast, wired with
wireless, and real-time with non-real-time applications within a common network
causes the significant diversity of Quality of Services (QoS) requirements and
fair- ness issues. Unfortunately, the current advances in the development of new
flow and error-control protocols supporting mobile multicast are not keeping
pace with these challenges. Without investing immediate research effort in this
area, these challenges will likely slow the rate at which we develop the next-
generation Internet.&lt;br/&gt;There is no "one-size fits all" protocol that can
solve all the above challenges by best meeting the significantly diverse flow
and error-control requirements imposed by multicast services over mobile
networks. To overcome this problem, we propose to develop a novel architecture
which, using the decoupled flow and error structure, enables flexible
integrations of different flow and error control protocols to efficiently fit
the QoS requirements for any given specific mobile multicast transport. On the
other hand, the proposed architecture also allows different flow and error-
control protocols to coexist in a common network. While the proposed
architecture focuses only on the flow and error control applied to multicast
services over mobile networks in this proposal, it is a generic protocol
developing methodology and thus can be beneficial in many other applications of
protocol development. The specific research topics/areaB to be explored in
detail in this proposal include:&lt;br/&gt;.Develop the flexible architecture on
which different flow and error protocols can be integrated efficiently to meet
the different QoS requirements for multicast services over mobile
networks.&lt;br/&gt;.Design the uniform/general interfacing
techniques/structures for flexible integrations of different types of decoupled
flow and error protocols.&lt;br/&gt;.Investigate the fairness and coexistence
issues of multiple protocols and their TCP-friendliness with currently existing
TCP-traffics in the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;.Validate and evaluate the proposed
architecture, flow and error protocols, and protocol interfacing techniques
through various analytical approaches, simulation tools, and testbed
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed research project is expected
to have an important impact on the development of the general-purpose
architecture for designing flexible integrations of multiple flow and error-
control protocols for mobile multicast and other services in the next-generation
Inter- net. The industrial collaboration is being pursued with a number of
companies to obtain feedback and test the developed results in a real-life
setting, and enable the technology transfer. The PI has ongoing research
collaboration with IBM T. J. Watson Research Center and TI Digital Video
Communication Department that will be leveraged upon in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The education component of the proposal
focuses on building a strong un- dergraduate and graduate program in Computer
Networking at Texas A&amp;M University. To achieve this goal, the PI plans to
undertake a number of educational projects during the next few
years:&lt;br/&gt;.Develop a new graduate level course on mobile wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt;.Design a lab set for the undergraduate course on Computer
Networking.&lt;br/&gt;.Integrate the planned research prototype as a test bed
for graduate course on wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;