* 0348572
* CAREER:     The Role of Turbulence, Coherent Structures, and Intermittency for Controlling Transport in Multiphase Plumes in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2011
* Scott Socolofsky, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 03/31/2011
* USD 472,416.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0348572&lt;br/&gt;S. Socolofsky, Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developments in computer resources and
laboratory methods over the past 20 years are expanding our understanding of
turbulence and revolutionizing the field of environmental fluid mechanics.
Through these advances, environmental fluid mechanics is increasingly in a
position to evaluate the instantaneous, turbulent velocity and concentration
fields and no longer must rely on mere average quantities. This Career proposal
addresses intermittency, turbulent fluctuations, and coherent structures for
multiphase plumes in environmental applications and advances the curriculum
available for teaching and communicating a modern view of environmental fluid
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiphase plumes in stratified and flowing
ambient environments occur in a wide range of industrial and environmental
applications. This Career proposal seeks to understand the instantaneous
characteristics of field-scale plumes to predict biologic impacts and to
interpret real-time field measurements of purposeful, natural, and accidental
injections. Laboratory experiments will measure full-fields of instantaneous
velocity and concentration for multiphase plumes in stratification, crossflow,
and combinations of both. A primary orthogonal decomposition (POD) of the
dispersed phase and entrained fluid motions will elucidate mechanisms for
separation between phases and correlations between coherent structures in the
dispersed-phase and entrained ambient fluid. The laboratory data will be used to
develop dynamic sub-grid scale models for turbulence simulations. To test the
analysis methods developed in this proposal, field data for carbon dioxide
sequestration plumes in the oceans will be made
available.&lt;br/&gt;Environmental fluid mechanics is a rapidly advancing field
of engineering, and new materials are needed to bring these advances into the
classroom. The objective of this Career proposal is to develop curriculum and
resources for teaching environmental fluid mechanics to a wide range of
audiences. A textbook for senior-level undergraduates and first-year graduate
students will be developed and complimented by a comprehensive, interactive
website and online assessment tools. The visualization and animation
capabilities of the web will also be exploited to introduce K-12 students to
common problems in environmental fluid mechanics and to the results of the
proposed research on multiphase plumes. International forums and partnerships,
in the form of an international exchange with Germany and participation in the
International Association of&lt;br/&gt;Hydraulic Engineering and Research (IAHR)
European Engineering Graduate School Environment Water (EGW) are also proposed
to give the broadest possible impact to the proposed activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed activity: This
Career proposal responds to current needs in design, analysis, and prediction of
multiphase plumes in environmental applications with advanced investigative
methods. The laboratory measurements will provide fundamental insight into the
turbulent properties of multiphase plumes. The POD analysis will be used to
evaluate the role of coherent structures in controlling pollutant transport in
multiphase plumes and to develop appropriate turbulence models. Through the
curriculum development, the utility of visualization and animation to
communicate complex topics will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity: The activities identified
in this Career proposal provide important resources for learning, understanding,
and advancing environmental fluid mechanics. A research website will be
developed that gives access to the laboratory data, developed numerical models,
and animations illustrating important multiphase plume physics. A course
textbook and educational website will also be developed that emphasizes outreach
to a broad audience through use of visualization, animation, and interactive
components. A research and educational exchange program with Germany will also
be developed to promote cross-cultural communication and
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;