* 0348979
* CAREER:  Catalytic, Multi-Component Reactions for the Synthesis of Heterocyclic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Karl Scheidt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2008
* USD 566,000.00

Professor Scheidt is developing new methods for the synthesis of heterocyclic
compounds utilizing catalytic, multi-component reactions in which a transition
metal complex initiates a cascade involving a metallocarbenoid and Lewis base-
containing molecules. The reactive intermediate generated will be trapped by a
subsequent cycloaddition reaction. Use of chiral ligand-transition metal
complexes as catalysts will allow enantiocontrolled heterocyclic synthesis,
while intramolecular variants will permit the rapid construction of complex
polycyclic products. Professor Scheidt will develop new broad-platform molecular
visualization capabilities designed to enhance classroom and Web-based learning,
and he will facilitate the transfer of this technology to the high school arena
through establishment of a high school teacher outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the teaching and research efforts
of Professor Karl A. Scheidt, of the Department of Chemistry at Northwestern
University. Professor Scheidt is developing novel methods for the rapid
construction of complex organic structures, exploiting the unusual reactivity
and versatility of metal complexes. His methods hold promise for general utility
in the synthesis of the complex molecular structures often displaying important
chemical or biological properties. In order to facilitate student learning about
the often confusing three-dimensional structures of organic molecules, Professor
Scheidt is developing versatile and accessible methods for visualization of
molecular structures. He is introducing these techniques throughout the organic
chemistry curriculum and is facilitating their usage in the high school setting
through establishment of a high school teacher outreach program.