* 0348532
* CAREER: Manufacturing Flexibility through Demand Chain Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Julie Swann, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 01/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop and analyze implementable
policies that link tools to manage demand (e.g., pricing or leadtime) with
production processes. The focus is on manufacturing industries with leadtime
flexibility or with products that may be substitutable by price or attribute
(e.g., cars). Specific research activities include: determining mechanisms for
quoting leadtimes and dynamically allocating capacity to service-differentiated
customer classes; developing production and pricing decisions that incorporate
product substitutability by price or attribute; creating dynamic allocations of
components to products; and analyzing and incorporating strategic behaviors of
consumers such as forward buying in pricing and production decisions. The
methodologies to solve these problems comprise mathematical techniques such as
nonlinear and dynamic programming, discrete choice and game theory, and
statistical methodologies. The primary objective of the educational activities
funded by the grant is to increase the awareness and reasoning in ethical
dilemmas within Industrial Engineering undergraduate students. This will be
achieved through the development of new modules for the curriculum, and the new
pedagogy will be assessed to see if students' ethical reasoning has increased
significantly.

The proposed research will result in decision-making tools for manufacturing
such as algorithms or structural decision policies that link supply and demand
and explicitly account for customer behavior. The improved decisions will lead
to better customer service (measured by the ability to fulfill orders on-time)
and could have additional benefits such as reduction of inventory and reduction
of overall product leadtime. Improving the match between supply and demand also
enables more effective use of scarce resources such as labor or production
capacity. The benefits of the proposed decisions and the value of additional
flexibility in the production process will be quantified using data from
industrial collaborators. The proposed activities in ethics will most
immediately guide changes in the curriculum decisions of one Industrial
Engineering department, but the results will also have implications for other
engineering disciplines as well as other universities.