* 0348290
* CAREER:  Fundamental Research on Silicon Wafer Fine Grinding to Foster a Quantum Leap in Manufacturing of Silicon Wafers
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2012
* Zhijian Pei, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 01/31/2012
* USD 514,855.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental
research on silicon wafer fine grinding, and integration of research results and
other advances into engineering education. The objective of the research is to
generate the understanding and knowledge of silicon wafer fine grinding
necessary for the development of an innovative wafering process flow.
Specifically, the research will develop mathematical models to predict the
distance and locus of grinding marks and the effects of the chuck shape on
grinding marks, and physical models to explain the generation mechanisms of the
deepest subsurface cracks and the self-dressing mechanisms of grinding wheels in
silicon wafer fine grinding; and validate these models by experiments. The
educational activities include improving manufacturing education through
curricula, a textbook, and an Internet forum; reaching out to industry through a
Web site, online courses, and workshops; and involving women/minority students
and K-12 teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the research activities
will enable wafer manufacturers to produce high quality wafers at low cost. This
will result in cheaper and better electronic products, which will benefit the
economy and society. Success of the research will also have a positive impact on
the environment, because grinding will replace lapping, etching, and a major
portion of polishing. This will eliminate or reduce use of environmentally
detrimental abrasive slurry and chemicals. The educational initiatives will
strengthen the manufacturing engineering program at Kansas State University,
promote lifelong learning for industrial practitioners, and broaden
participation of the underrepresented groups in research.