* 0348884
* CAREER:  Bio-Nanocomposites: An Approach Towards Tissue Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Gudrun Schmidt, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 06/30/2007
* USD 305,500.00

Tissue engineering from bio-nanocomposites embodies the creation of a scaffold
structure that has the appropriate physical, chemical, and mechanical properties
to enable tissue formation in three dimensions. The objective of this project is
to develop new bio-nanocomposite materials with anisotropic structure,
biocompatibility and biodegradable pathways for advanced materials such as
tissue scaffolds and artificial skins. The tissue engineered bio-nanocomposite
materials that will be developed, are oriented hybrid composites incorporating
chitosan-type biopolymer and the degradable synthetic clay Laponite. Polymer-
clay hydrogels will be used as the scaffold material that is dried on one side
producing a density gradient and a thin polymer clay film to the outside. To
characterize such a material the outside polymer clay film zone, the
concentration gradient zone and the inside hydrogel zone will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal addresses issues of synthesis,
morphology, structure and properties relevant to the design of novel scaffold
materials. Several techniques such as microscopy, scattering and rheology will
effectively elucidate the structural features and physical properties of the
bio-nanocomposite materials. The challenge of this proposal is to combine
disciplines such as chemistry, materials science, and bio-engineering to provide
new technology and fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of synergistic
biopolymer-nanoclay interactions while controlling cellular behavior through the
design of bio-nanocomposite scaffolds. This work may lead to general principles
and predictions for future design of bio-nanocomposite materials. In spite of
many efforts to create tissue from inorganic and organic components critical
performance deficiencies remain when it comes to biodegradable soft scaffolds
with anisotropic nano-structure that can be used as an artificial
skin.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research and educational program
is to train students in the interdisciplinary areas of polymers, bio-engineering
and materials science while improving their laboratory and communications skills
for a career of discovery in academia, entrepreneurship, national and
international laboratories or industry. One aim of this project is to create a
partnership between industry, governmental laboratories and Louisiana State
University. The most fundamental part of the proposed research involves neutron
scattering experiments that will mainly be performed at the NIST Center for
Neutron Research, at HIFR, Oak Ridge National Laboratory and at the Institut
Laue Langevin, Grenoble, France. Plans are described to host graduate students
at German and French laboratories. The goal is that the student will gain an
appreciation for the resources available, and this experience will teach them
how to collaborate with other scientists. Some of the discovery based
experiments described in the educational plan will build on and extend resources
that are already available at LSU and can be integrated into science education
for disadvantaged youngsters and underrepresented minority students in local
communities. For example, the video-based technology "scope on a rope" applied
to materials science has proven to be an invaluable aid to undergraduate
teaching and K-12 outreach. The typical application is to biological systems
(pond water) but the same technology, with some improvements, can be used to
elevate student awareness of and interest in bio-materials. Quite a few of the
undergraduate science and non-science majors the PI will be teaching become K-12
teachers and can take with them the tools provided.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;