* 0348156
* CAREER:     Nanoarrays:    Fabrication and Device Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Latika Menon, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* James W. Mink
* 11/30/2005
* USD 154,098.00

Current state of the art in nanotechnology is the study of advanced, high-
performance nanoscale materials. In order to fabricate devices based on these
materials, several fundamental issues need to be considered: novel
nanofabrication techniques amenable to devices need to be invented, appropriate
growth and processing techniques suitable to nanostructures need to be
developed, novel methods must be devised to investigate properties of these
materials and most importantly, device processing issues need to be considered
for such small structures. In this proposal several of these critical issues
will be addressed. Non-lithographic, nanofabrication methods based on porous
alumina templates will be developed. Nitride semiconductor nanoarrays will be
synthesized for UV-light emitters and spintronic device fabrication.
&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is also concerned with developing new materials
exhibiting exotic properties at the nanoscale level. In this work, new nanoscale
materials, magnetic alloys (FePt) and energetic nanocomposites (Al-Fe2O3) will
be fabricated&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This is a unique proposal
covering research in many different aspects of nanotechnology. Success of this
research proposal will lead to development of highly efficient nanofabrication
methods, development of advanced growth and processing methods and demonstration
of novel nanodevices based on nitrides. Fabrication of UV light emitters will
not only impact the optoelectronics industry, it will also have applications in
advanced chemical and biosensors, relevant to national security issues.
Spintronic devices will allow easy integration into present-day micro-electronic
systems. FePt alloys are important materials for data storage devices and high
density recording media while novel Al-Fe2O3 nanocomposites will find
applications in energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: The
interdisciplinary nature of this research proposal will have a broad impact in
many different areas of research including magnetic materials, energetic
nanocomposites, materials science, device physics and advanced engineering. A
major goal of this program will be the creation of excellent student education
and training programs. This will be achieved through development of advanced
laboratory facilities, involvement of students in all aspects of the research
plan, introduction of nanotechnology into courses, active recruitment of
students from underrepresented groups into my research program, and by fostering
inter-disciplinary and industrial collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;