* 0349444
* Collaborative Research:  Ocean Horizontal Array Turbulence Study:  An Investigation of Subfilter-Scale Fluxes in the Marine Surface Layer
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* James Edson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2005
* USD 182,033.00

OHATS (Ocean Horizontal Array Turbulence Study ) is a novel field program to
examine air-sea interaction and in particular the coupling of surface-layer
turbulence in the marine (atmospheric) boundary layer with the underlying
surface waves. These wind-generated waves influence the dynamics of the marine
surface layer and the air-sea fluxes of momentum and scalars. The ability to
model the marine surface layer reliably with large-eddy simulation (LES) is
unknown. LES and in particular its sub-filter-scale (SFS) parameterization
require validation against and guidance from observations for this complex flow.
The critical piece of the project is a field campaign specifically directed at
the measurement of SFS variables in the marine surface layer. These observations
will be used to elucidate the impact of waves and atmospheric stability on
surface-layer turbulence and provide a database to validate and improve SFS
models for LES. OHATS will be carried out in the summer of 2004 at the recently
constructed Air-Sea Interaction Tower (ASIT) located off the coast of Martha's
Vineyard. The ASIT is connected directly to shore via the Martha's Vineyard
Coastal Observatory (MVCO) operated by Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
OHATS will employ 14 sonic anemometers in a two-level setup similar to the
Horizontal Array Turbulence&lt;br/&gt;Study done in California in 2000. SFS
velocity and temperature fluxes will be deduced by spatially filtering the
measured 3-D velocity and temperature fields. Simultaneous observations of the
wave-field properties will be made in order to establish correlations with the
SFS variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OHATS will enhance the current
understanding of air-sea interaction processes, provide insight into the
couplings between surface waves and turbulence, and shed new light on SFS
modeling for LES A graduate student will work on the project along a
postdoctoral student from the Advanced Study Program at NCAR.. The project will
provide hands-on experience and training with a fundamental problem in air-sea
interaction research, i.e., the coupling of wind and waves to graduate student
and post-doc. The data will be made available to the broader community via the
internet.&lt;br/&gt;