* 0349228
* CAREER:      Single Molecule AFM Tips
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Chengzhi Cai, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 02/28/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0349228&lt;br/&gt;C. Cai, University of
Houston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal outlines the development of a
practical and reliable method to modify silicon AFM tips with single functional
molecules for biological research at the&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale, including the
specific study of Taq DNA polymerase. Additional educational efforts will focus
on the development of a special topics course on Organic Thin Films, and the
introduction of Supramolecular Chemistry to the undergraduate Organic Chemistry
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fabrication of satisfactory AFM tips
remains a major obstacle to realizing the full potential of AFM as an ultra-
sensitive analytical instrument for studying biological systems. Although
previous work has demonstrated that AFM tips can be modified with probe
molecules to detect their interaction with target molecules, most of these tips
interact non-specifically with biomaterials, hindering the reliable measurement
of specific interactions. Moreover, the number, location, and activity of probe
molecules at the tip apex often confound the measurements, since these
parameters are usually unknown and cannot be precisely controlled. To resolve
these longstanding formidable issues, a rational approach to the reliable
preparation of well-defined, highly specific AFM tips is proposed herein. The
novel strategy involves coating silicon AFM tips with a robust monolayer of
oligo(ethylene glycol) (OEG) to resist non-specific interactions, selectively
activating the apex of the OEG-coated tips by electrochemical reactions, and
introducing a single functional group via a dendron molecule to the activated
area to form a single-molecule AFM tip (SMAT). The judicious confluence of these
steps is entirely unique.&lt;br/&gt;Relevant surface chemistry will be explored
using a series of silicon substrates designed to mimic silicon AFM tips. These
model systems include flat silicon (111) and (100), porous silicon, and silicon
nanoparticles. The deposition and properties, especially the protein
resistivity, of a series of OEG films on these model systems will be studied
using a variety of analytical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies
will be followed by the examination of nanoscale electrochemical reactions on
the OEG films and subsequent derivatization. The insights gained from these
studies will provide valuable insight for achieving the targeted objective.
Furthermore, the results will likely benefit several fields that utilize
biocompatible silicon devices, such as silicon-based biosensors and implantable
microdevices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An additional goal of the proposed research
is to showcase SMATs in the study of the mechanical properties of Taq DNA
polymerase, even during DNA synthesis. The results from this study should
provide new insight toward understanding the fidelity of DNA replication. Using
single-molecule tips and genetically engineered polymerases, well-defined
systems will be generated for reliable pulling
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the educational benefits that
will undoubtedly arise from the proposed research, this proposal seeks also to
develop a special topics course on Organic Thin Films, which will provide
students with an in-depth introduction to this ever-expanding interdisciplinary
field of research. The material covered will familiarize the students with the
types of molecular building blocks and principles needed to design functional
thin films for a variety of applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A script will be
written for this course, since existing related texts have limited focus. To
facilitate learning among students with diverse backgrounds and expertise, the
"group learning" technique will be adopted. An additional effort to promote
interdisciplinary education is the incorporation of Supramolecular Chemistry
into Introductory Organic Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;