* 0349416
* International Workshop: Arctic Observations Based on Ice-Tethered Platforms
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* John Toole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Conlon
* 08/31/2005
* USD 98,309.00

To address the "Arctic gap" in the ocean observing system, the National Science
Foundation funded an instrument-development project in July 2003 entitled: "An
Ice-tethered Instrument for Sustained Observation of the Arctic Ocean." This new
instrument concept is for an expendable, ice-tethered variation of the now-
operational Moored Profiler (MP) instrument developed at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) with NSF support. A loose array of these Ice-
Tethered Profilers (ITP's) is envisioned, repeatedly sampling the upper ocean
below the perennial ice pack and telemetering the data back in real time to the
users ashore. Long lifetime and modest cost will permit coarse, basin-scale
coverage to be maintained through regular seeding of replacement systems as
necessary, similar to the surface ice buoys of the International Arctic Buoy
Program (IABP). Operationally, the ITP array will serve as the Arctic analogue
of the ARGO float program now being initiated in the lower-latitude oceans.
Ideally, an array of such ice-tethered platforms can serve as an effective
observing system of the polar surface atmosphere and sea ice conditions as well
as the upper-Arctic Ocean. Moreover, addition to the ice platforms of a
telecommunications link through the surface ice pack would allow the array to
serve as the backbone for two-way transmissions to buoys, AUVs, and subsurface
moorings in the Arctic Ocean as well as acoustic tomographic receivers.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to optimize the capabilities of future Arctic
observing systems and to coordinate international efforts in Arctic observing,
this group will hold a workshop entitled "Arctic Observing Based on Ice-
Tethered Platforms" at WHOI, June 23-25, 2004. This workshop will be a logical
continuation of an earlier Arctic Instrumentation Workshop. It is expected that
approximately 40 key experts plus interested scientists and students from the
USA, Canada, Germany, Great Britain, Norway, Russia, and possibly other
countries will attend to brainstorm ideas of ice-tethered observing systems.
Support is included here to cover the travel and lodging expenses of meeting
participants, the meeting logistics, and report preparation and dissemination.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
workshop will contribute significantly to the design and implementation of a
full Arctic atmosphere, sea ice, and ocean observing system. It is expected that
this workshop will push the boundaries in environmental measurements and
telemetry capabilities, as well as the collection, acquisition, integration,
analysis, synthesis, access, and long-term preservation of the observations.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will bring together experts from different countries to coordinate the efforts
of various countries in Arctic studies. Results of the workshop will be widely
distributed through the internet and scientific publications. Additionally, the
workshop will have educational impact through the involvement of graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;