* 0349204
* CAREER: Arene Functionalization by Metal Catalysts with Heavily Fluoronated Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Joseph Sadighi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 03/31/2009
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Joseph P. Sadighi at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology to develop metal catalysts capable of selectively
inserting atoms or groups into arene carbon-hydrogen bonds, such as those in
benzene. These complexes will contain very reactive bonding arrangements between
oxygen or nitrogen and an electrophilic metal center, such as Cu(III), with a
organofluorine pocket around the metal center that is immune to attack by the
metal center while at the same time preventing metal centers from reacting with
each other. The reactivity of the proposed copper, palladium and rhodium
complexes will be controlled by the nature of the surrounding organic scaffolds.

The proposed research will give student researchers experience in organic
synthesis, coordination chemistry, crystallography, spectroscopy and kinetics,
and catalysis. An integrated, semester-long laboratory sequence involving the
synthesis of ligands and complexes, characterizing them by spectroscopic
methods, and monitoring and interpreting the rates of key reactions will be
initiated to engage the students' interest and prepare them for their
independent research.

Very reactive metal complexes, which are protected against self-destruction,
will be prepared to insert new atoms or groups into organic compounds to provide
economically useful products by efficient and environmentally compatible
methods. Students involved in this project will learn to synthesize both organic
molecules and metal complexes, and to analyze their reactions by instrumental
methods.