* 0349313
* CAREER:    Organic- and Metal-based Luminescence in Molecular and Dendrimeric Phosphors
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Mohammad Omary, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 02/28/2009
* USD 527,000.00

This CAREER award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Mohammad A. Omary to study luminescent
materials of inorganic and organic compounds. These efforts include: (1)
establishing the spectroscopic and structural criteria for using selectively-
targeted molecular and dendrimeric compounds for applications in photonics and
optical sensing; (2) tailoring phosphorescent compounds that are suitable as the
emitting layer materials in molecular light-emitting devices for flat panel
display, or as optical sensor materials for the detection of volatile
environmental pollutants; and (3) fabricating the devices and characterizing
their performance. The work will also probe how the metal-based luminescence in
coinage-metal complexes may be dependent on metal-metal distances in the
luminescent excited electronic state.

New luminescent materials will be developed for sensors and light-emitting
displays. The educational component aims to improve graduate and undergraduate
education by demonstrating how classroom material and modern research can be
integrated and applied in various technological aspects in life. Outreach
efforts will be made toward educating underrepresented groups, including
undergraduate and high school students, students from minority groups, school
teachers, and people in the community.