* 0349049
* CAREER: Dynamical Properties of Low Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Sergey Vitkalov, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2009
* USD 450,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project seeks to substantially
enhance research and education in the areas of solid state physics and nano-
electronics at the City College of New York. The objective of the research is to
apply highly sensitive microwave techniques to answer questions regarding
quantum dynamics of strongly correlated, low dimensional electron systems and
nano-structures - this is one of the most important issues in condensed matter
physics. Quantum coherence of electron states, effects of electron-electron
interactions and spin polarization on the kinetic of the disordered quantum
systems are targets; these will provide significant information for future
applications employing quantum properties of matter. The educational component
of the proposed activity, including domestic and international collaborations,
presents an excellent opportunity for the diverse City College students to get
valuable knowledge and marketable experience in advanced areas of quantum
physics, micro- and nano-electronics.

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project seeks to substantially
enhance research and education in the areas of solid state physics and nano-
electronics at the City College of New York. The objective of the research is to
apply highly sensitive microwave techniques to answer questions regarding
quantum properties of physical systems with very small sizes on the order of
nanometers. These systems, sometimes called nano-systems, are key elements of
future electronic devices employing quantum properties of matter. The proposed
research will provide valuable information regarding the response of the nano-
systems to a rapidly varying electromagnetic field, a feature that is important
for many applications. Situated in the heart of Harlem, the City College of New
York is a public institution that serves a very diverse student body, with many
students from underrepresented groups. The educational component of the project,
including domestic and international collaborations, provides an excellent
opportunity for students to get significant knowledge and marketable experience
in advanced areas of quantum physics, micro- and nano-electronics.

