* 0349980
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic and Thermodynamic Control of Tropical Cyclone Intensity in Sheared Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Michael Montgomery, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/2006
* USD 469,912.00

In this collaborative research effort, the Principal Investigators will
undertake a comprehensive investigation of the physics of the interaction
between tropical cyclones and sheared flow in which they are embedded, focusing
on the mutual operation of dynamic and thermodynamic processes. They hypothesize
that tropical cyclones are weakened by the injection of low-entropy, middle
level air into the vortex core by vortex Rossby waves excited by the interaction
between the vortex and environmental shear flow. The research emphasis (mutual
importance of dynamical and thermodynamical processes) departs from most
previous investigations, which have focused almost exclusively on direct
dynamical effects. The research will have a direct path to improved prediction
of tropical cyclones through the improvement of an operational forecast
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The starting point of the research is two key
theoretical developments that have matured over the previous decade: the
quantitative theory of thermodynamic control of hurricane intensity, and the
theory governing the generation, behavior and wave/mean flow interaction of
vortex Rossby waves. From these points, the Principal Investigators will develop
an extended theory for the generation and maintenance of vortex Rossby waves as
a consequence of the interaction between vortices and ambient shear flow,
addressing as well the rate at which these waves flux passive tracers in and out
of the vortex core region. This theory will be used as guidance in modifying the
thermodynamic cycle to account for dry air injection at middle levels by vortex
Rossby waves. Having developed this theoretical framework, the Principal
Investigators will test it using a suite of models, focusing on fully three
dimensional simulations at high resolution using a nonhydrostatic model. It is
expected that the theory will be modified based on the results of these tests.
Finally, the researchers will use this theory to develop a parameterization of
Rossby wave-induced fluxes of low entropy air, for use in axisymmetric models,
including the aforementioned operational forecast
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project: The nature of
the interactions between tropical cyclones and the ambient wind field has
remained enigmatic for many years. Previous efforts to understand and quantify
this interaction have focused almost exclusively on the dynamics. In this
project, the researchers will marry thermodynamic and dynamic aspects of the
interaction to create a general and complete description of the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project: The skill of
hurricane intensity forecasts remains poor in spite of substantial advances in
the skill of storm track forecasts. Research on tropical cyclone intensity is a
high priority under the U.S. Weather Research Program. This research may well
lead to an advanced understanding of the effect of environmental shear on
hurricane intensity; such advanced understanding will be directly incorporated
into an existing hurricane intensity prediction model, thereby leading directly,
and within the time frame of this award, to improved hurricane intensity
forecasts. In the process of carrying out this research, the Principal
Investigators will train advanced graduate students in the science of hurricanes
and hurricane prediction, thereby helping to foster a new generation of
researchers and forecasters.