* 0349302
* CAREER:     Soft and Hard Chemical Routes to Nanoscale Metal Chalcogenide Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2009
* USD 563,845.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry makes
this Career award to Northwestern University to investigate the synthesis and
properties of nanoscale transition metal dichalcogenide materials. With this
award, Professor Teri Odom will explore routes to inorganic, fullerene-like MX2
(M = Nb, Ta; X = S, Se) materials and strategies for varying the electronic
properties through control of size, structure and intercalation chemistry. Of
primary interest is how the surface and bulk structure and finite size of a
system can influence the properties of collective phenomena, such as charge
density waves and superconductivity. Variable temperature scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) and conducting atomic force microscopy (AFM) will be used for
electronic characterization. Professor Odom will also integrate nanoscale
technology into classroom activities and enable participation of high school
science teachers in research projects. She is developing curriculum in
nanoscience that includes access to cutting-edge instrumentation and early
exposure of undergraduate students to research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Teri Odom will develop methods for the preparation of fullerene-like, nanoscale
materials based on transition metal dichalcogenide compounds and investigate the
electronic properties through the use of atomic and high spectroscopic
resolution techniques. The results of these studies provide fundamental
information about materials properties that control superconductivity and
electronic charge trapping by surface states. The education component will
broaden awareness of research and nanoscale science and open new learning
opportunities for high school science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;