* 0349201
* CAREER:  Probing Charge Transport by Terahertz Time-Domain Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2010
* Jie Shan, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 12/31/2010
* USD 478,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development project aims to develop an integrated
research and education program that addresses scientific questions concerning
the electrical charge transport, while simultaneously providing significant
advances in science and engineering education at Case Western Reserve
University. The research program will use terahertz time-domain spectroscopy to
obtain data on the conductivity of materials without the need of contacts and,
when required, with sub-picosecond time resolution. These capabilities will be
applied to examine problems that are difficult to address by other means,
including the conductivity of photo-excited insulators and of semiconductor
nanoparticles. To understand the nature of the conductivity, measurements will
be made of frequency dependence conductivity and its temporal evolution. These
research activities, particularly as related to optics and lasers, play a
critical role in the coordinated educational activities. The educational program
is designed to impact groups ranging from the general public and high-school
students to science and engineering graduate students. Emphasis will be placed
on advances in curricula and mentoring that will promote the participation of
women and other under-represented groups in science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Development project
aims to develop an integrated research and education program that addresses
unresolved scientific questions concerning electrical charge transport, while
simultaneously providing advances in science and engineering education at Case
Western Reserve University. The experimental tool that will permit these new
scientific measurements is terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. This approach,
based on the capabilities of femtosecond pulsed lasers, permits very fast, non-
contact measurements of electrical conductivity in many material systems. The
method will be used to examine the motion of charges under the influence of an
electric field in a variety of scientifically and technologically important bulk
and nano-scale materials. The scientific results will be of significance for the
disciplines of condensed-matter and materials physics. They also have the
potential to impact several major areas of technology, including electronics,
optoelectronics, and sensing, in which electrical conductivity is of critical
importance. The coordinated educational program is broad based. It will
highlight advancing optics and lasers at all levels in education, thus enhancing
the workforce in this area. A specific additional aim of the educational program
is to increase participation of women and other under-represented groups in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;