* 0349300
* CAREER: Engineered Dendritic Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2011
* Jeffrey LaCombe, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 01/31/2011
* USD 498,094.00

This Career award to University of Nevada, Reno is to advance scientific
understanding of dendritic solidification, and to apply this knowledge to
improve modern metal casting methods. The principal technical goal of this
effort is to use pressure oscillations, applied to a melt during solidification,
to enhance the control over solidification morphologies during casting. Periodic
pressure pulses will be applied during the casting process to stimulate the
formation of dendrite secondary arms at a desired frequency, thereby
establishing the secondary arm spacing that many important mechanical properties
derive from. Cast samples will subsequently be characterized for key
microstructural features (such as dendrite arm spacings) and mechanical
properties (such as tensile strength). Educational and outreach programs of this
Career award include the development of interdisciplinary science education, and
the creation of computer-based learning modules that augment lectures and
connect students in the classroom directly with the PI's research efforts.
Additionally, the educational efforts will be leveraged by bringing local high
school teachers into the lab during the summer, with the ultimate goal of
developing new curricula for use in high schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
metallurgy, dendritic (tree-like) crystal microstructures are the predominant
morphological form of the cast microstructure. The characteristics of a
dendritic microstructure are known to significantly affect many important
material properties such as strength and ductility, which may be controlled to
an extent by controlling the casting process. This award is to develop new
parameters, which will significantly expand the range of control over cast
microstructures and the resulting material properties. Pressure pulses will be
utilized to stimulate the creation of regularly spaced dendrite branches with
controlled properties. Education plans include the development of
interdisciplinary science education, and the creation of computer-based learning
modules that augment lectures and connect students in the classroom directly
with research. Additionally, local high school teachers, during the summer, will
participate in the ongoing research activities, and are encouraged to develop
new curricula for use in their own classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;