* 0349907
* Experience Based Knowledge in a Science Policy Context
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Bonnie McCay, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 02/29/2008
* USD 180,001.00

In recent decades the roles of lay experts as sources of information useful to
policy have been recognized and subjected to scrutiny. The present study
examines the role of such experienced-based knowledge (EBK) in marine fisheries
management, where non-scientists have substantial knowledge about natural and
technical systems that derives from their occupations. This knowledge, although
qualitatively different from research-based knowledge, has been important in
policy outcomes. The question to be examined is what are the implications of
this storehouse of experienced based-knowledge for the development of science-
based policy? This question is addressed through a comparative study that will
examine how EBK appears within the policymaking institutions, how EBK relates to
professional or technical expertise, and what difference experience-based
knowledge (EBK) makes to policies and their outcomes. The research will compare
various approaches to public participation, e.g. advisory panels, public forums,
and cooperative research projects, that are currently used in the management of
Atlantic cod fisheries in New England, Canada and the European Union. This study
is coordinated with an EU-funded examination of these questions, concerning
North Sea cod. The US system has a number of formal and informal mechanisms of
participation, which often take an adversarial and even litigious form. The EU
fisheries science process involves almost no formal public input. The Canadian
approach has been similar to the EU in this regard, but has recently begun to
open up. Two hypotheses are examined. 1) The rules and practices governing
public participation in and the scrutiny of scientific deliberations have an
influence on scientific outcomes. Where EBK is high and where the rules and
practices permit its consideration the outcomes will reflect the content of the
EBK. 2) User group satisfaction with policies will be greater where EBK is
recognized by the policy process and has an influence on outcomes. Both
hypotheses would be predicted by the literature on public participation in
policy. The science studies literature, on the other hand, would suggest that
these hypotheses would not be confirmed because in situations of high EBK, in
particular where rules and practices give space to lay experts, scientists will
respond by intensifying their boundary work. These hypotheses will be examined
through both comparisons among cases and among differing rules and practices
within cases. The practices to be examined include negotiated rule making,
stakeholder forums, the use of advisory panels and collaborative research. The
impact of public openness itself, e.g. sunshine laws and litigation, will be
examined along with the role of informal interactions among stakeholders.
Research methods include documentary research, interviews, observations of
meetings of scientists, advisory panels and other public forums, and comparative
analysis of data from formal surveys between the US and the European cases. This
is made possible by existing data for the US cases and data gathering that will
be carried out by the EU project. In pilot activities for the study September
2003-August 2004 (NSF #0322570) a graduate research assistant has interviewed
participants in cooperative research and related fisheries meetings in New
England and Canada and at one international meeting. Since public participation
in science policy is a critical question in all forms of environmental policy,
findings that improve our understanding of these processes promise broad
application. Results will be disseminated through presentations and discussions
in national and international policy networks in which the investigators
participate, as well as at meetings of relevant professional associations and in
scholarly and scientific publications.