* 0349601
* SBIR Phase II:   A Simple and Practical Solid-State 157nm and 193nm Coherent Light Source for Applications in Lithography Development
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Sterling Backus, KAPTEYN-MURNANE LABORATORIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 10/31/2007
* USD 465,249.00

This SBIR Phase II project will develop a new generation of fully-coherent,
solid-state, vacuum-Ultraviolet (UV) light sources at 157nm and 193nm, to
support the next generation of semiconductor fabrication and metrology, as well
as for applications in basic research. Currently available UV excimer sources
have limitations such as poor spatial coherence, making them unsuitable for
metrology. Therefore, the most promising route to generate fully-spatially-
coherent VUV sources is to up convert light from the visible-infrared region of
the spectrum, where coherent laser sources already exist. However, a significant
technical obstacle towards this goal is the lack of reliable solid-state
nonlinear-optical crystals that work in the deep-UV. Unavoidable residual
absorption at wavelengths &lt;200nm can lead to long-term damage of nonlinear
optical crystals, requiring constant replacement. Furthermore, for frequencies
&lt;193nm, no suitable nonlinear optical crystal currently exists. Therefore,
gaseous nonlinear-optical media are an attractive alternative to crystals for
generating light at wavelengths &lt;200nm. This SBIR Phase II project will use
four-wave mixing in gas filled hollow waveguides to develop a tabletop VUV laser
capable of generating 10's of mW, and possibly 100's of mW of light at 157nm and
at 193nm, in a fully coherent beam, at the very high (10kHz) repetition rates
necessary for applications in metrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has the potential to have a very broad impact on the semiconductor and
electronics industries, as well as in basic science. Progress in both the
complexity and the speed of microprocessors, DRAM memory, and other integrated
electronics has been driven by the ability to make increasingly dense IC's, with
ever-smaller feature sizes. This has been enabled by the development of higher-
resolution lithographic "steppers" and the use of ever-shorter wavelengths of
light for lithography. Because no bright, tabletop, sources currently exist,
most short-wavelength materials, nano- and chemical science must take place at
synchrotron sources, where access is limited and the sources are not optimized.
Therefore, significant gains in productivity could occur with the availability
of such a source.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;