* 0349659
* SBIR  Phase II:    Lean Physics:    Streamlining the Supply Chain Using Factory Physics
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Keith DiAngelis, Factory Physics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,069,000.00

0349659

This SBIR Phase II project involves the creation of an innovative Methodology
and software Toolkit that can substantially improve the supply chain of
virtually any manufacturing firm. The proposed Support Tools offers a
comprehensive system that combines the best of the "software only" and the
"best-practices" approaches with a framework to create a new paradigm for
production system improvement. Algorithms based on this framework will provide
important diagnostic and analysis tools that show how and where major
improvements to the supply chain should be made. Execution algorithms that "bolt
onto" existing supply chain management systems will provide the means to improve
productivity, reduce inventory, and increase customer responsiveness without
having to replace existing implementations. The toolkit can also be delivered
over the Internet, providing a cost effective alternative to smaller companies.

Commercial versions of this innovation could enable widespread adoption of a new
and more effective paradigm of manufacturing logistics. With the loss of 2.3
million jobs in the last three years, the issue of manufacturing productivity is
critical as is the need for supply chain tools which integrate production
software systems with operational initiatives to improve productivity and cost
competitiveness. Widespread adoption of this methodology and tools could have a
profound influence on the competitiveness of U.S. industry.