* 0349999
* Metal-Metal and Metal-Molecule Interactions on Nanoisland Covered Single Crystal Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Andrzej Wieckowski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2007
* USD 525,600.00

This project, funded by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, addresses
the correlation between the structure and reactivity of binary and ternary
transition metal catalysts used for electrooxidation of methanol and formic acid
in fuel cell contexts. The work, carried out primarily in the laboratories of
Andrzej Wieckowski at the University of Illinois, examines spontaneously
deposited nanoislands of Os or Ru deposited on Pt and Au substrates. STM and
electrochemical methods are used to examine these structures, as well as emersed
electrode XPS examination of the structures. Calculations carried out by co-P.I.
Paul Bagus at the University of North Texas are used to help interpret the
detailed core level spectroscopy used to probe these systems. Collaboration with
C. Woell in Bochum provides high resolution synchrotron based XPS studies of
these nano-structured materials. Information obtained from these studies may
find applicability in the design of improved fuel cell catalysts.

Using a combination of experimental and calculational studies, Wieckowski at
Illinois, and Bagus at the University of North Texas, are examining the
correlation between structure and reactivity of a series of nanoisland
transition metal catalyst systems. These catalysts, consisting of Os or Ru
deposited on Pt or Au substrates, show promise as effective electrooxidation
catalysts in methanol fuel cell applications. Information obtained from these
fundamental studies may aid in the design of improved fuel cell systems.

