* 0349952
* FRG:  Synthesis, Characterization, and Simulation of Tailored Inhomogeneous Elastomers
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Fernando Escobedo, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 01/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

Intellectual Merits. Much progress has been accomplished recently in
understanding the role of the structure on the physical properties of
homogeneous elastomers composed of neutral flexible polymer chains. Carefully
tailored syntheses, new analyses of physical measurements, and new computer
simulation methods have been developed to study these polymer networks. It is
now possible to address the more challenging task of understanding the
properties of inhomogeneous elastomers. The presence of a discontinuous phase
(made up of microdomains that either spontaneously form or are purposely
introduced) is known or expected to dramatically affect the network mechanical
properties. Two examples of such situations are polar domains formed in ionomers
and densily-crosslinked domains formed in bimodal networks. Two types of
inhomogeneous elastomers will be investigated by synthesizing model systems that
will allow the identification of the molecular basis of the observed properties
using NMR, X-ray, and neutron scattering measurements. Computer simulation of
these systems will provide comparison with experimental results. Specific areas
of research include: 1) the flow properties of precursor polysiloxane chains
with interacting groups at regular intervals along their backbone; 2) the
macroscopic and microscopic properties of endlinked networks synthesized from
these precursor chains and the development of kinetic and equilibrium Monte
Carlo simulations for comparison with experimental results; 3) the study of the
properties of bimodal networks to test a recently proposed scaling that predicts
the onset of short chain clustering that dramatically affect the properties of
the elastomer. Broader Impacts. The particular materials to be investigated have
potential applications in the area of conducting elastomers (in the case of
ionomer networks), and in high-strength rubber fibers (in the case of bimodal
networks). Scientific results will be disseminated through professional meetings
and an industrial outreach program organized by Cornell Center for Material
Research. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be working on the
project; they will gain a good understanding of the synthesis and the chemical
and physical properties of polymers and elastomers in particular. They will
acquire a general appreciation for the coupling of experimental analysis and
computer simulation that is becoming increasingly important for industry as the
materials being engineered to benefit society become more complex.