* 0349285
* Model Institutions for Excellence-Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Gene D'Amour, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,948,710.00

In Phase 3 of the Model Institutions for Excellence (MIE) program, Xavier
University will endeavor to complete the process of infrastructure development
and institutionalization of key components of an institutional Model for
preparing undergraduate Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
students for graduate and professional school
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the course of the MIE program, the
University has employed metrics that have served as a guide in the development
of program strategies and ensuring attainment of the overall goal of becoming a
Model Institution for Excellence in graduate school placement. Those metrics
have included and remain a) achieving a STEM student retention rate of 75%
through graduation (within a six-year period), and b) achieving and sustaining a
STEM student graduate school enrollment rate of 50% of Xavier STEM
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this final stage (Phase 3) of MIE the key
objectives that will be pursued by the University will include the following
items.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Transitioning of NSF financial assistance for STEM
Fellows to other non-NSF University assistance resources.&lt;br/&gt;
Transforming the Xavier University Center for Undergraduate Research (XUCUR),
which was initiated with NSF support (with a focus on STEM students), into an
institutionalized, University-supported, centralized structure that will
administer to all students (STEM and otherwise) in their preparation for
graduate/professional school.&lt;br/&gt; Development of a degree program in
Electrical Engineering as a complement to the previously-established Computer
Engineering degree. &lt;br/&gt; Completing the development of multi-media
classrooms and conferencing centers in support of the continued University
expansion in the use of technology in the instructional process.&lt;br/&gt;
Finalizing the formation of a University structure that will optimize the number
and availability of research faculty to serve as mentors for STEM undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon accomplishment of these objectives, the
University expects to realize successful completion of all major elements of its
Model for achieving excellence in the graduate school placement of its
alumni.&lt;br/&gt;