* 0349048
* CAREER:  Use of Covariate Information in Adaptive Designs
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Feifang Hu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An adaptive design is a sequential design where
the design points are chosen based on both previous design points and the
outcomes at those design points. Covariate information is often available and
usually very important in statistical inference. Very few adaptive designs
described in the literature attempt to incorporate covariate information. This
proposal is concerned with using covariate information in adaptive designs. The
investigator proposes a new class of adaptive designs under some optimal
criteria. The new designs (i) can incorporate covariate information; and (ii)
exhibit certain desired properties when there is no covariate information. The
investigator then studies the properties of the proposed designs when
incorporating covariates. Further he investigates the relationship between
efficiency of estimation and the total number of failures in experiments. Based
on these results, the investigator develops a procedure to select a suitable
adaptive design for a particular problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In clinical
trials, prognostic factors are often available and usually very important. How
to incorporate prognostic factors (covariates) into trial design is a critical,
and conceptually difficult, problem. Adaptive designs use data sequentially as
it is collected, making use of it in deciding, for example, how to allocate
future subjects between treatment groups or even whether or not future subjects
are needed to achieve some accuracy objective. In this proposal, the
investigator will thoroughly investigate using covariate information in adaptive
designs. Upon completion of this project, a class of adaptive designs, which
incorporates covariate information, will be available for clinical trials and
other experiments. Applications exist in a wide variety of fields: industrial
experiments, bioassay, and clinical trials. The full impact of these designs
will be realized through dissemination in the literature, presentations, group
working sessions, and interdisciplinary collaborations. The project will
stimulate researchers and students to work in the area of adaptive designs, and
should lead to numerous graduate and undergraduate level projects and
these&lt;br/&gt;