* 0349771
* SBIR Phase II:   Self-Imaging Transmitters for Remote Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Iain Mckinnie, COHERENT TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2006
* USD 458,011.00

This SBIR Phase II project will develop and demonstrate self-imaging laser
technologies for eyesafe remote sensing applications. Laser based remote sensing
applications require a variety of output formats, including amplitude modulated
(AM) and frequency modulated (FM) continuous wave (CW) lasers; and pulsed
lasers. There are currently no eye safe technologies available with the adaptive
waveform capabilities to satisfy these requirements. At eye safe 1.5-micron
wavelengths, bulk solid-state lasers are not capable of high average power
operation; and conventional fiber laser systems are not capable of handling high
peak powers due to optical damage and nonlinear effects. A patent-pending
diffraction limited self-imaging waveguide laser technology has been developed
that use an adaptive waveform that has the potential to satisfy the average and
peak power requirements simultaneously. There are two objectives for the Phase
II research- 1) to design a self-imaging laser system with adaptive waveform
capability, and 2) to demonstrate an adaptive waveform 1.5-micron laser
transmitter. It is anticipated that &gt;20 W of diffraction limited, eye safe
average laser power will be achieved with adaptive waveform capability
demonstrated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This eye safe self-imaging
waveguide laser module is targeted as an enabling technology with broad reaching
impact. The specific markets include remote sensing markets of wind and aerosol
detection and 3- D imaging. This technology should have a significant impact
because current sensors are complex and costly. Other applications include
hazard alerting for windshear, gust front, and turbulence detection; wake vortex
detection, tracking, and measurement; and detection and tracking of hazardous
bioaerosols. &lt;br/&gt;