* 0349955
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating Explanatory Theories of the Demographic Transition in Otavalo Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2005
* James Boster, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2005
* USD 10,894.00

Understanding the demographic transition -the shift from high population growth
rates to low rates--has been important in demographic and anthropological
research for some time. This dissertation research in cultural anthropology
tests three different theoretical explanations of human fertility decisions (the
embodied capital theory, the moral economy of childbearing theory, and diffusion
theory) as they apply to population growth in Otavalo, Ecuador. The study seeks
to understand factors in male reproductive decisions; analyzes the complex
relationship between individual attributes, economic conditions and social norms
as they pertain to reproductive decisions; and tests hypotheses regarding the
interaction of variables that affect the status, health, education, and wealth
of families. Data will be drawn from open ended interviews with a random sample
of 40 Otavalo residents; two sets of 28 free lists of the expense of children
and prestige items owned by respondents; and a survey of 200 respondents; and
focus groups to test diverse interpretations of the data. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the study include the new information about fertility decision-making
to be provided, which will be important for planners and decision makers
concerned with Ecuador's population and resources. In a country that has the
highest population density in South America, appropriate population and economic
policy is crucial. Understanding what influences fertility decisions is useful
for the design and implementation of family and economic programs in Ecuador,
both at the local and national levels. In addition the study will generate
information to advance general theory and will be an important factor in the
education of a young social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;