* 0349886
* Astronomical Conversations:  Ninth-Century Commentaries on the 'Astronomia' of Martianus Capella
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Bruce Eastwood, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 79,429.00

In the Carolingian Renaissance of the ninth century, what brought the science of
astronomy to maturity sufficient to provide conceptual foundations that lasted
for the next 350 years? Why was the Astronomia of Martianus Capella chosen as
the textbook for elaboration in pursuit of the conceptual inquiries and
clarifications, both verbal and -diagrammatic, that appeared? What needs did
ninth-century scholars identify for the developing study of astronomy in
commentaries on this text? In answering these questions, the project will locate
the study of Capella's astronomy in the context of the Carolingian revival of
ancient Roman texts for studying the liberal art of astronomy. The project will
then set forth the manuscript evidence for conversations among the scholars who
produced a remarkable body of graphic and verbal discussion of so many points in
the text of the Astronomia. The revival of texts on astronomy and cosmology from
the Roman Empire by Carolingian scholars initiated a new stage in scientific
awareness, advancing well beyond the focus of the previous three centuries upon
time-keeping and the construction of calendars. For the study of astronomy, only
the work of Martianus Capella received extensive glossing and comments during
the ninth century, though other ancient texts offered relevant material. The
commentaries appear in a set of manuscripts stretching from the 830s to the end
of the century. Identifying and editing the most important of these
commentaries, the "Anonymous," then studying the interactions among many
commentaries, will show how Carolingians conceived of astronomy. The Carolingian
achievement laid the foundation for teaching astronomy for another three hundred
years. &lt;br/&gt; This project will produce an edition of the "Anonymous"
commentary (with diagrams) made before 850 and will examine differences among
the variants and other commentaries as well as with the published commentaries
of John Scot Eriugena (ca. 850) and Remigius of Auxerre (ca. 900). This wealth
of commentary material permits the search for and discovery of interactions
among the commentaries. These interactions, or conversations, uncover the
variety and developing concerns among ninth-century scholars of astronomy and
their subsequent impacts. &lt;br/&gt; To advance scientific understanding the
project will: (a) establish precisely and fully the primary evidence for ninth-
century knowledge and views of Capella's astronomical textbook, (b) identify and
edit the "Anonymous" commentary, (c) distinguish different viewpoints among the
commentaries, (d) explain the conversations that produced the apparent
interactions, and (e) show the significance of diagrams in each of these points.
The project will contribute to the following research: (a) a study of the
motives for scientific studies in the Carolingian Renaissance, (b) the
importance of diagrams in early scientific development, and (c) the significance
of Carolingian astronomy for the later reception of Greco-Arabic science.
&lt;br/&gt; The project will produce an electronic edition of the "Anonymous"
commentary as part of a larger project on Martianus Capella at the Constantijn
Huygens Institute in The Hague. A separate study of this commentary and others
of the ninth century will be published. For teachers the astronomical diagrams
will provide actual historical examples of graphic models of problem-statement
and problem-solving that students can analyze. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;