* 0349412
* The Organic Chemistry of Silicon in Small and Large Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Joseph Lambert, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2008
* USD 468,900.00

With this renewal award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
continues its support for the work of Professor Joseph B. Lambert of the
Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University in Evanston IL. The research
will extend the PI's work on the organic chemistry of compounds that contain
silicon and other main group elements. Silicon, which is just below carbon in
the periodic table, conveys novel properties when replacing carbon. The primary
goals of the research are to prepare new molecules with interesting and useful
properties. New and unusual organic cations centered on main group elements will
be synthesized and their stability evaluated. A series of organosilicon
reactions will produce dendrimers of nanodimensions, whose surface is covered
with organic hosts that can bind to metal cations and serve as novel catalysts.
The ability of fundamental organic molecules of biological interest to react
with silicic acid will be investigated with the goal of establishing links
between the inorganic and bioorganic worlds with implications in prebiotic
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A diverse, multiracial group that includes
students from underrepresented minorities will carry out this research. The
research will not only educate those involved in the projects but also
undergraduates and the general public though educational activities, books, and
lectures. This research is expected to have broad positive impact in the areas
of catalysis, industrial separations and purification, environmental
remediation, and drug delivery. &lt;br/&gt;