* 0349772
* SBIR Phase II: Use of Inducible Antimicrobial Peptides for Rapid Diagnosis, Prevention, and Management of Disease in Finfish Aquaculture
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* James Carlberg, KENT SEATECH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 01/31/2006
* USD 499,812.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase II Project proposes to
develop a new approach for controlling disease in the aquaculture industry. This
approach is based on the use of a recently discovered natural antibiotic
compound in hybrid striped bass (HSB) called bass-hepcidin. Hepcidin is an
antimicrobial peptide (i.e. bactericidal molecules) that is part of the fish's
innate immune system. Prior Phase I work has demonstrated that HSB (and probably
many finfish) respond to disease challenges by increasing their hepcidin levels.
This finding is useful because elevated hepcidin levels indicate that fish are
being challenged by disease, and artificially increasing hepcidin levels (by
feed additives or other means) may stimulate the fish's immune response to
assist in combating disease. This Phase II project will develop an ELISA
diagnostic test for hepcidin and conduct follow-on clinical studies with several
important aquaculture species. If successful, this research may result in the
development of two types of hepcidin-based products that will be of immense
value to aquaculturists: 1) hepcidin test strips that provide an instant
positive-negative indication of the presence of disease processes, analogous to
pregnancy test kits, and 2) feed additives that stimulate the production of
hepcidin in finfish, to be used to control disease outbreaks. The commercial
impact of this project will be significant as there is clearly a market need for
products to control infectious diseases in fish that cause tremendous economic
loss, of the order of $ 3 billion, each year.

