* 0349758
* SBIR Phase II:   Low-Voltage Poling of Waveguides in Nonlinear Optical Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Philip Battle, ADVR, INC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 12/31/2006
* USD 771,700.00

&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will develop the processing steps for the
fabrication of highly quality periodically poled waveguides in potassium titanyl
phosphate (KTP). Periodically poled waveguides enable highly efficient, quasi-
phase matched (QPM), nonlinear optical wavelength conversion of continuous wave
and high-peak power quasi- continuous lasers. The fabrication process,
established during the Phase I effort, utilizes low-voltage pulses combined with
a novel electrode configuration to periodically pole channel waveguides embedded
in a KTP chip. The use of standard off-the-shelf KTP channel waveguides will
significantly increase yields, allow greater design flexibility, and decrease
manufacturing expenses while providing a large QPM conversion efficiency that
will enable a range of commercially significant applications. Specific products
include the frequency doubling of pulsed and continuous wave infrared diode
lasers for use in bio- analytical instrumentation and fluorescent spectroscopy,
waveguide-based difference frequency mixing modules for generating tunable,
narrow band near-infrared sources for environmental monitoring, spectroscopy at
hard-to-reach wavelengths, and all-optical switching in communication networks.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project should result in efficient
frequency doubling of diode lasers, which will &lt;br/&gt;Have beneficial
impacts in medical, environmental, and scientific applications. In the
&lt;br/&gt;Medical field, the availability of small, low power consumption,
cost-competitive visible &lt;br/&gt;Lasers will enable the creation of portable
bio-analytical instrumentation (e.g. a bedside flow cytometry system). In the
environmental field, small inexpensive spectroscopically useful infrared sources
will enable new and improved remote sensing systems. Additionally, the KTP
waveguide technology developed in this effort is expected to contribute to
advanced research in a variety of fields including ultra short pulse wavelength
conversion, development of waveguide optical parametric devices, &lt;br/&gt;and
the efficient generation of correlated photon pairs for quantum optical studies.
&lt;br/&gt;