* 0349956
* Small Research and Training Grant: Proof, Persuasion, and Policy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Geoffrey Bowker, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2008
* USD 305,172.00

From its inception in 1989, the Science Studies Program at the University of
California, San Diego, has trained scholars who advance understanding of how
science works in its full intellectual and cultural dimensions. In various ways,
faculty and students have studied how scientific controversies are adjudicated;
how evidence relates to theory; how information is distributed, shared, and
hoarded; and how matters of credibility, authority, and trust are ultimately
issues of politics and culture as well as of fact. With the prior support of
NSF, the Program has developed into one of the premier science studies programs
in North America, and has produced a cohort of graduate students now teaching in
tenure-track positions in the United States and several other countries. Over
the past five years, eight new faculty members have joined the program, adding
new vigor, enthusiasm, and perspectives, and both the quality and quantity of
our graduate applicant pool has increased. This is an opportune time to renew
the commitment to the teaching and training mission. Seeing an alignment of
faculty expertise, student interest, and societal need, this proposal seeks to
dedicate the next three years to a programmatic theme of "Proof, Persuasion, and
Policy." &lt;br/&gt;Given the salient but often ambiguous contribution of
science to public decision-making, society needs to have trained experts who
know how to study the process of scientific consensus: how scientists prove that
things are as they are and persuade others that they have proof to do so. Given
the myriad issues today that involve questions of scientific consensus--the
reality of global warming, the approval of new pharmaceuticals, the efficacy of
supply-side economic--it is important to think harder and deeper about the
inter-relations between proof, persuasion, and policy. This proposal seeks to
develop a concrete pedagogical plan for graduate student and post-doctoral
fellow training by using the nexus of "Proof, Persuasion, and Policy" as a
touchstone issue that all key program activities will engage with over the grant
period.&lt;br/&gt;The post-doctoral fellow, whose research bears on the theme,
will organize a major portion of the teaching and colloquia around the theme.
The proposal will also increase support for graduate students through two first-
year fellowships and one dissertation-year fellowship. The initiative will focus
on three thematic areas: a) models and prediction, b) the social sciences, and
c) disease and health. Each of these is an area that relates to important issues
facing the United States today, and each is an area in which faculty and
students are already working. The initiative will assist the Program to sharpen
its focus, to strengthen its interdisciplinary connections, and to reach out to
relevant communities at the university and beyond. &lt;br/&gt; The primary
intellectual merit of the proposal is that it will facilitate a deeper
understanding of how and why scientific knowledge does (or does not) impact
public policy, and particularly why science at present seems to be failing to
play the role that is often expected, or even demanded, of it. The broader
impact will be the insights and knowledge that graduate students and post-docs
take with them as they launch their own professional careers, as well as the
stimulus the initiative will provide to both faculty and students to think more
sharply about the connections between the abstract questions of science studies
and tangible questions of public policy. The initiative will strengthen one of
the premier centers for science studies research in North America, and will help
reach outward towards the communities around UCSD that generate, use, and in
some cases challenge scientific knowledge. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;