* 0349464
* SBIR Phase II:  Web-Based International Trade Knowledge Discovery System (TradingCube)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Carlos Sanchez, TradingCube Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2007
* USD 499,895.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program Phase II project will focus on
applied research for the development and implementation of a commercial Web-
Based International Trade Knowledge Discovery System. It will address the
significant need for organizations supporting international trade and for small
and medium-sized business to have improved access to information and dynamic
analyses of world markets in a single source. This product will provide
subscribers with dynamic analyses of world markets for baskets of goods allowing
them to extract actionable information to make strategic and tactical decisions
while enabling the functionality of a novel combination of tools including
knowledge discovery, data management technologies, web technologies,
international trade economics and strategic analysis. This project will focus
on: 1) Implementing a prototype based on the results of the Phase I feasibility
study within a web portal framework, 2) Developing a library of international
trade analyses, interactive maps and graphics, 3) Developing a meta-business
directory and implement an international trade search engine, and 4) Developing
personalization features and snapshot reports.

The proposed product will contribute to applications of knowledge discovery in
the international trade domain, data warehousing, information hierarchies, and
clustering-indexing techniques to support analytical queries. In addition it
advances research in the application of Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG). SVG is a
language for describing two-dimensional dynamic and interactive graphics in XML.
The product addresses one of the fundamental areas on which trade promotion can
have a significant impact --access to actionable information that will help
businesses maximize export potential. In the process it will contribute to
economic growth, education and participation of small businesses and
underrepresented groups in international trade. The development process and
product will involve researchers and students from several disciplines. The
potential market includes any commercial, private or public organization with
the need to find and evaluate international trade opportunities.