* 0349578
* Substrate Capture in Hsp70 Catalyzed by the Hsp40 J-domain
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Samuel Landry, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2010
* USD 819,917.00

This research will analyze the role of the J-domain in the delivery of
substrates by Escherichia coli Hsp40/DnaJ to Hsp70/DnaK. The Hsp40 and Hsp70
molecular chaperones cooperate in numerous cellular processes that require the
modulation of protein-protein interactions. The Hsp40-Hsp70 chaperone machine
dissociates protein complexes such as clathrin cages and transcriptional
activation complexes. Hsp70 uses an ATPase activity to regulate substrate
binding and dissociation. Hsp40 delivers substrate proteins to Hsp70 and
stimulates the DnaK ATPase. In this research, the DnaJ-to-DnaK delivery process
will be dissected using novel recombinant proteins composed of the J-domain
fused to well-studied fluorescent peptide substrates. J-domain function is
evident in the fact that the affinity of the fusion protein for DnaK increases
in the presence of ATP. The affinities of proteins and peptides normally
decrease in the presence of ATP unless DnaJ is present. Specifically, this
research will investigate: (1) the influence of the J-domain on DnaK-binding
affinity and kinetics of peptides and fusion proteins, (2) stimulation by the
J-domain of the DnaK conformational change and ATPase activity, and (3)
interaction of the J-domain- and peptide-binding sites on DnaK by NMR signal
perturbation. This effort will illuminate the mechanism of Hsp40-Hsp70
cooperation.

Molecular chaperones are machines that use the chemical energy of ATP to
assemble and disassemble cellular structures. Some molecular chaperones act like
conveyors, others like levers, and others like self-assembling scaffolds. The
Hsp40-Hsp70 class molecular chaperone machine acts like a lever, using the
energy of ATP to force protein subunits apart from each other. Whereas the Hsp70
component makes the force and acts on the protein subunits, the role of the
Hsp40 component remains obscure. This research project will employ biophysical
methods to analyze protein-protein binding, protein conformational changes, and
ATP consumption to test the hypothesis that the Hsp40 acts like a fulcrum to
couple the energy of ATP to lever action by the Hsp70. This work will have broad
impacts on the advancement of biophysics, molecular machines, and the training
of the next generation of scientists. Knowledge from this work will lead to
molecular machines that create new materials and process information on the
smallest-possible scale. Over the five-year project period, two Ph.D. students
and at least five undergraduate students will work directly the project, and
approximately twenty additional biophysics students will be exposed to the work
through scientific exchanges within the Department of Biochemistry and the New
Orleans Protein Folding Intergroup. Due to Tulane's location and ties to the
community, approximately 20% of the trainees will be African-American.