* 0350620
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Relations Between the Awareness and Differentiation of Emotional Experience and Activity in the Neural Circuitry of Emotion Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Sharon Thompson-Schill, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 03/31/2005
* USD 8,250.00

What brain regions participate in the regulation of emotion? How do they
interact? How does the ability to think about and describe one's emotional
experience or mood in a specific and detailed way affect activity in these
regions as well as the relative success of regulating an emotional response or
mood? With National Science Foundation funding, Dr. Sharon L. Thompson-Schill
will direct graduate student research in a study examining the role of specific
brain regions (the amygdala, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex) during the conscious voluntary regulation of emotional
responses to both neutral and unpleasant, negative pictures in healthy human
participants. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) provides a measure of
neural activity. Galvanic skin response (GSR), a peripheral psychophysiological
measure, and self-reported measures of current emotional state are collected
during fMRI scanning to confirm and measure the degree to which the emotion
regulation manipulation is successful. Relations between neural activity and the
physiological and self-report measures are tested. Emotion differentiation, or
the degree to which emotional experience is parsed in a discrete, differentiated
fashion, is assessed using a 14-day diary protocol with handheld computers in
study participants after completion of the fMRI procedure. Greater emotion
differentiation is hypothesized to provide additional emotion knowledge
pertaining to the cause, context, bodily sensations, appropriate expressions,
and action sequences associated with enhancing or reducing the emotional
experience. Therefore, among individuals who experience negative affect at a
similar intensity, those who differentiate their negative emotional experience
into specific discrete emotions such as "fear" or "anger" are hypothesized to be
better able to regulate their negative affect than those who simply describe a
"bad feeling." Analysis of the relation between individual differences in
emotion differentiation and ability to regulate emotion as indexed by the self-
report, GSR, and fMRI data tests whether knowing exactly how one feels is
associated with greater ability to modulate that feeling in a goal-appropriate
manner. This study builds upon both (a) the investigators' previous finding that
maintenance of an emotional response to unpleasant pictures is associated with a
prolonged increase in amygdalar activity and (b) reported changes in amygdalar
and prefrontal cortical activity during suppression of negative emotion, because
both enhancement and suppression of negative emotion are examined in the same
participants and is compared to a condition when no regulation is performed.
Thus, brain regions displaying activity changes related to affective state
changes can be dissociated from those displaying changes related to attempt to
modulate affective state, providing information pertaining to the function of
the circuitry components.

Broader Impacts. This study tests whether greater differentiation of one's
emotional experience on a daily basis is associated with greater ability to
regulate emotional responses in a laboratory setting. Development of a model of
the neurocircuitry of emotion regulation is critical for understanding normal
emotional processes such as how the brain perceives and responds to affective
stimuli and how it recognizes the actual experience of the emotion, as well as
for developing appropriate treatments for psychological disorders such as
depression and anxiety that are characterized by abnormal regulatory processes.
In addition, it may also increase understanding of how the brain performs other
self-regulatory processes. This project provides valuable graduate student
training in the acquisition and analysis of self-report, psychophysiological,
and neuroimaging data through its integration of both cognitive neuroscience and
social psychological methods.