* 0350719
* Variations in the Oxygen/Nitrogen Ratios of Air:  Implications for the Global Carbon Cycle
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Michael Bender, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2007
* USD 667,132.00

This project makes use of measured O2/N2 (oxygen/nitrogen) and Ar/N2
(argon/nitrogen) ratios to improve understanding of processes related to the
carbon cycle. The O2/N2 measurements provide information on sequestration of CO2
(carbon dioxide) by the terrestrial biosphere and the ocean, and aid in the
understanding of ocean fertility and interaction between oceanic circulation and
biogeochemical fluxes. The Ar/N2 measurements provide information on upper ocean
heat content, upper ocean mixing and ventilation, gas exchange rates, and
atmospheric tracer transport. This information helps to constrain upper ocean
biogeochemistry and carbon exchange needed for physical ocean models.
Atmospheric mixing processes are also constrained by these observations that can
lead to improvement in inverse models aimed at characterizing atmospheric CO2
sources and sinks based on atmospheric CO2 distributions. Therefore, the
combination of the two ratio measurements will be deployed as important tools
for studying the carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be accomplished by
placing automated samplers at a number of existing measurement sites (Barrow,
Samoa, Amsterdam Island, Cape Grim, Macquarie, and Syowa), and aboard a NOAA
research vessel (Ka'imimoana). Two additional measurement sites will be added
(Sable Island and Bermuda), and preparations will begin to quantify the O2/N2
gradient across the continental United States. These measurements are similar to
those of Ralph Keeling, but are based on different analytical methodology, with
some overlapping sites and some complementary ones. Detailed intercomparison
exercises with Keeling's group will be an ongoing part of this
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Products of this research will include an updated
anthropogenic carbon balance available because of improved understanding of
terrestrial biosphere and ocean carbon sequestration. The seasonal cycles and
meridional gradients of the observed quantities will provide improved
understanding of oceanic biological processes and upper ocean dynamics, as well
as atmospheric transport phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide
important information on anthropogenic influences on the global carbon cycles
due to fossil fuel combustion and changes in the biosphere. This information can
be used in a number of arenas including coupling between components of the Earth
system in response to global climate change, predicting environmental
consequences associated with given emission scenarios, assessing possible
mitigation efforts, and as part of a scientific basis for policy decisions. Two
post-doctoral fellows will receive training as part of this work.