* 0350036
* Dissertation Research:  Ethnographic Research at the Alcantara Launching Center: An Inquiry into the Politics of Space, Race, Technology and Nation in Brazil
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Jean Comaroff, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 11,926.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
researcher will investigate contemporary politics of big science, development
and difference in Brazil using as an object of study the Alcantara Launching
Center (CLA), an ambitious government project that was intended to help Brazil
win "technological independence" when it was built in the early 1980s. Funds
from the grant will support travel to Brazil, as well as room, board, and travel
within the country. By 2000, Brazil had not successfully launched a satellite
from the base of CLA, and there was widespread opposition in Brazil to its
planned use by foreign governments. A movement to reclaim the land for displaced
Afro-Brazilian communities had gained prominent support. Alcantara, the poor
fishing region where the CLA is located, became a flashpoint for debates about
the character and future of Brazil as a multi-ethnic and technologically
developing nation-state. Through ethnographic research into the conflicts over
Alcantara's fate, and building on four months of preliminary ethnographic
research, this researcher will use ethnographic and archival methods to examine
three groups: 1) NGOs and political organizations involved in the conflicts over
the CLA; 2) scientists and others working in or on issues relating to the base;
3) and communities affected or displaced by the base. By investigating the
politics of an embattled big science project in a context of relative
technological disadvantage and longstanding technological ambition, this project
is expected to offer an ethnographic vantage on the cultural specificities and
lived- effects of some of the most contentious changes facing contemporary
Brazil--changes that are similar to those faced in much of the developing world.