* 0350312
* SLC Catalyst: Learning in Exchange Systems:  Human and Machine Interactions
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2005
* David Porter, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2005
* USD 109,733.00

The exchange of goods, services and information is pervasive in everyday life.
In particular, interactions among individuals in society and workplaces are
centered on exchange. Exchange systems are ancient in origin, universal across
disparate human cultures, and-along with biological and ecological processes-are
examples of self ordering complex systems. Two workshops will be held this year
that will focus on learning and exchange in organizations, markets and society
in general.

Understanding and extending the capacity of the mind through exchange processes
can have a tremendous impact on how individuals and organizations allocate their
scarce resources and to can better utilize their resources to expand
opportunities. These workshops will bringing together researchers who are
developing new interdisciplinary algorithms and methodologies for artificial
learning and those who are trying to understand aspects of learning as they
apply to market design and coordination along with the neuroscience (cognitive
and economics) associated with personal and impersonal exchange.

The workshops will investigate the design and use of software agents, data
visualization and machine learning to expand the scope of exchange systems. IN
particular, the advent of globalization and the proliferation of distributed
communication systems have made the design of exchange institutions a vital
aspect of the economy. The transfer of information and the way it is presented
can assist in distributed learning systems. In addition, the incentives provided
by an institution's rules can affect the quality of the information provided in
a distributed network and reinforcement learning from the decisions made in the
network. Without an exchange institution that aggregates information and
distributes it in a timely matter, the scarce resources of the brain would be
used to try and find trading partners and information concerning value trade-
offs. This idea of the market as an extension of mind can now be supplemented
with a unique function in the specialization and division of learning. As the
environments in which exchange occurs become more complex and distributed, the
use of computer algorithms to assist humans in focusing their learning to
specific large reward/small cost areas can facilitate exchange. These raise
question concerning when a software agent responsible for a transaction. Can a
software agent enforce a transaction? Can software agents coordinate among each
other to find solutions that are somehow represented to their human
counterparts?