* 0350425
* SGER:  System-Level Network Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Warren Alexander, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 02/28/2005
* USD 88,076.00

Modern communication networks are shifting from providing a basic data transport
capability to providing a rich collection of network services. Recent advanced
services envisioned by network designers include: multicast, reliable and
adaptive multicast, resource reservation, caching services, and mobile access.
Even these services and capabilities are eclipsed by needs for network
protection, distributed web-page composition, repelling denial of service
attacks, and assured network communications. The underlying network structure
used to deliver these services is rapidly changing, becoming increasingly mobile
and dynamic. We are embracing more wireless infrastructure, more mobile
computing devices, increased interaction between services, and increased dynamic
network services. To achieve desired capabilities in the &lt;br/&gt;increasingly
dynamic network environment, dramatic changes in networking infrastructure are
being introduced to provide a rich and highly dynamic networking environment.
Yet, to the user the network must be consistent and predictable. These changes
pose new challenges in the way network systems and services are designed and
deployed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI propose exploring new techniques for
design of advanced networking services. Specifically, concentrate on
understanding and predicting emergent behaviors resulting from interactions
between and among services and infrastructure elements. The hypothesis is that
using new, rigorous system-level design techniques, network infrastructure can
be more flexible while at the same time provide more predictable
&lt;br/&gt;network services. The PI propose using formal techniques to define
and analyze: (i) network services; (ii) network infrastructure; and (iii)
interactions between desired services and available infrastructure. The net
result will be techniques for predicting the behavior of interacting network
services implemented on a heterogeneous, dynamic network
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research
activity brings together ongoing research in network design, formal methods and
systems-level design. The fundamental intellectual challenge is the
identification of appropriate representations and analysis techniques for
network systems within the systems engineering and formal methods domains. The
greatest challenge within that task, scaling techniques to the systems-level,
remains a difficult, unsolved problem. This project will provide sufficient
justification for a long-&lt;br/&gt;term research program addressing this
problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Scientific Impacts: Developing flexible,
reliable, and secure networking infrastructure has far reaching societal impacts
ranging from response to changing environments to confident delivery of new
network services. Society's reliance on information availability will only
increase over time making information delivery increasingly critical to national
security and economic success. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;