* 0350645
* Econometric Methods to Study the Effects of Public Interventions and Terrorism
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Alberto Abadie, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 220,107.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0350645&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
NBER&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;PI: Abadie,
Alberto&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Econometric Methods to Study the Effects of Public
Interventions and Terrorism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, consisting of
two projects, will develop innovative econometric methods to study the effects
of public policy interventions. The first project studies simple matching
methods for treatment effects estimation and missing data imputation. New
analytical techniques for the study of the distribution of simple matching
estimators of average treatment effects have opened the way to solve two
outstanding problems: (a) The properties of the most popular matching procedures
to estimate the effects of and other treatment effects---simple matching
estimators on the estimated propensity score---are not well understood. This
project will fill this gap in the literature by extending recent development to
the case when matching is done on estimated covariates (as the propensity
score). (b) The CPS and other large surveys use a matching procedure known as
'hot deck' to impute missing values. Large biases in simple matching estimators
of treatment effects indicate that hot deck imputation procedures will produce
similar biases. This research will study the properties of an improved hot deck
procedure that is free of these biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the
effects of policy interventions often take place at an aggregate level and use
economies not exposed to the intervention of interest as a control group. This
approach is subject to two problems: (i) there is some ambiguity about how to
choose control groups with researchers using subjective measures of affinity to
select between possible controls. (ii) If aggregate data are used for the
analysis, the usual cross-section standard errors, which measure only
uncertainty about aggregate variables, do not apply. Uncertainty in these models
is about the ability of the control group to reproduce the behavior of the
exposed economies in absence of the intervention. This project will study the
properties of data-driven procedures to construct adequate control groups. This
procedure limits the discretion in the choice of the control group, forcing the
empirical researcher to demonstrate the affinities between the exposed and non-
exposed economies using observed quantifiable characteristics. In addition, this
project will study how to measure uncertainty about the quality of the
comparison control groups using time series information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of propensity score matching estimators and
estimators based on data imputed by 'hot deck 'are important problems empirical
research in economics. Moreover, the study of these properties will entail the
development and application of new analytical methods in econometrics. The
methods developed in this research will also be used to write software for the
STATA econometric package for wider use. The project will also help in the
efficient development and implementation of public policy. &lt;br/&gt;