* 0350039
* Collaborative Research: Geophysical Mapping of the East Antarctic Shield Adjacent to the Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* John Goodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,586.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the Transantarctic
Mountains and an adjacent region of East Antarctica. The East Antarctic shield
is one of Earth's oldest and largest cratonic assemblies, with a long-lived
Archean to early Paleozoic history. Long-standing interest in the geologic
evolution of this shield has been rekindled over the past decade by tectonic
models linking East Antarctica with other Precambrian crustal elements in the
Rodinia and Gondwanaland supercontinents. It is postulated that the Pacific
margin of East Antarctica was rifted from Laurentia during late Neoproterozoic
breakup of Rodinia, and it then developed as an active plate boundary during
subsequent amalgamation of Gondwanaland in the earliest Paleozoic. If true, the
East Antarctic shield played a key role in supercontinent transformation at a
time of global changes in plate configuration, terrestrial surficial process,
sea level, and marine geochemistry and biota. A better understanding of the
geological evolution of the East Antarctic shield is therefore critical for
studying Precambrian crustal evolution in general, as well as resource
distribution, biosphere evolution, and glacial and climate history during later
periods of Earth history. Because of nearly complete coverage by the polar ice
cap, however, Antarctica remains the single most geologically unexplored
continent. Exposures of cratonic basement are largely limited to coastal
outcrops in George V Land and Terre Adelie (Australian sector), the Prince
Charles Mountains and Enderby Land (Indian sector), and Queen Maud Land (African
sector), where the geology is reasonably well-known. By contrast, little is
known about the composition and structure of the shield interior. Given the
extensive ice cover, collection of airborne geophysical data is the most cost-
effective method to characterize broad areas of sub-ice basement and expand our
knowledge of the East Antarctic shield interior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will conduct an airborne magnetic survey (coupled with ground-based
gravity measurements) across an important window into the shield where it is
exposed in the Nimrod Glacier area of the central Transantarctic Mountains.
Specific goals are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Characterize the magnetic and gravity
signature of East Antarctic crustal basement exposed at the Ross margin (Nimrod
Group),&lt;br/&gt;2. Extend the magnetic data westward along a corridor across
the polar ice cap in order to image the crust in ice-covered areas,&lt;br/&gt;3.
Obtain magnetic data over the Ross Orogen in order to image the ice-covered
boundary between basement and supracrustal rocks, allowing us to better
constrain the geometry of fundamental Ross structures, and&lt;br/&gt;4. Use the
shape, trends, wavelengths, and amplitudes of magnetic anomalies to define
magnetic domains in the shield, common building blocks for continent-scale
studies of Precambrian geologic structure and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-resolution airborne magnetic data will be
collected along a transect extending from exposed rocks of the Nimrod Group
across the adjacent polar ice cap. The Nimrod Group represents the only bona
fide Archean-Proterozoic shield basement exposed for over 2500 km of the Pacific
margin of Antarctica. This survey will characterize the geologically well-known
shield terrain in this sector using geophysical methods for the first time. This
baseline over the exposed shield will allow for better interpretation of
geophysical patterns in other ice-covered regions and can be used to target
future investigations. In collaboration with colleagues from the BGR (Germany),
a tightly-spaced, "draped" helicopter magnetic survey will be flown during the
2003-04 austral summer, to be complemented by ground measurements of gravity
over the exposed basement. Data reduction, interpretation and geological
correlation will be completed in the second year. This project will enhance the
education of students, the advancement of under-represented groups, the research
instrumentation of the U.S. Antarctic Program, partnerships between the federal
government and institutions of higher education, and cooperation between
national research programs. It will benefit society through the creation of new
basic knowledge about the Antarctic continent, which in turn may help with
applied research in other fields such as the glacial history of
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;