* 0350833
* Robust Macroeconomic Implications of Constrained Efficiency
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Narayana Kocherlakota, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2006
* USD 145,854.00

Representative agent models have been a useful paradigm for macroeconomics for
at least twenty years. Despite their many uses, there are well-known deviations
between their predictions and macroeconomic data. For example, representative
agent models cannot account for the large difference between stock and bond
returns observed in the United States and other countries (at least with
standard formulations of preferences). This proposal asks the following
question. Representative agent models essentially assume that the allocation of
resources across people in the economy is Pareto optimal. Can models in which
allocations are constrained Pareto optimal do a better job
empirically?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of intellectual merit, the proposal
brings together two previously disparate fields of inquiry: dynamic contracting
and empirical macroeconomics. There is a large theoretical literature on the
properties of Pareto optima in dynamic settings with private information. There
is a large empirical literature on the failings of the representative agent
model especially in regards to asset pricing. This project uses a new result in
the former literature to fix remaining problems in the latter. The novel
ingredient in building this connection is the use of cross-sectional data on
consumption. The data used come from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). The
CEX has only a limited panel dimension. However, the evaluation of the empirical
implications of the theory does not require high-quality longitudinal data on
consumption, but only a time-series of cross-sections - which is exactly the
content of the CEX.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impact, the results
of this research will be disseminated broadly through scientific journals and
(in simplified form) through general audience publications like the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review. The societal consequences are
potentially large. It is natural to ask whether the empirical failings of the
representative agent model imply a role for government interventions of some
kind. The answer to this question is negative if the proposed empirical work
finds that these failings can be rationalized through private information
considerations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;