* 0350443
* Historical Ecology of the California Sea Mussel and Purple Sea Urchin Inferred from Multiple Gene Genealogies
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Grant Pogson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/2008
* USD 369,144.00

Pogson: Historical ecology of the California sea mussel and purple sea urchin
inferred from multiple gene genealogies.

Climatic fluctuations throughout the Pleistocene are known to have had profound
effects on the origins, extinctions, and geographical distributions of marine
taxa. However, the effects of these dramatic changes in sea level, sea surface
temperature, current patterns, and upwelling regimes on the evolutionary
genetics of marine species remains unclear. The fossil record lacks the
resolution to reasonably estimate historical abundance and is incapable of
providing estimates of important parameters such as a species evolutionary
effective population size (Ne). Recent advances in coalescent theory provide
exciting new opportunities to estimate evolutionary Ne, to infer population
growth histories, and to explicitly test various demographic scenarios
(including population bottlenecks) through the examination of the structures of
gene genealogies obtained from multiple independent loci. This study will
investigate the historical ecologies of two abundant and widespread NE Pacific
marine taxa (the California sea mussel, Mytilus californianus, and the purple
sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) through the reconstruction of allelic
genealogies at multiple nuclear and mitochondrial gene regions in samples that
span the geographic ranges of both species (Baja California to SE Alaska). The
large genealogies (150 alleles per locus) obtained from the multiple independent
loci will provide an unparalleled ability to infer both species evolutionary
effective population sizes and allow explicit tests of alternative demographic
hypotheses. The possibility of range fragmentation and bottleneck events on
mussel and sea urchin populations over the recent Pleistocene will be assessed
by (i) applying a coalescent-based maximum-likelihood method that tests for the
concordance of the timing and severity of diversity reducing events across
multiple independent genealogies, and (ii) performing coalescent simulations
that will impose population fragmentation and bottleneck events coincident with
known glacial maxima over the past 500,000 years. The genetic signature of
northward range expansion will also be tested by inferring the directionality of
gene flow and by comparing the ages of mutations and the growth histories of
northern and southern populations (that have a fossil record persisting
throughout the Pleistocene). The results are expected to provide fundamental new
insights into how the Pleistocene period has influenced the evolutionary
histories of marine taxa in the NE Pacific region. Broader impacts of the
proposed research: Understanding how the environmental history of the
Pleistocene has affected present-day marine communities is a fundamental yet
largely unresolved question. This research project will significantly advance
our understanding in this area by inferring the historical abundances and
population genetic histories of two ecologically important marine species of the
NE Pacific region. The genealogical approach offers an exciting new framework to
link paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic research with ecological and
evolutionary studies on extant marine species. When extended to other intertidal
and subtidal species, these coalescent-based methods will provide new insights
into the stability of marine communities and the susceptibility of individual
taxa to historical climate change. This project will also continue the strong
tradition at UCSC of involving undergraduate students in research, aid in the
training of minority and graduate students, and fund one postdoctoral position.