* 0350729
* Last Passage Percolation and Random Matrix
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Jinho Baik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 60,135.00

PI: Jinho Baik, Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0208557&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is about the
longest increasing subsequence problems in&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics, which can
also be interpreted as last passage percolation problems
in&lt;br/&gt;probability/statistical mechanics. We consider a maximal passage
time in a 2-dimensional lattice with a random time assigned at each lattice
site. The basic interest is the &lt;br/&gt;probabilistic properties of the
maximal passage time as the size of lattice becomes large. Other equivalent
forms of questions include a card game, random growth models in 2-dimension,
interacting particle systems, queuing theory, directed polymers&lt;br/&gt;and
so-called ``vicious'' random walks. Recent progresses show that there
are&lt;br/&gt;interesting connections of this field to the random matrix theory.
Random matrix theory has been an active field of research in both mathematics
and physics for last 50 years. We would like to understand more on this
connection and also investigate further relations between these seemingly
different fields. This project is a further work in this
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a greater framework, the subject
of this project can be regarded as a work on the basic properties of a
maximization process in a random environment when the size of system becomes
large. Such process could be growth of crystal, shape of fire front of paper
burning, or fastest passage in a computer or cellular network. These problems
are also subjects in statistics, statistical physics, and engineering. One of
the main goal of this project is an investigation of various universal
properties, which are independent of the microstructure of the models, of a
class of systems when the size of model becomes large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;