* 0350341
* SLC Catalyst: Childhood Contexts and Dispositions to Learning
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Ruth Small, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Kozhevnikov
* 12/31/2006
* USD 250,000.00

While no one can refute the critical importance of what happens inside the
classroom, what happens outside the classroom can be equally if not more
important in ultimate learning outcomes. These external influences and
experiences need further in-depth exploration and integration into formal
education in order to maximize educational achievement. Due to the varied and
diverse scope of these outside factors and the challenge of weaving together
external and internal components of learning, a center approach is the natural
vehicle for coordinating, conducting and implementing this research. Such future
research will address the interrelationships among (1) the contexts that impact
learning including families, society and culture, health systems, community and
community-based organizations, technology, transitional experiences, as well as
schools and other formal educational settings; (2) dispositions to learning
including motivation and curiosity, adaptability, activity level, temperament,
attention, and attitudes toward and skills in learning from and with others; and
(3) foundational academic skills including skills in reading, writing,
interpretation and manipulation of visual information, oral expression,
numeracy, and information literacy. This Science of Learning Center (SLC)
catalyst grant will fund the study and dissemination of information concerning
the ways in which institutional and non-institutional contexts of development in
childhood (birth through grade 6) affect the development of children's learning
and dispositions to learning, particularly the development of children's
foundational academic skills. &lt;br/&gt; The outcomes of this project will be
to: (1) develop a research road map, (2) demonstrate the success of new cross-
disciplinary activities, and (3) foster and formalize the range of partnerships
essential for a full Center proposal. The research road map will evolve from the
outcomes of a series of guided workshops; workshops' proceedings will culminate
in a report presenting a strategic plan for a Center. New multidisciplinary
research activities will be fostered through the support of graduate and
undergraduate honors students' summer pilot research projects; through these
students, new or expanded multidisciplinary collaborations designed to address
questions at the intersections of the sciences of learning's intellectual
boundaries will be realized. Concerted efforts will be made to encourage
participation of students from underrepresented groups, including the disabled.
Existing and new partnerships essential for the range of research, education and
outreach activities encompassing a full Center grant will be fostered using a
variety of formal and informal activities, such as a seminar series, local
workshops and research-education outreach programs with local community-based
organizations for elementary and middle school students, particularly those from
minority and disadvantaged groups living in urban areas. Broader impacts include
(1) the contributions of the road map to the larger sciences of learning
research agenda, (2) opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to
pursue new lines of research and experience collaboration across disciplines,
(3) nurturing collaborations and new relationships evolving into future
innovative research projects and, (4) classroom applications to benefit students
and society.&lt;br/&gt;