* 0350229
* The Deployment of a Buoy-Mounted Aerosol Sampler on the Bermuda Testbed Mooring
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Edward Sholkovitz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2006
* USD 220,896.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0350229&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Iron
Hypothesis was built around the argument that phytoplankton production in large
regions of the world's oceans is limited by iron. A large number of laboratory
studies, field projects, and modeling efforts continue to make this area of
research a hot topic within biological and chemical oceanography. Iron
fertilization from ships does result in the enhanced biological productivity of
surface waters. In contrast, enhanced ocean productivity, following the
atmospheric deposition of naturally occurring iron, is not well
documented.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Looking to apply new technologies that link
atmospheric processes with chemical and biological oceanography, a researcher
from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will deploy a buoy-mounted aerosol
sampler on the Bermuda Testbed Mooring (BTM) buoy with the primary objective of
producing a time-series for the concentrations of mineral dust, Fe and other
geochemically important elements. Aerosol sampling will start before and end
after the period of the large-scale transport of African dust to the Sargasso
Sea and Bermuda, which occurs in July and August. If the instrument works as
designed, the proposed study will produce the first time-series to have captured
and quantified dust events at the air-sea boundary from a moored buoy. The
aerosol sampler deployment will coincide with Boyle's deployment of the MITESS
water sampler under the BTM buoy. This joint deployment will allow for a
comparison between the temporal variations in the atmospheric deposition of
mineral dust (Fe) and the surface water concentrations of Fe. While the proposed
project involves testing new technologies, it has implications for drawing
longer-term connections between iron deposition, primary productivity and
ecosystem dynamics. Atmospheric concentrations and deposition rates of iron,
derived from buoy-mounted instruments, can also provide observational data that
can be compared to model simulations of iron deposition to the ocean.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;