* 0350796
* Science and Democracy Network Workshop, Cambridge, MA, July 2004
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Sheila Jasanoff, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 12/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

This grant provides travel support for participants in the third of a series of
annual workshops on Science and Democracy, to be held in Cambridge,
Massachusetts at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government. The
workshop's primary goals are to (1) improve scholarship in science and
technology studies (S&amp;TS) on science and democracy, and (2) train younger
S&amp;TS scholars to participate more effectively in decision processes and
public affairs. The workshop advances these objectives by (a) promoting
scholarship on the democratic steering, conduct, and uses of science and
technology; (b) improving the quality and dissemination of participants'
research; (c) connecting the normative and political analysis of science and
technology more closely to work in adjacent disciplines; (d) communicating
perspectives from S&amp;TS to policy actors and contributing to social problem-
solving; and (e) creating an international network of scholars and practitioners
interested in the democratic governance of science and technology. The workshop
will focus around three core themes of institutions, citizenship and
participation, and representation and communication and provide opportunities
for critical intellectual exchange, synthesis, and cross-disciplinary contact.
The workshop's broader impacts include the training of young professionals,
fostering national and international scientific communication, and building an
improved knowledge base for public policy. Young scholars participating in the
workshop will benefit from networking opportunities, scrutiny of methodological
and theoretical issues, and engagement with senior scholars, scientists, and
policy practitioners. The workshop will highlight policy issues of importance to
the United States and the global community and promote dialogue among an
interdisciplinary, worldwide network of scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Society for Social Studies of Science (4S), an international and
interdisciplinary society, will co-sponsor the workshop. Participants will be
recruited from a diverse array of professional communities, including the
European Association for Studies of Science and Technology, the American
Political Science Association, History of Science Society, and Society for
History of Technology, among others. A website will publicize the workshop and
provide information about its outcomes. Important results will be disseminated
through 4S journals and newsletters and in other venues as appropriate.
&lt;br/&gt;