* 0350498
* Synthetic, Structural and Mechanistic Studies of s- and p-Block Metal Complexes with Multiply Bonded and Other Reactive Functionalities
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Gerard Parkin, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 05/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research by Gerard F. R. Parkin of the Department of Chemistry,
Columbia University, on the synthesis of novel main group compounds. The s- and
p-block compounds prepared will feature currently unknown functionalities, such
as zinc complexes that bear terminal chalcogenido ligands and gallium complexes
with terminal pnictide ligands. Molecules of this type are unknown and are of
intrinsic fundamental interest in view of possible terminal-ligand to metal
multiple bonding. The syntheses of these complexes will rely upon the use of
ligands constructed so as to stabilize the functionalities under investigation.
These include various tris-(pyrazolyl)borate and bis- and
tris-(mercaptoimidazolyl)hydroborate ligands, C3-symmetric tridentate ligands
based on a benzene platform, atranes ligands, terphenoxide ligands, and pyrrolyl
ligands. Specific attention will be given to complexes that have novel
structures but have a compositional relationship to the materials that have
already found industrial applications The main group elements have a variety of
important applications in synthetic chemistry, solid state materials, and
catalytic reactions. This project aims at understanding some of the unusual
bonding and structural properties of some of the heavier members of the s- and
p-block of the periodic table. Understanding of zinc and gallium bonding to
terminal ligands may provide some insight into gas phase routes to materials.
The project will involve undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students. The
PI and his students will be involved in outreach to local schools.