* 0350211
* CAREER: Robust On-Line Location and Routing for Urban Service Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Elise Miller-Hooks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2005
* USD 110,543.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Robust On-Line Location and Routing for
Urban Service Systems&lt;br/&gt;Elise Miller-Hooks&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No.
9875305&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the development of the
conceptual framework and&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic steps for real-time location and
routing decisions in dynamically&lt;br/&gt;changing environments for urban
service operations, including emergency&lt;br/&gt;response services, vehicles
carrying hazardous materials, and response teams to&lt;br/&gt;incidents
involving hazardous materials. Response time and the associated&lt;br/&gt;level
of service of many of these urban service operations, such as
ambulance,&lt;br/&gt;police, fire and emergency repair, depend on travel times
experienced on the&lt;br/&gt;roadways and the relative location of the call for
service to that of the&lt;br/&gt;response vehicle. Thus, optimal location and
routing decisions are vital to&lt;br/&gt;the performance of many emergency
service operations. Real-time information&lt;br/&gt;can be used to make improved
tactical and operational location and routing&lt;br/&gt;decisions for emergency
services and other urban operations, including the&lt;br/&gt;transport of
hazardous materials. However, it is critical that procedures
that&lt;br/&gt;dynamically respond to current conditions on the state of the
network consider&lt;br/&gt;the time-varying and uncertain nature of future
travel conditions in order to&lt;br/&gt;generate robust solutions; i.e.
solutions that will remain optimal, or nearly&lt;br/&gt;optimal, despite
variations in travel conditions and that can be applied to a&lt;br/&gt;variety
of situations. The inherent stochastic and dynamic characteristics
of&lt;br/&gt;future travel conditions, including the probability of arc or node
failures, as&lt;br/&gt;well as the spatial and temporal correlation in travel
conditions and the&lt;br/&gt;possibility of multiple conflicting objectives, are
considered in this work. &lt;br/&gt;Accompanying this research effort is an
integrated educational initiative to&lt;br/&gt;provide students with fundamental
knowledge and skills drawn from multiple&lt;br/&gt;disciplines to allow them to
solve a broad range of difficult problems, to&lt;br/&gt;integrate research and
teaching through inclusion of real-world problems in&lt;br/&gt;coursework, to
impart an interest in transportation graduate studies and&lt;br/&gt;promote
retention of women and underrepresented minorities in engineering,
and&lt;br/&gt;to develop skills in using non-lecture based pedagogical
techniques for&lt;br/&gt;improved comprehension of fundamental engineering
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;