* 0351558
* Adaptive Business Location, Survival, and Sustainability in Transitional Market Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Harley Johansen, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2008
* USD 104,517.00

This project addresses the problem of business survival through spatial or non-
spatial (e.g., management and operational) changes in the context of foreign
direct investment (FDI) into post-socialist, emerging market countries. In the
case of former socialist transition countries, FDI inflow is primarily from the
west for labor and other factor cost advantages, as has been witnessed over the
last decade. The investigators expect that firms should become more efficient in
their location choice after experiencing the transition and its effect on their
operations and markets, yet adaptive behavior in ex-socialist settings has
received minimal attention in the literature. A model of the adaptation process
is proposed that considers the original FDI location as one made with good
information about the new market, or one based on inadequate assessment of the
conditions that affected the firm's operation. Either way, a firm can choose a
good or bad location, resulting in the possible need for adaptation through
management or location change, unless it becomes "adopted" by the system. The
decision to stay in place or move to another location will be made on the basis
of firm characteristics and options available. Examples of spatial adaptation
through location change may include clustering, or clustering may be a form of
adoption where other firms gather around an original FDI company. To study the
adaptation process, this project uses survivors from an earlier NSF study of the
original FDI firms from Nordic countries that entered the Baltic region after
Soviet collapse in 1991. It compares adaptation trends and reasons with firm
characteristics such as size, source country, host setting, and original
location decisions. Data from the earlier study will be compared with current
data for each surviving company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will further
basic understanding of adaptive behavior by firms in a new setting. By selecting
survivors who entered the fast-changing and high-risk post-Soviet Baltic region
at roughly the same time, the project should help answer some questions about
the importance of initial location decisions and the need for location change to
survive in the emerging market setting. The investigators also will be able to
determine whether geographic patterns of clustering have developed and if these
are viewed as important in the firms' survival strategies. The longitudinal
study of these firms provides a unique opportunity to study survival,
adaptation, and change during the first ten years of the transition to market
economy. Because FDI is an important development strategy in transition
countries, this project also will provide needed evidence of surviving
companies' adaptive strategies and the reasons for needed changes during the
first ten years of the transition. The broader impact of the study could be
policies that are better designed to alleviate these problems if governments
understand how they affect FDI (and local)
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;