* 0351909
* Collaborative Research- Penetrating Foreign Markets:  A Firm and Product-Level Investigation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2011
* Samuel Kortum, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 138,567.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0351909&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
NBER&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: ENHANCING HUMAN PERFORMANCE&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Kortum, Samuel S&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE: Collaborative Research
- Penetrating Foreign Markets: A Firm and Product-Level Investigation
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid technological innovation, international
diffusion of technology, and integration of world markets have transformed the
global economy in the last three decades. While these have been investigated at
the aggregate and sectoral levels, individual firms that generate and respond to
such changes are less studied. This research investigates the processes of
innovation and globalization that integrates data at the scale of firms,
products, sectors, and nations. It develops a methodology to investigate product
innovation and entry into foreign markets. The methodology characterizes how
firms compete in selling across national markets separated by trade barriers.
The model of competition across space is linked to a model of firm dynamics
involving the innovation of new products and the obsolescence of old ones. This
methodology is applied to an extensive administrative dataset of private-sector
French manufacturing firms since 1986. These data are unusual in that they
indicate, for each firm in each year, the amount exported of each product to
individual countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of the research is to quantify
the costs of selling in a foreign market. Questions addressed are: To what
extent is the cost of selling in a foreign market fixed or variable? To what
extent are fixed costs sunk or recurrent? Do firms have individual "networks" of
export destinations? A benefit of quantifying the costs of exporting is to
accurately assess the benefits of different forms of market integration. For
example, a finding that the fixed cost of entering a national market is
substantial suggests that small countries are particularly likely to benefit
from market integration. A second goal is to relate aggregate trade flows to
what goes on at the firm level. How is the variation in export destination
reflected in the quantities that individual firms sell and the participation of
firms in exporting? This knowledge will provide insight into how various
scenarios for the global economy are reflected in the performance of individual
producers. A third goal is a better understanding of the role of exports in the
life-cycle of firms. Are there connections between product innovation, firm
growth, and penetration of foreign markets?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
contributes to our understanding of the private firms in the international
economy. The new methodology also allows us to integrate data sets at the scale
of firms, sectors, and nations as well as enhance our ability to exploit the
increasing array of available social, economic, and technological indicators to
study fundamental global phenomena using theoretical models, advanced
statistical techniques, and computer technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;