* 0351999
* Cycling of  Vitamin B12 in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Sergio Sanudo-Wilhelmy, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2008
* USD 331,692.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-035199&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The organic regulation of
primary production in the ocean is not well understood, despite the fact that
more than 65 species of phytoplankton are known to be auxotrophic for vitamin
B12, meaning they require exogenous supplies for growth. While a major research
effort has been directed in the last 10 years to understand the importance of
trace metals and other inorganic micronutrients on phytoplankton production, the
role of organic growth factors such vitamin B12 has been overlooked. The lack of
clear understanding of the cycling of vitamin B12 in the marine environment has
also hindered the understanding of methane production, the formation of organic
chelators (which may control the bioavailability of some bioactive trace metals
such as cobalt), and phytoplankton assemblage shifts (from vitamin-requiring to
non-vitamin-requiring species) observed in some regions of the world
ocean.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, the lack of availability for a
quantifying B12 in a quick and reliable technique has hindered the progress of
vitamin B12 studies in the marine environment. In this study, researchers at
SUNY at Stony Brook have developed a new method for the direct determination of
vitamin B12 in seawater by pre-concentration using solid phase extraction,
quantification using reversed phase HPLC with gradient elution, and detection by
UV-visible absorption. By using this new technique the researchers will study
the marine cycling of vitamin B12 in various biogeochemical provinces. This
information is needed to evaluate the importance of this vitamin in the marine
environment, as well as to validate previous studies carried out using the
bioassay technique. The field study sites have been selected to give the maximum
amount of information about the cycling of vitamin B12 in a broad range of
marine environments (Southern Ocean, Sargasso Sea, upwelling regions of central
and Baja California, the Cariaco Basin and a coastal environment). These B12
measurements will be interpreted using a suite of analyses to determine the
dominant phytoplankton groups in the water being sampled, as well as analyses of
DOC, POC, PON, chlorophyll a, inorganic nutrients and bacterial biomass. The
determination of B12 cycling in contrasting oceanographic regimes will not only
provide a better understanding of the processes influencing the "biological
pump" but also of methane in the world ocean. Therefore, the application of this
new vitamin B12 method has the potential to play a vital role in furthering our
understanding of how the carbon sequestration capacity of the ocean could be
enhanced. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;