* 0351903
* Collaborative Research: CROSSTEX -Wave Breaking and Boundary Layer Processes and the Resulting Sediment Suspension in the Surf  Zone
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Diane Foster, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2008
* USD 271,246.00

Intellectual Merit: The CROs-Shore Sediment Transport EXperiment (CROSSTEX)
project has been developed to fill in the gap between complex field conditions
and small-scale laboratory experiments. This project will focus on the physical
mechanisms of nearshore hydrodynamics and sediment transport in the surf zone
and in particular the relative importance of wave breaking turbulence and bottom
boundary layer turbulence on nearshore sediment suspension processes. The Large
Wave Flume at Oregon State University serves as the focal point for this
project, and the project combines the unique talents of researchers who have
traditionally worked in the three areas of laboratory experiments, field work,
and numerical modeling and provides an opportunity to advance the state of the
science in nearshore modeling of sediment transport. One of the expected outcome
is a better understanding at space- and time-scales relevant to process-based
models and a set of benchmark data sets for validation of numerical models. The
latest advances in instrumentation to measure turbulent stresses in the water
column and boundary layer, advances in web-based data archival and retrieval for
data sharing and collaboration, and the latest implementation of numerical codes
and computer resources will be combined. For example, instrumentation and
experimental techniques will be combined into three sub-arrays for observing
three phase flow (instantaneous velocity, sediment suspension, and void
fraction) with each overlapping and focusing on a particular part of the water
column: the surface layer, below trough level, and the bottom boundary layer
including bottom roughness. The numerical modeling will be divided into three
sub-areas to resolve issues of space/time scales and varying in complexity
(e.g., one- or two-phase flow; complexity of turbulence closure schemes).

Broader Impacts: The Wave Research Laboratory (WRL) is an NSF REU (Research
Experience for Undergraduates) site for nearshore science and hazard mitigation
(http://wave.oregonstate.edu/). Dr. Cox is the lead PI for the site and 3 co-PIs
on the two other CROSSTEX proposals serve as faculty mentors. Each summer, these
mentors and their graduate students work with 10 talented undergraduate on
active research projects with an overall goal of encouraging these students to
consider graduate school. Half of the REU students are from under-represented
groups, and half come from outside of OSU. For Years 1 and 2 of this project, at
least 5 of the REU students will be involved in the CROSSTEX project. The WRL is
actively engaged in K-12 educational programs and outreach as part of its
designation as an NSF-NEES site. The WRL is currently working with education and
outreach people and programs to develop a comprehensive K-12 education and
outreach program which will be used to highlight the CROSSTEX project. During
this four-year project, several graduate students at OSU, Ohio State, and U.
Florida will receive training in sophisticated experimental and numerical
techniques.