* 0351020
* EITM: Behavior Patterns, Bystanders, and Performance Expectations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Lisa Walker, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2007
* USD 171,769.00

SES - 0351020 Murray Webster Lisa Rashotte Joseph Whitmeyer University of North
Carolina, Charlotte

The project plans to develop, assess, and improve theoretical models that
explain the effects of certain kinds of behaviors on inequality structures in
small groups. While social scientists long have recognized the importance of
behavior in affecting impressions of competence, these models are the first to
permit precise predictions of those effects, and to integrate the effects with
other sources of inequality such as status differences among individuals.
Variant models, developed from a well-established tradition of status
characteristics, performance expectations, and group structures, will be
constructed and tested in laboratory situations designed to permit a high degree
of control over initial situations and good visibility of predicted effects. The
theoretical outcomes of the project will be increased understanding of causes
and consequences of inequality in small groups, and improved models of face-to-
face behavior. The theoretical work adds to a cumulative body of knowledge
regarding status and behavior developed by many investigators at different
universities since the 1960s. The empirical work develops new techniques to
create theoretically meaningful behavior and observe effects, and puts
theoretical extensions on a sound evidential footing. Broader impacts: (1)
Benefits to society: Because status hierarchies and status behaviors are
ubiquitous, this research advances precise understanding of factors affecting
most social groups. The PIs intend to predict how behaviors affect hierarchies,
and to identify behavioral techniques for weakening or reinforcing effects of
status advantages and disadvantages, such as those resulting from gender and
ethnicity. (2) Broad dissemination to enhance scientific and technological
understanding: Results will be published in academic journals and in non-
technical outlets where appropriate. The data, as well as operational programs
developed will be made publicly available to other researchers and students. (3)
Advancing discovery while promoting teaching, training and learning: Graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved in most parts of this modeling
process, especially in developing the experimental designs, running of the
laboratory studies, interviewing, and analyzing data. Results, data and
experimental designs will be incorporated in the PIs courses and courses taught
at other universities, as well as in chapters of college textbooks.