* 0351205
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Time Series Models for the Analysis of International Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2005
* John Freeman, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2005
* USD 116,824.00

International war and conflict threaten the lives and well-being of millions of
people. On the basis of theoretical work in international relations, the co-
investigators develop multivariate, Bayesian vector autoregression time series
models (BVARs) for short and medium term conflict forecasting and for the
analysis of counterfactuals of various kinds, more specifically, Markov-
switching models of this type (MS-BVARs) for the Balkans, Israeli-Palestinian,
and India-Pakistan conflicts. The models will incorporate and test theoretical
work on conflict phase shifts as well as the results of research on the impact
of elections and democratic transitions on conflict. Scaled events data from two
sources (KEDS/TABARI and IDEA) will be used to estimate the model. The models
will yield short and medium term, case specific, quantitative predictions of
conflict and cooperation; they eventually will incorporate assessments of the
welfare consequences of conflict. Finally, by developing priors for the model
coefficients and constructing posterior inferences for the models' predictions,
for one of the first times in political science, explicit assessments of the
impact of model uncertainty on (political) forecasts accuracy will be produced.
Intellectual Merit. The proposed has theoretical and practical value. To begin,
it will produce statistically sound characterizations of conflict phase
sequences. The investigators test formally for the number of phases in the
Balkans, Israeli-Palestinian, and Indian-Pakistani conflicts, and also provide
numerical estimates of the transition probabilities between these phases (along
with measures of the precision of these estimates). They then will produce
quantitative, weekly and monthly predictions of the future course of the three
conflicts conditional on the realization of specific conflict phases and on the
steady state probabilities of the conflict phases for each case. In addition,
the fitted MS-BVARs will illuminate similarities and differences in the three
conflicts' dynamics. For instance, the fitted models will show if there are
common degrees of persistence in them, the extent to which the three conflicts
display the same patterns of reciprocity and triangularity, whether the
conflicts tend toward the same long-term (fixed) mean levels of conflict, and
whether provision for electoral forces and transitions to (from) democracy
enhance the predictive power of the MS-BVARs. Impulse response analysis will
yield insights into the possible impact of hypothetical, surprise peace
initiatives by third parties (conditional on the conflict phase). The methods of
conditional forecasting (with the BVARs and MS-BVARs) will be used to analyze
counterfactual histories of the conflicts. For example, by inserting
counterfactual variables for elections in Pakistan in the late 1990s we will
examine of the counterfactual consequences of that country not experiencing a
democratic reversal on its conflict with India. Broader impact. The results will
be disseminated in several ways. First, a web-site will be constructed. The
website will contain the investigators' computer code, data, and examples. It
also will contain a tutorial on how to construct and apply BVARs and MS-BVARs
for selected international conflicts. Second, the investigators will offer
short-courses on how to build and apply MS-BVARs. These courses will be offered
at such gatherings as the International Studies Association (ISA) , Peace
Science Society (PSS), and American Political Science Association (APSA)
meetings. Every effort will be to include "unrepresentative groups" in these
short course and training sessions. Scientifically, the project will demonstrate
the usefulness of events data in political forecasting, and advance our
understanding of Bayesian time series methods in the social sciences. American
and global society will benefit from being better able to anticipate
international conflict weeks and months ahead and also being able to evaluate
counterfactuals of various kinds.

