* 0351576
* Impacts of Eddies on Zooplankton Community Structure and Biogeochemical Cycling in the Open Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Deborah Steinberg, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2007
* USD 285,000.00

The distribution of plankton in relation to the physical structure of the water
column results in patchiness, which can significantly impact biogeochemical
cycling and production of higher trophic levels. The currents, fronts and eddies
that comprise the oceanic mesoscale, sometimes referred to as the internal
weather of the sea, are highly energetic and ubiquitous features of ocean
circulation. Dynamical consequences of these phenomena include perturbation of
the chemical and biological environment that can dramatically impact
biogeochemical cycling in the ocean. Recent evidence suggests that
&lt;br/&gt;mesoscale eddies are an important nutrient transport mechanism in the
oligotrophic subtropical gyres, and that they are important in controlling the
structure and productivity of marine planktonic communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is an intensive field study of mesozooplankton
community structure associated with mesoscale eddies to compliment a recently
funded NSF project, Impacts of Eddies and Mixing on Biogeochemical Cycling in
the Open Ocean: Regulation by a Complex Biological System. Given the integral
role zooplankton play in food webs and flux of material out of the surface
waters, this study expects to find that zooplankton contribute significantly to
the overall trophic energy transfer and flux in this system. This complimentary
study will address the following questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. How do the specific
physical/ chemical/ biological characteristics of mesoscale eddy features affect
the spatial and temporal distribution of mesozooplankton? &lt;br/&gt;2. How do
eddies affect the vertical migration behavior of mesozooplankton at the
population and/or individual level? &lt;br/&gt;3. How do eddies affect the
physiology (body condition) of mesozooplankton at the population and/or
individual level? &lt;br/&gt;4. How do differences in mesozooplankton dynamics
within or outside eddy features affect vertical flux of carbon and associated
bio-elements? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Measurements of zooplankton biomass,
species composition, diel vertical migration behavior, body condition, and
contribution to vertical flux will be simultaneous with other ongoing physical,
chemical, and biological measurements within a series of existing cruises. The
goals are to advance our understanding of the complex interactions between
physics and biology in eddies, and to elucidate the role mesoscale features play
in structuring zooplankton communities and influencing biogeochemical cycling.
Ultimately, this natural perturbation experiment could provide critical
information about how the ocean has responded to environmental changes in the
past, and how it might do so in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the study include a benefit to society by infusing ocean science
education into both graduate and K-12 education, as well as informing the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;This project will coordinate education and outreach
activities with the existing eddy program. This includes the support of a young
investigator at the beginning of his career, curriculum development and
enhancement, development of content for public lectures and web-based curriculum
for science teachers, and participation in real-time web casts of cruise
activities. &lt;br/&gt;