* 0351523
* Bayesian hierarchical models for inference with behavorial data
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Jeffrey Rouder, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 06/30/2008
* USD 299,998.00

This project will develop new methodology in Bayesian hierarchical analysis in
order to provide efficient inference for a number of nonlinear models of mental
processing. Specific methodological goals include: (1) developing new
semiparametric methods and (2) developing and implementing model selection
strategies and Bayes factors appropriate for the proposed Bayesian hierarchical
models. New semiparametric methods will enable psychologists to critically
examine proposed models as well as analyze data without making undue
assumptions. Model selection methods and Bayes factors in particular are
Bayesian analogues to hypothesis testing and are crucial tools for verifying or
disproving psychological models. The new methodology will be applied in two
substantive domains of experimental psychology: (1) the measurement of learning
or skill acquisition curves, and (2) the assessment of conscious and unconscious
influences in memory. This basic methodological research, along with the
proposed applications, will provide the tools for better understanding of
learning and memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental psychology has provided
profound insights into the nature of perception, learning, and memory. The
current research addresses a flaw in experimental practice. As psychological
theories progress, they tend to become nonlinear. Unfortunately, unmodeled
variance in nonlinear settings generally distort inference, making the link from
data to theory tenuous. Psychological research is characterized by several
sources of variance, including those from the selection of participants, test
items, and moment-to-moment fluctuations in performance. The presence of these
distinct sources presents a significant challenge to nonlinear theory testing.
The project will develop new statistical tools for modeling variability at
several levels in specific, pertinent, nonlinear models of psychological
process. The new methods will then be used to address several long-standing
controversial issues in how learning occurs and how memory operates.