* 0351241
* Climatic Influences on the Spatial and Temporal Variability of Aerosols over North America
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Scott Sheridan, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2007
* USD 99,971.00

Aerosols play an important role in the climate system by scattering and
absorbing solar radiation and by affecting the physical properties of clouds.
Despite the importance of aerosols, the processes that determine their spatial
and temporal variability are not well understood. Furthermore, all methods for
quantifying turbidity, which is the total amount of aerosol in the atmosphere,
suffer from a major constraint in that they require cloudless sky conditions.
This restriction produces gaps in the turbidity record and a sampling bias,
which has led to questionable inferences about the variability of aerosols. This
research will use meteorological and climatological analyses, together with
aerosol data from 40 stations, to explain temporal and spatial variability in
aerosol properties over continental North America. These analyses will then be
used to provide aerosol climatologies (statistical summaries of aerosol
properties) that will be more representative than those presently available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will permit improved aerosol
parameterizations in regional and global climate models, which will help
elucidate the relative roles of aerosols and greenhouse gases in the climate
system. The research will therefore further our knowledge of the factors that
influence climate and climate change and this will help policy makers prepare
informed climate change policies. &lt;br/&gt;