* 0351530
* Expressive Law in Mixed Motive Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2011
* Richard McAdams, American Bar Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 84,822.00

A fundamental issue for legal theory is to identify the ways that law influences
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand empirically the expressive
effects of law on behavior; that is, the effects that law has apart from
sanctions it imposes. Many theories, including most of law &amp; economics,
point to sanctions as the sole mechanism by which law achieves compliance. By
contrast, most expressive theories tend to follow psychological and sociological
claims that law influences behavior to the extent of its perceived legitimacy.
As a third possibility, a few theorists have suggested coordination as another
mechanism for generating legal compliance, a third reason why people obey the
law. The aim of this project is to test empirically one such theory: that law
influences behavior in coordination games with multiple equilibria by providing
a focal point around which the parties coordinate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A simple
example of coordination is the choice between driving on the left side or right
side&lt;br/&gt;of the road. The fact that we all want to coordinate does not
guarantee that we will all choose the same side of the road. A "focal point"
gives guidance about how to coordinate. More common are mixed-motive
coordination games, in which the parties have conflicting preferences between
choices . e.g., two drivers at a four way intersection each want to proceed
first; yet, they both prefer not to proceed simultaneously and collide. The
overarching hypothesis guiding this research is that in mixed-motive
coordination games, legal actors can influence behavior merely by making a
particular equilibrium focal or salient. To test this claim, a series of
controlled experiments will be run in which the expressive effects of law will
be modeled in the laboratory. The aim of these experiments is to tease apart
several different components of expressive law. Study 1 tests the ostensive
properties of law in which law works by merely pointing to a particular outcome
and increasing its salience. Study 2 tests whether these expressive effects are
enhanced by law's legitimacy (arising from agents who are elected, appointed,
and so on) and by its normativity (articulating what citizens should or should
not do, in terms of rights, obligations, etc.). Study 3 tests a more strenuous
claim: that expressive law can change behavior even when the recommended
behavior is contrary to an existing convention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirical
investigation of the expressive effects of law on behavior will provide
information&lt;br/&gt;that is critical for legislators and policymakers. Because
it is commonly assumed that law works solely through the sanctions it imposes,
legislators draft statutes, sentencing commissions produce guidelines, and
government agencies construct regulations using considering only possible
deterrence (and sometimes, incapacitation). By contrast, empirical data on the
effects of expressive law will inform legal reform by documenting the
circumstances under which law is likely to work simply by providing a focal
point around which parties can coordinate. It is hoped that the proposed
activity will eventually lead to a better understanding of systematic successes
and failures of legal compliance, such as the circumstances under which parties
tend to keep contractual promises, settle rather than litigate disputes, and
comply with regulations regarding smoking and recycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;