* 0351131
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Domestic Violence at the Crossroads: the interaction of the criminal, civil and child protection responses
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Susan Coutin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 12/31/2005
* USD 10,710.00

This study examines three separate but interrelated legal processes with which
female victims of domestic violence interact on a regular basis, and where they
potentially experience a large degree of institutional managing -- the criminal
justice system, the civil protection order process and the child welfare system.
The research will study how the actions of victims are named and interpreted by
those charged with intervening in their cases. Observations will take place in
criminal and civil courts, and work sites, and interviews conducted with 30
institutional workers in San Francisco, California. Focus groups with 30
battered women who have been involved with the state will explicate how users of
the system understand its functioning. Interviews with 20 nationally based
domestic violence advocates will speak to how national policy development
informs work that is being done locally. Worker narratives will provide rich
data to examine how victim actions are read, and whether these readings change
over time or between agencies, and maps that highlight key moments of
simultaneous intervention will be developed. These narratives and maps will make
it possible to identify contradictions that arise within and between
institutional processes and to whom or what blame is affixed when conflicts
arise.&lt;br/&gt;