* 0351834
* Hearing About A Job:  Networks, Information, and Segregation in Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Katherine Stovel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 12/31/2006
* USD 148,527.00

This project examines segregation in labor markets. Empirical evidence reveals
that labor markets are often highly segregated with respect to ascribed
attributes such as race, ethnicity, and gender. Most explanations of this
segregation can be classified as either 'supply-side' (worker qualifications or
preferences) or 'demand-side' (job requirements or discrimination by employers).
Yet neither of these approaches addresses the structure of information that
links potential workers and employers, or how actors evaluate the information
they do acquire. This is unfortunate, since how potential workers hear about
vacant jobs, and how employers view referred employees, are crucial parts of the
hiring process that have implications for individuals' opportunities and,
potentially, for the level of segregation in labor markets. We formalize
information-related aspects of the matching process into two additional
mechanisms. The first rests on constraints on access to information: if
information about jobs flows only through networks linking potential workers,
then the structure and composition of those networks will influence who hears
about--and is hired into--vacant jobs, and networks composed of similar people
could therefore produce and maintain segregation within jobs or firms, without
any discriminatory action on the part of individual employers. Alternatively, if
evaluating a candidate's potential is difficult, information from trusted
employees may be more valuable than information from strangers. In this
situation, employers may prefer to hire workers who are referred by their
current employees; again, to the extent that networks are segregated, the labor
market will be segregated. Previous scholars have found it difficult to tease
apart the relative impact of each explanation in empirical studies; therefore,
the core of this project is the development of a labor market simulation that
allows us to implement each of these types of 'mechanisms' (supply-side, demand-
side, and information-related) as a set of structures and a set of rules. We
will calibrate the simulation model with data describing empirical labor markets
and then use it as an experimental framework to generate testable hypotheses
about the relationship between each mechanism, other labor market
characteristics, and the level of segregation in particular types of labor
markets. The project should have several broad impacts: it will demonstrate the
utility of simulation method as a tool to address substantively important yet
empirically difficult problems; insights from the simulation may be used to
focus subsequent empirical studies; and, most importantly, we hope that this
study will help us identify practical strategies that might effectively reduce
racial, ethnic, and gender segregation in labor markets.