* 0351259
* Econometric Methods for Structural and Semiparametric Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2004
* Jack Porter, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2004
* USD 56,823.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0351259&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
Harvard University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: Economics&lt;br/&gt;PI: Porter, Jack
R&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Econometric Methods for Structural and Semiparametric
Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research deals with econometric
methods for various economic structural and semiparametric models. The research
consists of several projects. The first project is &lt;br/&gt;an empirical
project on multi-unit auctions in the deregulated electric utility market in
England and Wales. Bid data and the actual auction software will be used to
estimate fixed costs and costs of capital, which will be used to analyze
incentives to invest, auction design issues, and possible collusive behavior.
Companion work develops a new approach to dynamic auction model estimation using
the first order condition derived from a bidder 's optimization problem as a
moment for estimation and avoiding the computational difficulty associated with
numerically solving for optimal bidding strategies. This research provides
empirical results relevant to the recent debates concerning electricity markets,
and, more generally, will provide new tools for the empirical analysis of many
other auction markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project considers certain
semiparametric models that are typically estimated using an initial "plug-in
"conditional expectation estimator and pursues an approach to estimation that
avoids using a sample size dependent smoothing parameter. A nearest neighbor
approach is combined with local polynomial regression to achieve sufficient
bias-rate reduction for root n consistency even with a high dimensional
covariate space. Leading applicable models include the partially linear model
and the average treatment effect framework. This research is aimed at providing
econometric tools that are easy for the empirical researcher to apply within a
class of semiparametric models. The third &lt;br/&gt;Project uses Le Cam 's
limits of statistical experiments theory to generalize standard results on
efficient point estimation in parametric models. It shows how to construct a
local shift to the MLE that yields efficiency under more general conditions,
including all regular and many leading nonregular models along with symmetric or
asymmetric loss. This work provides best estimators in these models, which are
the workhorse of empirical research in many fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
third project extends semiparametric estimation of treatment effects in the
regression discontinuity design to allow for an unknown cut-off in treatment
assignment. This work also characterizes estimation in a nonparametric analog of
the parametric unknown structural breakpoint model. This approach will further
broaden the applicability of the regression discontinuity framework. These
projects are aimed at providing new econometric tools for the applied
researcher. &lt;br/&gt;