* 0352598
* US-India Cooperative Research: Density Functional Theory of the Mixed State in Layered Superconductors with Pinning
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Oriol Valls, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2010
* USD 24,419.00

0352598&lt;br/&gt;Valls, Oriol&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the
US-India collaborative research entitled Density Functional Theory of the Mixed
State in Layered Superconductors with Pinning. Professors Oriol Valls,
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities and Chandan Dasgupta, Indian Institute of
Science (IISc), Bangalore will carry out numerical simulations to study the
mixed phases of high-temperature superconductors in the presence of various
types of random pins. This project is important for understanding the vortex
properties in superconductors. The test system is the archetype for studying the
effects of quenched disorder on the structure and melting of solids. The density
functional approach, which is an original method for studying melting of ordered
and disordered vortex systems, has been used successfully by these investigators
and is likely to succeed in the present context. This research is very important
for applications of superconductivity and could have far-reaching technological
and fundamental impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Additionally, it will
develop a partnership between a leading US institution and the foremost center
for theoretical condensed matter research in South Asia. The PIs are prominent,
well-recognized physicists and leaders of the density functional technique.
Professor Valls has made important contributions to superconductivity. Students,
postdocs and the research groups at both institutions will benefit from this
collaboration, which is jointly funded by the Government of India's Department
of Science and Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;