* 0352808
* Special Projects: CREU: Collaborative Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* John Hurley, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2008
* USD 340,016.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Special Projects Program - FY04&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNS
0352808, PI's Joan M. Francioni and John S. Hurley, Computing Research
Association&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CREU: Collaboration Research Experiences
for Undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides support for the
Computing Research Association's Committee on the Status of Women in Computing
Research (CRA-W) and the Coalition to Diversify Computing (CDC) to join efforts
in a new project designed to increase the number of women and minorities who
enroll in computer science and engineering graduate studies. The new project
provides research experiences to teams of undergraduates - either all women or
all minority- to work on a common research project at their home institution. To
emphasize interaction in research activities, CREU students apply jointly as
teams to work with a faculty mentor, building on prior positive relationships.
The teams work for an entire academic year and are encouraged to present their
work in talks and papers that they are required to post on their common website.
The project is built on a pilot program, CREW, that CRA-W has conducted for
women over the last five years. Evaluation of that project was carried out by
the LEAD Center at the University of Wisconsin and found to be successful. This
new project will make the CREW model available to many more women and will
extend its benefits to minority students and their institutions as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in its
potential for increasing the research opportunities for undergraduates and, in
some cases, for their mentors. Further, the LEAD evaluation of the program will
give us insights into the factors that determine success in the recruitment of
women and minorities to graduate Computer Science and Engineering (CS&amp;E)
programs. The broader impacts of the project lie with its potential for
increasing the numbers and success of women and underrepresented minorities in
CS&amp;E graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;