* 0352971
* International Symposium on Ice-Water Interactions; Portland, Oregon; Summer, 2004
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Christina Hulbe, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 12/31/2004
* USD 10,760.00

This award provides support for the International Symposium on Ice-Water
Interactions which will be held at Portland State University, Portland, Oregon,
in the summer of 2004. This symposium was proposed to and accepted by the
International Glaciological Society (IGS) as one of two major symposia sponsored
by the Society each year. An important goal in organizing this symposium is to
promote interdisciplinary dialog between specialists in snow and ice hydrology.
While their topics are related, these groups rarely&lt;br/&gt;enjoy the
opportunity to interact directly. By hosting the symposium in the Pacific
Northwest, attention will be drawn to the place of snow and ice in regional
resource issues. Interactions between water and ice span a wide range of topics,
from some of the fundamental problems in glaciology to the daily lives of people
who depend on alpine watersheds. This symposium will be devoted to the macro and
mirco interactions between ice and water, providing new avenues for discussion
across the phase boundary. For example, investigations of basal water-drainage
systems in glaciers have an affinity with studies of subglacial melting and
freezing processes, both of which are in turn connected to studies of glacier
and ice-sheet flow rates, in both modern and paleo-environments; glaciologists,
hydrologists, and biologists can share knowledge regarding the timing and rate
of melt and meltwater discharge and its downstream effects; and similarities and
differences between glacier and ice-shelf calving processes can be explored. The
week-long symposium will take place from 26 to 30 July 2004.The meeting format
will include both oral and poster presentations. Selected papers will be
published by the IGS in the Annals of Glaciology. Student participation will be
encouraged. This award provides a small amount of support for the development of
a meeting website and an administrative assistant to manage meeting
registration, reservations for accommodation, and related issues. By reducing
overall meeting expenses, this grant support will allow the organizers to charge
a lower registration fee for students, encouraging their participation in the
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;