* 0352995
* Workshop:  Geodynamics and Paleoclimate of the Amerasian Basin and its Margins; Washington, DC; June 6-8, 2004
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Bernard Coakley, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 02/28/2005
* USD 48,201.00

The Principal Investigator will host a workshop to bring scientists interested
in the geology and geophysics of the Arctic Ocean and its adjacent margins
together to discuss the critical questions about this region and formulate a
science plan for future investigations. In the Arctic, the history of the
Amerasian basin has been inferred from the limited stratigraphic record exposed
on the Canadian and American continental margins. During the last few years, an
outpouring of data collected in the Arctic Ocean basin from satellites,
airplanes, and submarines has been made available and compiled into revised and
much improved maps and grids of bathymetry, gravity anomalies and magnetic
anomalies. With these new data, it is now possible to formulate concrete,
specific hypotheses about the history of the basin. Testing these hypotheses
will require coordinated field programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: A number of basic scientific problems can be addressed in the Amerasian
Basin. Some of these problems are unique to the Arctic Ocean while others are
framed by studies conducted at lower latitudes. Solutions of these problems will
require new data collected throughout the basin. The expense of these cruises
argues against continuing in the single investigator, single hypothesis, single
cruise mode that is the typical NSF model. Making progress will require multiple
coordinated, multi-disciplinary cruises. While the Amerasian Basin is clearly an
oceanic basin, no mutually agreed upon plate boundaries are recognized. As a
result, reconstructions of the paleo-geography of the northern hemisphere prior
to the Cenozoic are largely hypothetical. Identifying these boundaries will help
to decipher the plate tectonic history of the Mesozoic Arctic Ocean. The
stratigraphic record of the Arctic Ocean contains a unique paleooceanographic
and climatic record. Little of the Cenozoic and almost none of the Mesozoic
record has been sampled. Dramatic changes have occurred since the Cretaceous
through the Pleistocene, when ice sheets extended out into the basin, to the
present day. Deciphering this history will complement the sediment and ice cores
taken at lower latitudes and make it possible to study truly global paleoclimate
for the first time. This work will be accomplished by scientific drilling, which
would require a number of preliminary cruises collecting swath mapping and
multi-channel seismic profiling to prepare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The generation of earth scientists who began their arctic careers with
International Geophysical Year (IGY), ice islands and Polar-class U.S Coast
Guard icebreakers has retired. Their experience, enthusiasm and ideas are needed
by the mid-career scientists who have focused on Arctic Ocean geology and
geophysics and others, post-docs and graduate students who will advance this
work in the future. The major objectives of this workshop are to make these
connections, both domestically and internationally, build a community and
develop a coherent plan for the future studies of the Amerasian
Basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;