* 0352237
* Collaborative Proposal: Numerical Study of the Unsteady Feeding Currents in Calanoid Copepods
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Gustav-Adolf Paffenhofer, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David L. Garrison
* 04/30/2009
* USD 66,489.00

Numerical Study of the Unsteady Feeding Current in Calanoid Copepods

This research project will address the question, "Why are there two temporal
types of generating feeding currents among herbivorous calanoid copepods"? That
is, why do animals show an on/off pattern, creating an unsteady flow, when they
have to overcome the inertia of the surrounding water every time they start
moving?

We will first directly observe feeding animals in situ. Then, we will observe
them in 3D in the laboratory to define (1) the structures of the feeding
currents, and (2), the temporal patterns under different food regimes. The
database, which includes the shapes and sizes of the animals observed, will be
used for simulations using computational fluid dynamics (CFD). The research team
consists of an applied mathematician/environmental fluid dynamicist (Jiang,
WHOI), a biological oceanographer (Paffenhofer, SKIO), and two experimental
marine biologists (Strickler and Janssen, UWM). Experiments will be conducted
during a two-week stay at the Wrigley Marine Science Center where we will
observe Calanus pacificus and Rhincalanus nasutus in situ and in the laboratory.
The results will be data on the frequencies of switching the feeding current
on/off, and on the structures and temporal changes of the water flow around the
animals. We will also study the activity patterns of calanoid copepods from the
ocean off Savannah, GA, under different food densities. All the data sets
generated will be constantly used to design the simulations in CFD at WHOI. We
expect to find evidence that there exist different survival strategies among
calanoid copepods living in nutritionally dilute environments. The strategy to
alternate the generation of a feeding current may be based on a compromise
between low excess weight, large body size, and low food concentrations. This
would contrast to the strategy of high excess weight, constant feeding current,
large sensing range, and moderate food density.

Intellectual Merits

Planktonic copepods live in environments of varying and often severely limiting
food abundances. So far few if any studies have addressed the adaptations of
copepod behavioral repertoires to this diminished food availability. Our study
is designed to improve our understanding of copepod feeding behavior by studying
empirically free-swimming calanoids, which produce unsteady on/off feeding
currents of different kinds, and then compare the newly gained results with our
knowledge to date about the steady feeding currents.

Broader Impact

The project will support the research efforts of a young, physically oriented
scientist in a well-integrated interdisciplinary study with three accomplished
senior biological ocean scientists. Our well-visited web sites on zooplankton
ecology, marine and fresh-water, will serve to stimulate young persons to pursue
the natural sciences. Data files and simulation results will also be uploaded
onto our website of (http://www.uwm.edu/~jrs) for public access. We will
disseminate our results in the scientific literature. Two undergraduate students
will be working at Skidaway with G. -A. Paffenhofer and will interact with the
team of PIs during the course of the project.