* 0352448
* Collaborative Research:  U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Stochastic Modeling of Turbulent Flows for the Prediction of Lagrangian Trajectories in the Ocean
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Leonid Piterbarg, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2007
* USD 15,000.00

0352448 &lt;br/&gt;Piterbarg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research between Dr. Tamay Ozgokmen, School of Marine and
Atmospheric Science, University of Mimai, Miami, Florida, Dr. Leonid Piterbarg,
Department of Mathematics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California and Dr. Mine Caglar, Department of Mathematics, Koc University,
Istanbul, Turkey. The aim of this project is to bring together the expertise of
interdisciplinary researchers to develop and implement mathematical methods for
modeling turbulent flows in the ocean. The main goal of such modeling is to
study&lt;br/&gt;the Lagrangian motion predictability with application to rescue
and search operations in the sea, dispersion of pollutants and fish larvae,
design of observing systems and navigation routes. The PIs will draw upon
existing theory of stochastic flows, numerical modeling and Lagrangian studies
of the ocean for establishing a united approach. The project aims to contribute
novel Lagrangian prediction algorithms and model identification procedures from
time/space observations. Submesoscale eddies are evident in the high-resolution
velocity field data observed along Florida coast. Current ocean models are able
to resolve meso-scale structures in the ocean, however small eddies cannot be
resolved and should be parameterized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The potential
impact of the project includes the enhancement of Lagrangian prediction studies
by stochastic modeling of such eddy structures, and the capability to represent
sub-grid turbulence in the ocean models. The methods employed will be
statistical estimation of stochastic flow model parameters from ocean data,
incorporation of stochastic modeling into numerical modeling of mesoscale
oceanic processes, and construction of prediction algorithms that perform well
in the presence of coherent structures. The expected scientific benefits of this
project include: (i) understanding of turbulent flows through the collaboration
of disciplines, namely physical oceanography, applied mathematics, probability
and statistics; (ii) contribution to the theory of statistics of stochastic
processes by a complex problem, namely the study of spatial and temporal data
for fitting the parameters of a vector field; (iii) establishment of better
Lagrangian stochastic models for oceanographic applications. The broader impacts
of this project are: (i) collaboration among two US academic institutions will
be supported; (ii) algorithms for prediction will be developed and disseminated
through scientific publications; (iii) the results of the project will be
publicized in international conferences of applied mathematics and probability,
and physical oceanography; (iv) scientists from US and Turkey will develop
future international collaborations for both research and also education such as
exchange or recruitment of graduate students ; (v) the project contributes to
understanding the environment and addresses a very practical safety
problem.&lt;br/&gt;