* 0352897
* Resource Allocation and Allometry of Plant Growth in the Arctic:  Key Constraints on Change and Predictability of the Arctic System
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Gaius Shaver, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 04/30/2008
* USD 892,302.00

The proposed research will contribute to the main themes of the Arctic System
Science program by improving our understanding of the broad patterns of
vegetation change and vegetation function across the Arctic. The underlying
hypothesis is that evolutionary adaptation to the arctic environment places
constraints on the patterns of growth of arctic plants (i.e., on their resource
allocation patterns and allometry of growth), and that these adaptations in turn
play an important role in regulating change and resilience in arctic vegetation
and its feedbacks to the Arctic System. The proposed research is designed
essentially as a search for the general characteristics of plant growth,
resource allocation, and allometry that can be used to develop large-scale,
long-term predictions of vegetation properties and of the role of arctic
vegetation in the Arctic System. By comparing a wide range of vegetation types
in widely-separated sites, the research will also help to identify the relative
vulnerability of different vegetation types, plant functional types, and species
to climate change and other forms of disturbance. The research sites include
Toolik Lake, Alaska; Abisko, Sweden; Ny Alesund, Svalbard; and Zackenberg,
Greenland. The plant variables to be evaluated--primary production, C fluxes, N
turnover, NDVI, and canopy structure--are all key components of the feedbacks
and interactions between the terrestrial landscape and the cycles of energy,
water, and elements in the Arctic System. Field research at each site will
include quadrat harvests for analysis of production-biomass relationships,
biomass allocation patterns, N turnover and use, and canopy leaf area-leaf N
interactions. Additional sampling will relate these variables to CO2 fluxes,
stem density and branching patterns, and NDVI. Winter visits will determine
effects of stem and canopy structure on snow and winter microclimate. In
addition to empirical analysis of results, one product of the research will be a
data base for modeling and extrapolation of vegetation properties and processes
across the Arctic region. Long running collaborations with established modeling
groups will continue. The major issues of broader interest here are (1) the
scaling of ecological understanding from single sites and species to larger,
regional environmental systems, (2) the effects of individual species or plant
"functional types" on overall ecosystem and landscape-level processes, and (3)
the meaning and measurement of resistance, resilience, and stability of
ecosystems and landscapes in a world of constant change. Resolution of these
issues is key to development of sound policies on conservation and management of
ecosystems and landscapes everywhere. The proposed research will also make
several contributions to education of future professionals and of the general
public, by continuing our long-term involvement with training of undergraduate
REU students, postdoctoral fellows, technicians, and science journalists.