* 0352703
* SGER:    Development of Linux Attack Scenarios in Support of Intrusion Detection in High Performance Clusters
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Rayford Vaughn, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 09/30/2006
* USD 75,000.00

NSF-0352703&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: SGER: Development of Linux Attack
Scenarios in Support of Intrusion Detection in High Performance
Clusters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Rayford B. Vaughn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cluster
and grid clusters based on the Linux operating system have become widely used
computational resources in environments where large amounts of data have
privacy, defense, reliability, or other security concerns. Cluster nodes
exchange information through both TCP/IP and high-speed network fabrics that
often bypass operating system controls. As clusters become ubiquitous with
Internet connection commonplace, the services they deliver will likely place
them at a greater risk for attacks or intentional misuse by insiders.
Mississippi State University has been pursuing research in anomaly detection
within High Performance Computing (HPC) networks since 2000. This work is
currently sponsored by the National Science Foundation and the Department of
Defense. One of the major challenges for research in anomaly detection within
high performance networks is the dearth of data sets for evaluating performance.
Such data sets are necessary to validate the efficacy of artificial intelligence
techniques that are under development for the detection of anomalies resulting
from misbehavior of users or programs or from faults, and for performance
monitoring. Three different classes of attacks against clusters have been
designed and simulated at MSU. This research will refine these attacks and
introduce additional classes of attacks in HPC clusters and will archive data
sets for general use by the research community looking at anomaly detection in
HPC environments. &lt;br/&gt;