* 0352801
* Technical Concepts and Contexts of Olfaction:  c.1700-c.1900
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Thomas Staley, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 11/30/2006
* USD 101,724.00

This project is an historical investigation into scientific and technological
approaches to the sense of smell in the 18th and 19th centuries. Five
interrelated trends in this history will be examined: (1) the influence of pre-
Enlightenment understandings of olfaction on later technical endeavors; (2)
natural philosophical inquiry into the sense of smell in the British and French
Enlightenment and its impact on the growth of the human sciences; (3)
disciplinary developments related to olfaction in the natural sciences,
especially chemistry; (4) the craft traditions involved in-and subsequent
industrialization of-the production of odoriferous substances; and (5) interest
in olfaction in the context of the life sciences. These topics have received
sparse treatment in the critical literature on conceptual and practical
approaches to sensation and perception. &lt;br/&gt;Technical approaches to
olfaction and odor will be approached in the same spirit as recent STS work in
the genre known as biography of scientific objects. The object in question smell
(here meaning both the sensory mode and the phenomenon itself) will be
characterized using a series of six important historical vantage points, each
emphasizing a particular aspect of the same ongoing story. These episodes will
illuminate, in context, the work of such important figures in olfactory science
as Linnaeus, Fourcroy, Cloquet, Zwaardemaaker, and Ramon y Cajal. In addition,
institutional trends in the various disciplines and enterprises related to smell
will be examined, using this set of discrete vantage points to highlight
different perspectives. This study will emphasize both philosophical and
historical themes in conjunction. The philosophical aspect will accentuate the
role attributed to olfaction as a potential and actual source of knowledge, and
the consequences of this role for theories of knowledge production. The detailed
historical account will demonstrate the abiding technical interest in smell in
the past three centuries and describe the gradual development of related
theories, practices, and techniques. &lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of past
developments related to smell has the potential to influence a number of fields.
While experientially and emotionally powerful, olfaction has often been ignored
or derided in both technical and philosophical circles. Recently, new work in
STS has begun to redress some of this inattention, but the base of expertise in
the United States remains underdeveloped given the many potential areas of
impact. Smell provides a valuable perspective from which to approach questions
about the fundamental role of epistemic instruments in the sciences, and the
possible distinctions between representation and reality and between subjective
and objective experience. Furthermore, the material-chemical nature of olfaction
makes it of special interest in historical and conceptual studies of chemistry,
helping to connect this area of inquiry quite directly to issues of
epistemology, ontology, and the philosophy of technology. Thus, broader impacts
of funding this work will include: (1) fostering of interdisciplinary
connections among different perspectives on science and technology; (2)
significant contributions to under-examined topics in STS; and (3) promotion of
international dialogue on important historical and conceptual issues that have,
until lately, been disregarded in this country. &lt;br/&gt;