* 0352453
* Science in Global Issues:  An Integrated High School Science Course
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/2004,11/30/2011
* Barbara Nagle, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 11/30/2011
* USD 2,690,622.00

"Science in Global Issues" (SGI) joins the already published, "Science and
Sustainability," to become a two-year integrated science course for grades 9 and
10 incorporating an issues-oriented, guided-inquiry approach to learning. The
course, to be available both as a full year course and as modules, focuses on
the role of science in addressing the needs of modern society and the use of
technology in advancing scientific knowledge. In collaboration with teachers and
scientists, specific learning goals related to the science standards are
developed. The assessment system, previously used in other SEPUP materials,
serves as an indicator of learning, guides the development of activities, and is
used as a basis for evaluation and research on how the instruction affects
student learning and teacher practice. Students are introduced to and examine
key science concepts in the context of personal and societal issues. A primary
resource contains images of and data about countries around the world and links
to existing simulations of processes. Unit themes include "Tools for Exploring
Earth," "Maintaining Diversity," "World Health," and "Fueling the World."
Content standards include interactions of energy and matter, matter energy and
of living systems, evolution, the cell, structure of atoms and molecular basis
of heredity. With SGI, SEPUP has developed a sequenced science curriculum for
grades 6-10.