* 0352136
* On a Reciprocal Tarry-Escott Problem, the Distribution of Roots of Polynomials Modulo a Composite, and Sieve Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Ernest Croot, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 98,248.00

DMS-0301282 Poonen, Bjorn M. (Croot, Ernest S.)

Abstract

Title: On a Reciprocal Tarry-Escott Problem, the Distribution of Roots Of
Polynomials Modulo a Composite, and Sieve Methods

The Proposer's research project has three goals: He wishes to finish working on
his results and methods on the Prouhet-Tarry-Escott problem, which he will write
up in one or more papers; he plans to continue and to write up in a paper his
work with an undergraduate on cryptology; and, he wishes to continue to develop
a new sieve method for determining the number of primes in thin sets of
integers. The proposer's work on the Prouhet-Tarry-Escott problem gives a new
method for constructing solutions to certain systems of diophantine equations
with many variables, and the method may lead to a solution of one of more
unsolved problems in this area. The work on cryptology centers around showing
that certain algorithms for attacking public-key cryptosystems, that find low-
height roots of polynomials modulo an integer q (such as Coppersmith's method),
cannot be easily improved. Finally, the proposer plans to continue developing a
sieve method for counting the number of primes in a given set of integers, which
allows one to use additional analytic information (besides the usual data used
by the combinatorial sieve) about the set, in the hopes that the method will
lead to the solution of one or another known, difficult, unsolved problems in
prime number theory.

Since the time of the ancient Greeks, mathematicians have been trying to
understand how the prime numbers are spaced; that is, how does the distance
between consecutive prime numbers vary as one considers larger and larger
primes? Sieve methods were developed as a theoretical tool for answering this
type of question; however, there are many natural questions about such spacings
that they currently cannot answer. One of the proposer's research goals is to
finish developing a new sieve method which he hopes to use to make progress on
some of these unsolved problems. The proposer's work on cryptology was motivated
by research with an undergraduate on a certain method (Coppersmith's algorithm)
for attacking the RSA cryptosystem, which is a procedure for sending secure data
via the internet. The proposer (and student) plans to continue his work on a
related problem in number theory, the solution of which would show that this
method of attack cannot be much improved. Lastly, the proposer plans to continue
his work on the Prouhet-Tarry-Escott problem. This problem is a longstanding
unsolved question in number theory, and proposer is developing new methods to
make progress on it and other, similar problems.