* 0352289
* CONFERENCE SUPPORT FOR THE 4TH INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON NON THERMAL PLASMA (May 10-14, 2004)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2004
* Bruce Locke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 08/31/2004
* USD 8,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 4th International Symposium on Non-thermal Plasma
Technologies for Pollution&lt;br/&gt;Control and Sustainable Energy Development
will be held in Panama City Beach, Florida, May 10-14, 2004. It is devoted to
advancing the field of non-thermal plasma processes for environmental
protection, including applications to air and water treatment and to sustainable
energy processing. This meeting is intended to assemble experts from all over
the world to present recent advances to the field and to discuss the prospects
of these technologies for future development and study. The objectives of this
meeting are therefore:&lt;br/&gt;1) to assemble key research groups working on
the environmental applications of non-thermal&lt;br/&gt;plasma including air and
water treatment and sustainable energy processing,&lt;br/&gt;2) to provide a
stimulating environment to foster scientific exchange and discussion of the
most&lt;br/&gt;important current issues related to the development of this area
of technology, and&lt;br/&gt;3) to conduct extensive discussions on the
directions for future work and development.&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
supplemental funding to support this conference through some travel and
publication costs. This conference can lead to broader impacts as follows. The
conference will enhance and promote collaboration among scientists and engineers
from large variety of disciplines and from a wide range of nations. It will
engage a number of graduate students, and particularly women and under-
represented minorities in order to develop the next generation of researchers.
The intellectual merit of the conference is reflected in the high quality of the
participating researchers representing major laboratories from top institutions
worldwide. It will provide useful input to NSF as a guide to grant investments
in this evolving field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A non-thermal plasma is a plasma,
or collection of free and randomly moving ions, that is&lt;br/&gt;characterized
by low background temperature, or energy, in combination with highly
energetic&lt;br/&gt;electrons. Typically, non-thermal plasma can be produced
using a wide variety of high voltage&lt;br/&gt;electrical discharges (e.g., AC,
DC, and pulsed) as well as with electron beams. The largest&lt;br/&gt;commercial
application of non-thermal plasma in the environmental field is the use of
AC&lt;br/&gt;dielectric barrier discharge reactors for producing ozone,
generally, subsequently used in water&lt;br/&gt;treatment. Other commercial
applications of non-thermal plasma include flue gas treatment
from&lt;br/&gt;power plants and incinerators and indoor air cleaning. Over the
last 15 years there has been&lt;br/&gt;considerable interest and research
devoted to testing, evaluating, and developing non-thermal&lt;br/&gt;plasmas for
other applications. These other applications include treatment of volatile
and&lt;br/&gt;hazardous organic compounds in gases, treatment of nitrogen oxides
and particulate matter from&lt;br/&gt;the exhaust of mobile sources, treatment
of organic, inorganic, and biological matter in&lt;br/&gt;contaminated water,
synthetic chemical processes, and destruction of hazardous chemical
and&lt;br/&gt;biological agents. While the technology for ozone generation is
fairly mature, developments for&lt;br/&gt;other applications are intensively
under investigation due to the high sensitivity of reactor&lt;br/&gt;performance
on the reactor design and operating conditions (e.g., gas and/or liquid
composition,&lt;br/&gt;nature of applied electric field, addition of catalysts,
and other factors). Recent developments in&lt;br/&gt;the fields of plasma-
catalysis, gas-liquid discharge phenomena, and hydrocarbon reforming
from&lt;br/&gt;natural gas are particularly promising and can contribute to the
development of useful and efficient technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;