* 0352314
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:  Synthesis and Properties of Light Weight Alumina Particle Reinforced Ductile Iron Castings
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Pradeep Rohatgi, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Jong-on Hahm
* 08/31/2008
* USD 51,160.00

0352314&lt;br/&gt;Rohatgi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award enables Dr. Rohatgi
and junior members of his research group from the Center for Composites at the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) to collaborate in research on metal-
matrix composites with Dr. Chang Ok Choi and others of the Metallurgical
Engineering Department of Dong-A University in Pusan, South Korea. They plan to
develop optimum processing conditions for synthesizing low-cost lightweight
ductile iron composites reinforced with alumina The collaborative research plan
joins the complementary expertise of Dr. Rohatgi in developing various
nonferrous metal-matrix composites and that of the Korean research group in the
area of ductile iron castings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dispersal of alumina
particles in ductile iron castings is expected to improve the stiffness and
hardness, reduce the weight and increase the wear resistance of ductile iron
components in a variety of mechanical systems. The challenges in this project
are to develop new metallurgical techniques to incorporate alumina particles in
ductile iron melts, to prepare very fine graphite nodules with improved spheroid
shape and to inoculate them into in composite melts. Once this has been
achieved, the investigators plan to cast a selected prototype component using
the process developed to demonstrate improved performance in a component at
Dong-A University. The project work will lead to an increased understanding of
the incorporation of alumina particles in molten ductile iron and their
interaction with transitional phases formed during solidification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader significance: The development of metal matrix
composites has been one of the major innovations in materials in the past 25
years. However the use of cast composites has been limited because techniques
did not exist to blend the components well enough to achieve improved materials
behavior. The alumina-reinforced cast ductile iron to be developed with new
techniques in this project will be lighter and stronger than widely used ferrous
materials in cars, trucks, mining equipment and small engines. Adoption in the
automobile industry could contribute to energy conservation. The improved
characteristics of this composite material can also make it useful in other
manufacturing industries. The collaborative arrangement also will benefit
students and postdoctoral fellows of the U.S. and Korea. The U.S. team includes
undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow; several of them
will travel to Korea for research experience. The Korean team also has several
students. The students will benefit from their interaction and also from being
exposed to state-of-the-art research and the metal castings industries of both
countries.&lt;br/&gt;