* 0352280
* Improved Accuracy and Precision of Dissolved Organic Nitrogen and Inorganic Nitrogen in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Jonathan Sharp, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2008
* USD 435,284.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0352280&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past decade, the
international oceanographic community has demonstrated the ability for accurate
measurements of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the ocean. The improved
analytical ability is critical for understanding global carbon fluxes, which are
needed to better assess global change. Also, consistent accurate analytical
measurements are essential as we move toward the Twenty-first Century global
observing systems. With better DOC measurements, new concepts have arisen
regarding carbon distributions and fluxes, and accurate analytical capabilities
will allow for additional understanding of the global carbon cycle in the near
future. In the past several years, some progress has been made with DON
analysis, but more research is needed before reliable measurements can be made
on a routine basis. &lt;br/&gt;In this study, a researcher from the University
of Delaware will improve the reliability and accuracy of the measurement of
dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) in seawater. Recognizing that DON must be
derived from the measurements of total dissolved nitrogen (TDN) and dissolved
inorganic nitrogen (DIN), the researchers will first address the preparation and
use of combined reference materials for measurement of TDN and DIN. Then, all
available wet chemical and high temperature combustion (HTC) methods for TDN
measurement will be further evaluated. A third objective is to improve
reliability of measuring DOC and TDN by HTC methods. Protocols will be developed
and tested for combined TDN and DIN analysis. The initial steps of the project
will be made with close coordination between the researcher's laboratory and the
Joint Global Ocean Flux Study time series stations in Bermuda (BATS) and Hawaii
(HOT). Later in the project, reference materials and protocols will be extended
to the international marine community for adoption using the time series
stations as the norm. There are very few parameters in the field of marine
biogeochemistry with documented standardization. The goal of this project is to
make DOC and DON among them. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;