* 0352218
* Egocentrism in Self vs. Other Comparisons: On the (Not so) Comparative Nature of Social Comparisons
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Justin Kruger, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 07/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

People tend to be unrealistically optimistc. That is, on average, participants
estimate that they are more likely than the average student to experience the
desirable events and less likely than the average student to experience the
undesirable events (Weinstein, 1980). This optimism about the future can have
severe consequences. For instance, each year thousands of individuals die in
alcohol-related automobile accidents, in part because they underestimate the
likelihood that driving drunk may get them into trouble. As well, people
frequently risk unprotected sex in part because they underestimate their
likelihood of contracting a sexually transmitted disease. While the consequences
of unrealistic optimism are clear, the causes are not. The three studies funded
by this award will explore the reasons why people are unrealistically optimistic
about their futures and uncover ways in which unrealistic optimism-and the
various societal consequences it engenders-can be reduced. The specific
explanation that will be tested is that when people compare their likelihood of
experiencing an event with that of the average person, they focus on their own
perceived likelihood of experiencing an event (how likely am I to live past 70?)
and insufficiently consider the chances of the average person experiencing the
event (how likely is the average person to live past 70?). When the event is
relatively common, like living past 70, this leads to an overestimation of one's
comparative likelihood of experiencing the event. When the event is relatively
uncommon, in contrast, it leads to an underestimation. This translates into
unrealistic optimism in the case of common desirable events and rare undesirable
events-but unrealistic pessimism in the case of common undesirable events and
rare desirable events. This suggests that unrealistic optimism can be reduced by
simply drawing people's attention to the risks facing the average person-
precisely the proposition to be tested. Additionally, this research may
challenge one of the most basic assumptions of social comparison theory
(Festinger, 1954). Some social comparisons, it turns out, are neither social nor
comparative.

