* 0352216
* Collaborative Research:  RUI --  Response of Nitrifying Bacteria to Fluctuating Hypoxia in Estuarine and Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* James Hollibaugh, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/29/2008
* USD 226,640.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0352221 / OCE- 0352216&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Nitrification contributes to removing fixed nitrogen from ecosystems;
it is a centrally important process modulating ecosystem productivity and the
global nitrogen budget. In anoxic estuaries, nitrification is compromised,
reducing the removal of fixed nitrogen. Bottom water anoxia leads to increased
HS- concentrations in pore waters that can lead to extended inhibition of
aerobic nitrifying bacteria. A researcher at the University of West Florida
believes that the loss of nitrification activity during weeklong hypoxic events
will reduce denitrification rates, although N2 production by anaerobic NH4+
oxidation (anammox) may be enhanced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this study, the
scientist from the University of West Florida will investigate how the community
composition of aerobic nitrifiers differs under varying oxygen tensions. How the
nitrifiers respond to short-term hypoxic events will also be considered, as well
as how the degree of hypoxia and bottom water NO3- concentrations (either
through denitrification or anammox) will affect N2 levels. And, finally, because
adaptation by the nitrifying community to periodic hypoxia and HS- exposure has
important ecological implications, the researcher will investigate the degree to
which nitrifiers can adapt to intermittent hypoxia lasting hours to days,
specifically when intermitted with exposure to HS-. If communities adapt to and
become HS- tolerant, then they can nitrify when conditions are favorable without
extended lag periods. Thus, nitrogen removal through denitrification would be
more efficient in these systems. In addition, the role of anammox in estuarine
environments is not well studied, particularly its contribution to estuarine
nitrogen budgets. If anammox rates are significant, it will suggest a major
revision of the fixed nitrogen removal processes in estuaries. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;