* 0352767
* Workshops:     Efficient Spectrum Utilization for Wireless Networking and PI Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Paul Kolodzy, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2005
* USD 112,465.00

In the past few years the wireless industry in an endless search for more
bandwidth &lt;br/&gt;efficient modulation schemes, spectrum and bandwidth
efficiency have become &lt;br/&gt;synonymous due to the limitations of legacy
communication systems. These limitations &lt;br/&gt;have traditionally bounded
the communication system to a specific frequency band with a &lt;br/&gt;pre-
selected modulation scheme that exhibits the best tradeoffs for the relevant
&lt;br/&gt;application. Emerging technologies like Software Definable Radios
(SDRs), Cognitive &lt;br/&gt;Radios (CRs) along with ultra wideband
transmissions, smart antennas and ad hoc &lt;br/&gt;architectures promise
unprecedented flexibility of spectrum access. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In unison
with these technological innovations, a report from the FCC Spectrum Policy
&lt;br/&gt;Task Force challenges for the first time the assumption of sparse
spectrum resources, by &lt;br/&gt;suggesting that at any given time and place,
less than 10 percent of the available spectrum &lt;br/&gt;is utilized. In order
to improve spectrum utilization, the FCC Spectrum Policy Task Force
&lt;br/&gt;proposes the concept of dynamic spectrum access (DSA). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Stevens Institute of Technology proposes to support the National
Science Foundation in &lt;br/&gt;developing innovative research projects to
radically improve spectrum utilization and &lt;br/&gt;spectrum efficiency for
wireless networks. This project proposes to help develop these
&lt;br/&gt;concepts through (1) a Principal Investigator Meeting involving the
leading technologists &lt;br/&gt;and researchers contributing to NSF wireless
networking programs and (2) a workshop &lt;br/&gt;focusing on physical and
network technologies for enhanced spectrum efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;