* 0352644
* Collaborative Research:  A Workshop on Values in the Design of Information Technology,  University of California, San Diego, Summer 2005
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Geoffrey Bowker, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 10/31/2004
* USD 44,709.00

This multi-disciplinary graduate student workshop focuses on values in the
design of computer and information technology. Despite a growing body of
excellent research and scholarship dedicated both to theoretical and practical
dimensions of this general subject, as well as workshops and other scholarly
gatherings, institutional responses have been sporadic and somewhat sparse.
Thus, a source of great concern for members of this emergent field, is that no
matter what great strides are made by the creative efforts of individual
researchers and scholars, without the institutional support accorded to
traditional fields, with built-in mechanisms of faculty self-governance and
graduate programs, its long term sustainability is at risk. This workshop,
designed to engage a wide representation of backgrounds and disciplines,
provides a test of one avenue for passing down the achievements and research
findings of one generation to the next. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With advice from
a broad based Steering Committee, the principal investigators will design the
curriculum. The workshop will last for two weeks; it will take place at the
University of California, San Diego. During the first week of the workshop
students would cover a curriculum of topics and readings selected from a
substantial bibliography. For the second week, three to four outstanding
scholars in the field will spend 2-3 days each with the group, leading
discussions and presenting new work. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broad representation
will be a fundamental guiding principle for selection of participants
&lt;br/&gt;(faculty and students), curriculum, approaches and methodologies. The
workshop seeks not only geographic, gender, and cultural balance, but a balance
of disciplinary contribution, including STS, philosophy, computer science and
engineering, information science, social sciences, history, communication and
media studies, etc.. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Several goals have motivated the
design of the workshop. The immediate ones are to deepen knowledge and
understanding of the complex interplay between social, moral, political and
cultural values and technology through the aggregation and study of a diverse
canon of works; create opportunities for collaborations among researchers and
scholars (current and future) historically separated by institutional,
geographic, and disciplinary boundaries; reveal relevant literatures,
approaches, and methodologies to graduate students, who might not, in the normal
course of their respective programs, see them; and promote further development
of collegial networks among established scholars as well as students. In the
long term, the workshop may project ideas of values in design into the future
and into broader domains of academic and research efforts; b) create model
course curricula and readings, particularly for use in institutions that do not
support specialization in these areas; and increase chances of technologies that
are responsive to social, moral, political, and cultural values.&lt;br/&gt;