* 0352274
* Collaborative research: The Nitrifying of Lake Superior and Its Intersections with the P and Fe Cycles
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* George Bullerjahn, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2008
* USD 132,241.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0352291 / OCE- 0352274 / OCE
0352208&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concentration of nitrate in Lake Superior
waters has increased steadily during the past century by six-fold from ca. 5 to
ca. 30 umol L-1. Today, nitrate remains in excess of biotic demand at the end of
the growing season. Though the increase in nitrogen concentration is not
surprising, the magnitude and rate of increase in Lake Superior are, considering
the long, fifty-year N turnover rate of the lake, and the absence of significant
local sources of N to the mainly forested watershed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
elucidate the causes of this impressive nitrate build up, researchers from the
University of Minnesota, Bowling Green State University, and Rutgers University
will undertake studies of the Lake Superior nitrogen cycle, combined with
studies of limiting nutrients and the responses of plankton communities to
differing nutrient supply regimes. Nitrification and denitrification rates,
previously assumed to be zero, will be measured with stable isotope tracers and
with other methods. Sources and transformations of the lakes nitrate will be
traced using natural abundances of stable isotopes of nitrogen and oxygen in the
lake, in streams and rivers, and in atmospheric sources. In addition to testing
the limitation on nitrate uptake, the team of scientists will also explore the N
cycle and its intersection with the P and Fe cycles in this large lake.
Shortages of P, along with cold and dark physical conditions, are likely
important factors in understanding lack of ecosystem assimilation of added
nitrate. Iron too may play an important role because of its critical role in
nitrate utilization by plankton. Indeed, it may be that absence of iron limits
the ability of the plankton to utilize nitrate such that the plankton are N
deficient even in the presence of nitrate surplus. In addition to developing a
new water column nitrogen model and data sets for several geochemically distinct
pools of dissolved P and Fe (with both spatial and temporal coverage of large
portions of the lake) this research will also yield a dramatically improved
knowledge of the nitrogen cycle in the worlds' largest lake.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;