* 0352119
* Collaborative Research:  Developing a Methodology for Imaging Stress Transients at Seismogenic Depth
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Paul Silver, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2006
* USD 40,619.00

EAR-0352119&lt;br/&gt;Silver&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We seek to develop a robust
methodology for directly measuring temporal variations in subsurface tectonic
stress by exploiting the stress dependence of seismic velocity. The dependence
of crustal seismic velocities on crack properties and in turn, the dependence of
crack properties on stress, means that seismic velocity exhibits stress
dependence. This dependence constitutes, in principle, a powerful instrument for
studying subsurface transient changes in stress. While these relationships and
their scientific potential have been known for several decades, the use of time-
dependent seismic imaging, has not yet developed into a reliable means of
measuring subsurface seismogenic stress changes. There are two primary reasons
for this: 1) lack of sufficient time-delay precision to detect small changes in
stress, and 2) the difficulty in establishing a reliable calibration between
stress and seismic velocity. These two problems are coupled because the best
sources of calibration are the solid-earth tides and barometric pressure, both
of which produce weak stress perturbations of order 102-103 Pa. Detecting these
sources requires measurement of fractional velocity changes on the order of
10-5-10-6, based on laboratory experiments. We propose to conduct a cross-well
experiment in the Parkfield area of the San Andreas Fault, with the goal of
successfully measuring delay-time variations induced by tides and barometric
pressure, as a means of demonstrating that known stress changes can be reliably
measured. By exploiting advances in the characteristics of artificial seismic
sources (such as rapid and reliable repeatability), dramatic advances in
computational power (allowing massive stacking of seismic waveforms), it will be
possible to measure variations in seismic velocity with unprecedented precision
that meet the requirement noted above. This will permit a meaningful stress
calibration of this method. The proposed experiment consists of two phases: a
test phase to take place at two locations at and near Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, and an experimental phase at Parkfield on the site of the 2-km-deep
SAFOD Pilot Hole, where progressively more realistic geometries will be
utilized. Ultimately, we will shoot to receivers in the Pilot Hole, which will
allow us to retrieve stress information at seismogenic depths.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;