* 0352407
* Quantification of Biomolecules Based on Flow Cytometric Single-Molecule Detection and Sorting on a Microchip
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Jeff Wang, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2006
* USD 280,407.00

This award supports the development of a novel instrument for measurement of
biomolecules using a combination of microscopy and a microfabricated device to
provide high throughput, single-molecule detection capability. The instrument,
which will sort and detect individual biomolecules during continuous flow,
represents a significant enhancement in sensitivity, accuracy, and resolution in
comparison to existing technology. The proposal aims to develop a generic,
washing-free, sensing strategy that can identify specific nucleic acids and
proteins in liquids at the single-molecule level using multi-channel confocal
laser induced fluorescence (LIF) and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy
(FCS), employing quantum dots as fluorescent tags. As part of the project, a
functional microfluidic chip will be designed and fabricated to enable rapid and
efficient molecular sorting. The microchip will have an array of microchannels
for multiple, concurrent measurements. This will allow analysis with extremely
low sample volume and concentration, and multiplexing of measurements to provide
high-throughput. The proposed instrument will be useful in many bioanalytical
areas including gene expression profiling, genotyping, early disease
diagnostics, pharmaceutical screening, as well as the study of molecular
binding. The impact of the project will extend beyond research to education and
training at several levels and, potentially, commercial applications following
further development.