* 0352868
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research Project:  Studies on the Folding Dynamics of Proteins
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Ahmet Palazoglu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2009
* USD 23,220.00

0352868 &lt;br/&gt;Palazoglu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a partnership between the Dr. Ahmet Palazoglu, Department of Chemical
Engineering and Material Science, The University of California, Davis,
California and a team of Turkish scientists including Dr. Attila Gursoy,
Department of Computer Engineering, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey and Dr.
Burak Erman and Dr. Yaman Arkun, both of the Department of Chemical and
Biological Engineering at Koc University. The focus of the research is the study
of protein folding dynamics, with the emphasis on developing fast simulation
platforms that can reliably predict the mechanisms of folding and analyzing the
simulated trajectories to understand the fundamental features of how the protein
folds to its native state. For simulating the folding dynamics, they plan to use
coarse-grained fast-folding algorithms. Specifically, a coarse-grained Go-type
model will be utilized. They will explore new directions, based on optimal
control theory, in steering the protein to its known native state. Furthermore,
they plan to use the principal components analysis (PCA) to characterize the
large number of trajectories obtained by the fast-folding Go-type model, and
perform wavelet decomposition to provide a multi-resolution analysis of their
spatial and temporal features. The coarse-grained Go model will also be
complemented by more extensive simulations of rigorous molecular dynamics (MD)
for proteins in water and different accuracy levels will be
probed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The proposed research on protein folding
dynamics is a field of intense study in structural biology. The PI's expect the
results of this research to have significant repercussions in understanding the
fundamental mechanisms involved during the evolution of the protein from its
denatured state to its native state. The two teams have complementary expertise
in the related elements of the proposed work, and there is already a brief
history of collaborative work between the two groups. The project will involve a
junior researcher from Turkey as the lead PI and graduate students from both
institutions. The travel between the U.S. and Turkey by the research teams will
be organized in such a way as to provide ample time for interaction and
substantial research during the year. The proposed research will help train
graduate students and provide a synergistic environment in which they can
appreciate the benefits of multi-disciplinary research. The results will be
disseminated through scientific literature and will also be available on the Web
pages of the leading PIs. The proposed activity will enhance our understanding
of how proteins function and will have a direct impact on the well being of the
society at large.&lt;br/&gt;