* 0352738
* Electron Liquids in Semiconductor Quantum Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Horst Stormer, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2009
* USD 1,440,000.00

Under the leadership of two principal investigators, this project will study the
electronic properties of highest quality two-dimensional electron systems at
ultra-low temperatures and in very high magnetic fields. When exposed to such
extreme conditions, electrons exhibit bizarre properties such as the fractional
quantum Hall effect. This research is expected to unravel novel quantum phases
of the low-dimensional electron systems and to characterize their properties.
There is significant probability of new physics discoveries as the experiments
explore novel tunable electron density devices with highly sensitive and
versatile inelastic light scattering techniques at millikelvin temperatures. The
project involves overall synergy from close collaboration between sample
synthesis, optics and electron transport studies. The project is of a
fundamental nature and offers venues for the training of graduate students and
postdocs in a combination of techniques that are at the forefront of today's
research. In addition, there is a healthy connection to traditional
semiconductor processing and field effect transistor research.

This project addresses the bizarre properties of collections of electrons in
semiconductor layers exposed to ultrahigh magnetic fields and very low
temperatures. Under these extreme conditions, electrons confined within
semiconductors exhibit fractional charge and vanishing resistance. The proposed
research will be carried out under the supervision of two principal
investigators. The project intends to move the field to a new regime of by
synthesizing the cleanest semiconducting materials ever created, pushing to the
lowest electron densities ever reached, and by performing optical and electrical
experiments at the lowest achievable temperatures. The expectation is to observe
novel, complex emerging properties. The research is of a fundamental nature and
addresses the question, which lies at the very heart of modern condensed matter
physics: how do complex properties arise within systems made from many simple,
identical components? In a broader context, the proposed research deepens our
understanding of quantum mechanics, which is presently considered for enhanced
information processing. On the educational side, the research trains young
scientists in a field that brings together exceptional experimental techniques,
forefront areas of semiconductor materials synthesis, ultra-low temperature and
high magnetic field technology, challenging theoretical issues, and advanced
numerical computation methods. This experience will prepare students for careers
in academe, industry or government.