* 0352343
* Biodiversity, Trophic Structure, and the Stability of Seagrass Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* J. Emmett Duffy, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 399,495.00

Biodiversity, trophic structure, and the stability of seagrass
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;Of the many consequences of declining global biodiversity,
impacts on the stability of ecosystem structure and functioning have generated
some of the strongest interest. The last decade has seen renewed attention to
the long-debated effects of biodiversity on stability, and several influential
experiments in grassland plant assemblages and laboratory microbial microcosms
support a link between them. These results, if general, are of clear importance
in the face of accelerating loss and homogenization of biodiversity worldwide.
Yet proposed links between biodiversity and stability remain poorly understood
in natural, multi-level food webs.&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use
eelgrass (Zostera marina) beds as a model system to test general hypotheses
linking ecosystem stability with biodiversity and food web structure. By
focusing on anthropogenic perturbations common to coastal ecosystems worldwide-
eutrophication, overfishing, and exotic invasion-proposed experiments will also
test rigorously the widely assumed dominance of bottom-up stressors
(eutrophication) in comparison with the impacts of top-down stressors, and their
interactions, in the ongoing global decline of seagrass ecosystems. Previous
research has demonstrated important effects of biodiversity and trophic
interactions on key properties of eelgrass ecosystems. This project will extend
this research to more complete food webs, a wider range of anthropogenic
perturbations, and interpretation of patterns in unmanipulated field systems.
The goal is a comprehensive, mechanistic evaluation of linkages among
biodiversity, food-web structure, and stability in a marine ecosystem of strong
significance to humans. Such an integration previously has been attempted only
for a few soil microfaunal and laboratory microbial communities. Specific
objectives include: (1) Test experimentally the main and interactive effects of
within-trophic level biodiversity, and foodweb structure (number and composition
of trophic levels, and interaction strengths among them), on eelgrass ecosystem
structure, functioning, and stability. (2) Test experimentally the roles of
consumer diversity and food-web structure in buffering seagrass ecosystems
against effects of anthropogenic eutrophication, predator removal, and invasion.
(3) Test the ability of experimentally derived conclusions to predict structure
and dynamics of unmanipulated seagrass ecosystems in nature.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use a complementary suite of mesocosm experiments, field
experiments, and application of experimental results to predict and interpret
patterns in&lt;br/&gt;unmanipulated field systems. Measured ecosystem response
variables will include benthic biomass, community composition and diversity,
macrophyte dominance, primary and secondary production, and trophic
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;This project has two principal broader impacts. First, the
general focus on ecological stability is of substantial practical importance
because human societies depend strongly on reliability of ecosystem services
such as water purification and fisheries production. More specifically, seagrass
beds are economically important ecosystems worldwide, but are declining for
reasons widely attributed to anthropogenic eutrophication. This project will
test experimentally the relative importance of eutrophication and food-web
changes in this decline. Second, the project will train several students, from
high school through Ph.D. levels, in experimental research on current issues at
the dynamic interface of basic and applied marine ecology. Finally, it will
coordinate with several recently initiated research projects addressing links
between biodiversity and marine ecosystem functioning, contributing to an effort
toward synthesis of this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(edited 15 Jan 04, J.
Pawlik)&lt;br/&gt;