* 0352256
* Collaborative Research: Gulf Stream Re-Analysis - Structure, Transport &amp; Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Lisa Beal, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2007
* USD 260,875.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0352256&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the strongest
element of the wind-driven circulation in the North Atlantic, the Gulf Stream
has been a focus of extensive empirical studies, theoretical debate and modeling
simulations. Its characteristics have always been prominent metrics by which the
verisimilitude of numerical models has been judged. Despite this attention,
there are important characteristics of the Gulf Stream between Cape Hatteras and
the Grand Banks that remain poorly known. As a cost-effective means of acquiring
more information and insight, the PI's will analyze existing data from the Gulf
Stream that either have not been analyzed before or can be analyzed more
accurately and completely now. The data in question were collected during the
two-year (1988-1990) Synoptic Ocean Prediction (SYNOP) experiment, the most
comprehensive experiment ever conducted in the Gulf Stream. While the original
SYNOP investigators have completed outstanding studies of the Gulf Stream's
kinematics and dynamics with the SYNOP data, there is still a wealth of
information locked within that data, because only in the past four years have
analysis techniques been developed which can take full advantage of the numerous
Inverted Echo Sounder (IES) recorders) or process the moored current and
temperature data without the biases arising from inadequate corrections for
mooring motion and inaccurate projection into "stream" coordinates. This
methodology employs historical hydrographic data in the vicinity of an IES array
to construct a temperature function (called the gravest empirical mode, or GEM)
with the independent variables depth (actually pressure) and seafloor-to-sea
surface acoustic travel time. It will allow independent estimates of GS
structure and transport. When the IES-GEM shears are combined with either the
HEF transports, or bottom pressure plus near-bottom current meter records, the
IES-GEM shears are transformed into absolute velocity profiles. Comparison with
earlier analyses will also allow an assessment of the performance of
traditional, widely used, analysis techniques. In addition, some important data,
from Horizontal Electric Field Recorders, will be analyzed for the first time
for its information about the Gulf Stream's structure and variability .
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;