* 0352582
* Chemistry and Self-Assembly of Molecules at Liquid-Solid and Vacuum-Solid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* George Flynn, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2008
* USD 591,000.00

In this award, supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. George Flynn of Columbia University will conduct
research on (1) the self-assembly of molecules at interfaces, both liquid-solid
and vacuum-solid interfaces, and (2) the reaction mechanism of carbon
tetrachloride on iron oxide surfaces. Experiments will utilize scanning
tunneling microscopy techniques, combined with temperature programmed desorption
measurements. Some of the studies in (1) will be complemented with a coupled
theoretical program, in collaboration with the Berne group at Columbia
University.

The studies by Prof. Flynn should provide important insight into some of the
processes that drive self-assembly. These insights are necessary in order to
begin to undertake the intelligent control and manipulation of self-assembly at
interfaces - - which could likely have a broad impact in many technological
areas, from new electro-optical materials to chemical and biological sensors. In
addition, the study of reactions of carbon tetrachloride at iron oxide surfaces
is expected to contribute to the understanding of the oxidation of this
halocarbon in the environment. Prof. Flynn's work will also contribute to the
education and training of post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate student
researchers.