* 0352702
* Warfare and Migration in the Galisteo Basin, AD 1250-1400
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,03/31/2009
* James Snead, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2009
* USD 167,133.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation James E. Snead and a
research team from George Mason University will conduct a three-year
archaeological program in northern New Mexico studying the relationship between
migration and warfare in Ancestral Pueblo society. The issue of conflict in
human culture has recently attracted considerable attention, and archaeology
provides one of the few means of studying this phenomenon as it existed in the
ancient world. The study of warfare in the Pueblo past is particularly
interesting, since in the modern era their culture is famously "peaceful":
evidence has accumulated, however, that these conditions did not always prevail
in earlier eras. Sensational reports have argued for the presence of extreme
violence and even cannibalism in the ancient Southwest. What continues to elude
us, however, is a detailed understanding of how conflict played out in
particular circumstances.

What conditions promote the outbreak of warfare? And what leads to its
cessation? Archaeologists have advocated various causes, such as environmental
stress, but relatively little attention has been placed on the role of social
and political factors in promoting violence in the past. Migration is a primary
element in many modern conflicts, as well as a process that has been part of
human interaction for millennia. This was also true for the Southwest, where
during the 13th century AD the traditional population centers in southwestern
Colorado and parts of adjacent states were abandoned in favor of newer areas,
including the Rio Grande in New Mexico. Widespread drought was a factor in this
migration, but does not provide a clear explanation. Complex political processes
are thus implicated. We also have increasing evidence that conflict
characterized the process of setting up new settlements in the Rio Grande and
elsewhere. This suggests that migration itself - which disrupted traditional
relationships, both cultural and economic - played a key role in the spread of
warfare during this era.

This research program focuses on Burnt Corn Pueblo, an Ancestral Pueblo village
established by migrants at the end of the 13th century AD and destroyed shortly
afterwards. Located in the Galisteo Basin south of Santa Fe, the site contains
critical information for the understanding of this process. Work will be
conducted at three scales: excavation in the ruins themselves, to gain a better
understanding of its occupation and destruction; survey in the surrounding
hinterland, to explore the structure of the settlement and use of the land,
particularly to evaluate perceptions of "threat" held by the inhabitants; and
examination of other residential sites in the broader region, to clarify
relationships between contemporary populations. This latter project will require
study of previously-excavated collections now housed in the Museum of New
Mexico. Additional goals of the project include the training of undergraduate
students from George Mason, both in field strategies and in laboratory
techniques back at the university. Ultimately this project will provide a window
on the relationship between warfare and migration in Ancestral Pueblo society,
and thereby expand our knowledge of these processes in the broader human
context.

