* 0352965
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Food Quality and Safety by Kernel Classification
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Ahmed Tewfik, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2008
* USD 35,000.00

0352965 &lt;br/&gt;Tewfik&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
collaborative research between Dr. Ahmed Tewfik, Department of Electrical
Engineering, the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota and a team
headed by Dr. Enis Cetin Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering,
Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. They propose to study the development of
methods for detection and classification of contaminated or defective kernels by
using analysis of impact acoustics. The PIs plan to develop contaminated or
defective kernel detection and classification based on the analysis of impact
acoustics, or the sound created when a kernel strikes a hard plate, as this mode
of acoustic excitation is easily adapted to high throughput sorting systems.
Demonstrating the effectiveness of the method in applications to hazelnuts,
wheat, and corn, could achieve a breakthrough in food safety by enabling the
non-invasive, rapid inspection of large quantities of food items. Despite
increasingly rigorous quality control stand in food alerts, current approaches
are mostly based on invasive chemical analysis of some selected food items or
sorting food items according to their color. Although chemical analysis gives
the most accurate results, it is impossible to analyze large quantities of food
items or to apply it to certain items. Signal processing techniques have become
attractive with the advances in computer technology, and it is now possible to
integrate low cost, non-invasive signal processing systems providing quality
control into the food supply chain. The approach uses substantial extensions of
speech and speaker recognition techniques to deal with the variability that
results from different kernel orientation at the instant of impact. The project
focuses more specifically on the detection of aflatoxins (a carcinogenic
material) and insect tunnels in hazelnuts, wheat kernels damaged by insects, and
aflatoxins and insect tunnels in corn. Detection and classification results will
be verified with high performance liquid chromatography. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project will lead to the development of real-time,
economically feasible, systems to remove whole intact corn and hazelnut kernels
that are contaminated with aflatoxins or wheat kernels infested with insects;
interdisciplinary training programs for undergraduate and graduate students and
the food industry in Turkey and the USA in signal processing, agricultural
engineering and molecular biology; the involvement of students in data gathering
and analysis; and algorithm development. With some modifications, the algorithms
and methods developed in this project can be also used for other nuts and
produce such as almonds and figs. The algorithms and other fundamental knowledge
to be developed may be applicable to multivariate signal processing in general,
beyond acoustics. Turkey has a wealth of expertise in hazelnut production and
processing, while the United States is the source of expertise in grain
production and processing. The research team reflects the interdisciplinary
nature of the project, and several of the investigators bring to the project a
strong background in the analysis and processing of speech and will crossover
such methods to food safety.&lt;br/&gt;