* 0352671
* Enhancing the Capacity of Math and Science Teachers -- A Conference to be Held in Washington, DC, Spring 2004
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Russell Garth, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 04/30/2005
* USD 19,671.00

The grant supports a planning conference with selected faculty and
administrators from eight to ten small colleges and universities with staff from
Stevens Institute of Technology. The conference would focus on more effective
use of the Internet in pre-service training of K-12 science teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Council of Independent Colleges (CIC) seeks to
strengthen the abilities of K-12 teachers to incorporate technological solutions
in their math and science classrooms. This initiative would enhance the capacity
of collegiate teacher education programs in independent colleges and
universities to shape the education of prospective math and science teachers.
The CIC and Stevens Institute of Technology will draw on their respective
strengths in educating prospective and current teachers in developing this
program. The CIC's member colleges and universities train a significant number
of career scientists and science teachers in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stevens Institute of Technology turned to community
colleges as its partners in organizing their own training sessions for in-
service K-12 teachers and its pre-science activities. They found faculty members
at small, four-year colleges were especially effective in their teacher-training
activities. Based on this successful relationship, Stevens and the CIC want to
create a national program beginning with approximately ten small colleges and
universities with strong records in the preparation of K-12 science teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;