* 0352584
* Collaborative Research:     A Unique Opportunity for In-Situ Measurement of Seasonally-Varying Firn Densification at Summit, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Edwin Waddington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 09/30/2010
* USD 217,526.00

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the University of
Washington and the Desert Research Institute. They will make detailed
measurements of the temporal and spatial variations of firn compaction to
advance knowledge and understanding of ice deformation and across different
fields, including remote sensing, snow morphology, and paleoclimatology. They
will make detailed measurements through two winter and three summer seasons at
Summit Greenland using the concept of Borehole Optical Stratigraphy, which will
use a borehole camera to record details of the wall. These details can be
tracked over time to determine vertical motion and strain, which in the shallow
depth is dominated by firn compaction. Quantitative understanding of firn
compaction is important for remote-sensing mass-balance studies, which seek to
measure and interpret the changing height of the ice sheet; the surface can rise
due to snow accumulation, and fall due to ice flow and increased densification
rates. Quantitative knowledge of all three processes is essential. Evidence
suggests that the rate of densification undergoes a seasonal cycle, related to
the seasonal cycle of temperature. When interpreting ice core trapped-gas data
for paleoclimate, it is important to know at what point the gas was actually
trapped in the ice. The pores do not close off until deep in the firn, leading
to a difference between the age of the ice and the age of the trapped gas. If
summer high temperatures have more impact on compaction than mean annual
temperatures, the gas-age/ice-age offset might be incorrectly calculated.
Greater understanding of firn densification physics will help the interpretation
of these records. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts- This project will:
&lt;br/&gt;Enhance infrastructure for research and education in the glaciology,
paleo-climatology, and remote-sensing community: 1) investigators working on
large-scale mass-balance studies using ice-surface altimetry will have a new
source of actual measurements of firn compaction; 2) modelers will be able to
validate and improve existing models of firn compaction with detailed compaction
measurements; 3) new thermo-mechanical models will allow remote-sensing studies
to estimate seasonally-varying firn compaction based on accumulation and surface
temperature measurements; and 4) investigators studying trapped bubble-gas for
paleoclimate interpretation will have new information about the physics of firn
densification and gas-occlusion. &lt;br/&gt;Integrate research and education to
promote teaching, training, and learning through the support of a graduate
student, Robert L. Hawley. This work will contribute to a PhD dissertation topic
for Hawley, who will carry out this project under the direction of the Principal
Investigator.&lt;br/&gt;Enhance K-12 education through ongoing collaboration
with Rolf Tremblay, a middle school science and math teacher in Gig Harbor,
Washington, and Lars Long, a middle school science teacher in Chippewa Falls,
Wisconsin. This project gives us the opportunity to involve middle school
students with the complete life cycle of a scientific endeavor- from idea to
hypothesis, to&lt;br/&gt;experimentation, formulating conclusions and reporting
results. &lt;br/&gt;Encourage broad dissemination of results through a project
website for the informed&lt;br/&gt;layperson", supplementing our peer-reviewed
journal articles.&lt;br/&gt;