* 0352707
* Annual Telluride Workshop on Neuromorphic Engineering: Telluride, CO  6/27/0407/17/04; 2004-2009
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Avis Cohen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 05/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

The Annual Telluride Workshop on Neuromorphic Engineering initially arose
because of a strategic decision by NSF to facilitate the interface between
Neuroscience and Engineering. The present project is a workshop that focuses on
innovative approaches to the design and fabrication of artificial neural systems
for perception, cognition and action, whose architecture and design are
critically base upon a biological nervous system. The three-week long workshop
includes lectures from key researchers in the areas of biological,
computational, and engineering sciences, practical tutorials from state-of-the-
art practitioners, hands-on projects, and special interest discussion groups.
The specific goals of the workshop, over the next 5 years, include promoting the
transition of scientific and technological results into practical real-world
application, providing outreach to enabling communities to attract researchers
in biomaterials, bioengineering, microsystems, and nanotechnologies, increasing
collaborations with international neuromorphic research to further technologies
and knowledge, extending critical neuromorphic infrastructure to develop
concepts, software, and hardware that support learning and memory, incorporating
neuromorphic concepts into emerging technologies such as computational media,
neural interface and signal processing, and on-chip processing, coordinate K-12
mini courses in simple electronic and robotics. The workshop will facilitate
interactions between junior and senior researchers, while educating the
community, and enabling international collaborations in research and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;