* 0352827
* US-India Cooperative Research: How Do Human Seed Predators Affect the Population Ecology of Tropical Forest Trees?
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Tamara Ticktin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2008
* USD 30,553.00

0352827&lt;br/&gt;Ticktin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
the US-India cooperative research, How do Human Seed Predators Affect the
Population Ecology of Tropical Forest Trees? US PI Tamara Ticktin, University of
Hawaii will collaborate with Dr. Rengaian Ganesan, Ashoka Trust for Research in
Ecology and the Environment (ATREE), Bangalore to assess the effects of seed
predation through fruit-harvesting by humans on the population ecology of four
animal-dispersed tropical forest trees in India's Western Ghats. While humans
have acted as important frugivores of tropical trees for thousands of years,
little ecological research has been conducted to assess the significance of the
role that human gathering of wild resources may have played, and continue to
play, in altering forest tree ecology. &lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the
investigators will use both demographic and seed-dispersal analyses to study the
role that animal frugivores play in shaping the structure and dynamics of tree
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This collaboration combines the
expertise of the US and Indian scientists in regeneration dynamics (Ganesan),
and population modeling and frugivory studies (Ticktin) to address the
complexities of this plant-human-animal interaction. The collaborating
institution ATREE is a recognized scientific research institution that has
conducted ecological research since its establishment in 1996. As a well-
respected environmental science and policy group, it has the expertise to
translate the scientific results of this project into meaningful management and
educational activities regarding conservation and sustainable harvesting of
tropical forests. Both Indian and US PIs are recent PhDs. This collaboration
will provide training opportunities for US and Indian doctoral students and
mutual benefits for faculty, researchers and students at both institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;