* 0353817
* REU Site: Systematics and Evolutionary Biology at the American Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Mark Siddall, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2009
* USD 424,975.00

Systematics and evolution are central concepts in biological disciplines.
Knowledge of the manner in which species are related to each other and the
mechanisms by which they become distributed across the globe provide a framework
(in evolutionary trees for example) for organizing and communicating ideas
regarding biodiversity or comparative genomics. Our program provides students
with a coherent, hands-on introduction to research in systematics and
comparative evolutionary biology, and serves a critical role in attracting,
inspiring and educating undergraduate students in the fundamental importance of
these biological disciplines. Students enrolled in the American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH) REU program have at their disposal world-class
collections of fishes, dinosaurs, reptiles, amphibians, mammals and
invertebrates, as well as cutting edge research facilities in the Molecular
Genomics laboratories, and the museum's research library. Projects are mentored
by museum curators and variously include use of genetic, histological,
anatomical or paleontological data and range from primary taxonomic to
integrative phylogenetic studies. Students will also be provided opportunities
to immerse themselves in the richness of New York City's cultural institutions
and summer venues. Eight students will be selected for a 10 week summer program
at American Museum of Natural History REU program in Systematics and
Evolutionary Biology. For more info, contact: Mark E. Siddall, 212 769 5638,
siddall@amnh.org or visit http://research.amnh.org/grants/underprog.html.