* 0353108
* ARPES Study of Electronic Evolution from Mott Insulators to Novel Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Hong Ding, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 330,000.00

This individual investigator award will support continued angle-resolved
photoemission (ARPES) studies on the evolution of the electronic structure of
novel superconductors. The materials studied in this project include
superconducting cuprates, ruthenates, and cobaltates. All of them are 2D oxides
that become superconducting when doped away from half-filled Mott insulator
states. Unconventional superconductivity in these materials is one of the most
important topics in condensed matter physics. In addition, other exotic phases,
such as charge (spin) ordered states, may develop at certain doping. The physics
of these states are of great importance as well. This project involves
systematic ARPES studies on these materials over wide doping ranges. It will
help us to understand the underlying electronic structure of the different
phases. Besides the 'traditional' measurements of band dispersion and Fermi
surface, many-body interactions, which are crucial in these strongly correlated
materials, will be also investigated by high-resolution ARPES. A better
understanding of the electronic structure in doped Mott insulators will
significantly advance our knowledge of Mott physics, novel superconductivity,
low dimensionality, quantum criticality, and non-Fermi liquid physics. This
project will also make a significant impact on the education of high school
students, undergraduate, graduate students, and post-docs by introducing them to
exciting new materials, cutting-edge techniques, and fundamental condensed
matter physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike traditional insulators that have
either empty or completely filled outermost electron orbitals, the so-called
"Mott" insulators have highest orbitals that are partially filled. Their
insulating nature comes from strong interactions among the electrons. More
interestingly, when extra electrons are added or removed from the Mott
insulators, they exhibit many unusual physical phenomena. Some such "doped"
materials show a very large change in their electrical resistance when placed in
a magnetic field. Others become superconducting, lose all electrical resistance,
above the temperature of liquid nitrogen - the so-called high temperature
superconductors. Several doped Mott insulators, which exhibit novel
superconductivity, are the focus of this experimental project. The technique of
photoemission is used to knock out electrons from a solid sample through the
absorption of ultraviolet light. The emitted electrons are studied to gain
information about their configuration inside the solid, the electronic structure
of the material. The electronic structure is crucial for the understanding of
many of the materials' properties. The proposed systematic photoemission
studies, over wide doping ranges, will help us understand the underlying
electronic structure of many exotic phases in these materials. The success of
this project will significantly advance our understanding of high temperature
superconductivity and Mott physics in general. A better understanding of the
physics of these novel materials will be helpful in realizing their application
potentials. This project will also make a significant impact on the education of
students by introducing them to exciting new materials, cutting-edge techniques,
and advanced physics. They will gain the experience of participating in research
at national facilities.&lt;br/&gt;