* 0353032
* Pol III-Related Mechanism of Transcription Through Chromatin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Vasily Studitsky, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 02/28/2006
* USD 398,929.00

The genome of higher organisms is organized in DNA-protein complexes called
chromatin. Chromatin is designed to allow tight DNA packaging and proper
functioning of DNA, as well as regulation of enzymes such as nuclear DNA and RNA
polymerases. RNA polymerases transcribe chromatin (make RNA copies of one DNA
strand). Transcribed genes are organized in chromatin raising the question of
how RNA polymerases deal with chromatin. The primary features of this process
have been recapitulated in vitro. In particular, the mechanism used by
eukaryotic RNA polymerase III (pol III) is accompanied by transient chromatin
remodeling at the sites of transcription followed by recovery of chromatin
structure. This project focuses on further mechanistic analysis of this
mechanism and its regulation using defined chromatin templates. The mechanism of
transcription through chromatin by pol III will be analyzed using biochemical
approaches, electron cryo-microscopy and fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET). Completion of this project will result in development of novel defined
chromatin templates and new techniques useful for analysis of various DNA-
protein interactions in chromatin, including interaction of specific regulatory
factors and enzymes of DNA metabolism (such as enzymes involved in DNA
replication and repair) with chromatin. The data obtained will lead to better
understanding of the mechanism of chromatin transcription in terms of the
structures of the DNA-protein complexes formed during this process. Since the
mechanisms of DNA replication, ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling and the
mechanism of transcription through chromatin by pol III have many common
features, the results obtained during this research will help to understand all
these processes. &lt;br/&gt;