* 0353470
* Developing a Professional Learning Community Model for Secondary Precalculus Teachers:  A Model for Teacher Professional Growth
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Nora Ramirez, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,444,624.00

This five-year project, entitled "Developing a Professional Learning Community
Model for Secondary Precalculus Teachers: A Model for Teacher Professional
Growth," will produce a model for a Professional Learning Community (PLC) for
pre-calculus teachers in secondary schools. It will generate research knowledge
from cycles of (1) defining, (2) studying and (3) refining the model and its
components. The project leadership team will then be able to describe the
support structure, group processes and tools needed to assist secondary pre-
calculus teachers in providing high quality instruction for their students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PLC tools will be developed and refined to facilitate
Teachers' "reflection-on-students'" thinking and reasoning relative to the major
concepts of pre-calculus mathematics. The activities of the PLCs will also
support teachers' continued conceptual and mathematical development, while
promoting reflections on the effectiveness of their classroom practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The leadership team expects that the teachers' rich
reservoir of new knowledge and understandings will be observable in the ways in
which they orchestrate learning experiences for their students. They anticipate
qualitative improvements in their classroom practices (perceivable in their
questions and questioning patterns, the design and substance of their tasks, the
conceptual focus of their exams), resulting in improved learning in their
students. Implementation of this model will produce a set of research-developed
tools to assist individual schools in devising and implementing a plan to
support secondary teacher professional growth.&lt;br/&gt;