* 0353158
* U.S.-Africa Workshop:  The Mathematics of Computer Security, Tunis, Tunisia, August 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Wayne Patterson, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 35,000.00

0353158&lt;br/&gt;Patterson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an
international workshop, "The Mathematics of Computer Security," to be held in
conjunction with the quadrennial Congress of the African Mathematical Union, in
Tunis, Tunisia on August 30-31, 2004. The workshop is being co-organized by the
PI and by Jan Persens from the University of the Western Cape, South Africa. A
number of leading American researchers in computer security have identified
current research issues in information security, information exchange, and
information hiding, and will work towards developing collaborative approaches to
solving these problems. Computer security issues, in this era when more and more
information is developed and maintained in electronic form, have vastly
increased in importance, and in order to develop stronger methods, more scholars
need to become interested in this field. This research workshop will develop
collaborations among the American practitioners in the field, as well as among
US researchers and the African scholars who will participate in the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project will be to
deepen and sustain the relationship between US and African mathematicians and
computer scientists. A significant number of the US participants are from
minority-serving institutions, so it is expected that this activity will bring a
broader range of US participants to this field of research.&lt;br/&gt;