* 0353723
* REU Site:     Research Experience for Undergraduates in Discrete Mathematics and Algebra at Auburn University
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Peter Johnson, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 01/31/2009
* USD 218,438.00

Eight participants will spend 8 weeks at Auburn University during the summer of
2005 working on problems in Discrete Mathematics and Algebra. The first two
weeks will serve as orientation and introduction, with two formal meetings per
day, plus at least an hour of computer lab. During this period, participants
will be given some of the necessary background for research in the areas of
interest, and will be introduced to problems and classes of problems that they
might work on. In addition, each participant will be asked to prepare an "ice-
breaker" presentation. These presentations will be completed by the end of the
third week, by which time the participants, in collaboration with each other,
the project directors, and interested faculty and graduate students in the
Department of Mathematics and Statistics at Auburn University, will be working
on particular problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Regular meetings will continue,
with talks by the participants, faculty, graduate students, and visiting
luminaries. Participants will write up their research findings during the course
of the summer to be submitted to the project directors at the end of the
program. During the last week of the program, each participant will give a final
presentation describing his/her work. At the conclusion of the program,
participants will be asked to write a critique of their experience, and of the
program overall.&lt;br/&gt;