* 0353513
* Topics in Multivariable Operator Theory and Interpolation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Gelu Popescu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2009
* USD 105,383.00

The main directions of this proposed research are the following: (1) Harmonic
analysis on Fock spaces, (2) Entropy and multivariable interpolation, (3)
Numerical in-variants for Hilbert modules over free semigroup algebras. A new
notion of entropy for operators on Fock spaces is proposed in connection with
factorizations of multi-Toeplitz and multi-analytic operators, multivariable
interpolation, and numerical invariants for completely positive maps. Under the
first heading are also found a number of problems pertaining to harmonic
analysis on Fock spaces, the geometry of the unit ball of non-commutative
analytic Toeplitz algebras generated by the left creation operators, interpo-
lation sequences, and Fejer type inequalities in several variables. These
results have po-tential applications to function theory in several complex
variables, prediction and multi-variate stochastic processes. In recent years,
there has been exciting progress in multi-variable interpolation. The PI will
continue his work in this area of research and expects to find the maximal
entropy solutions of several multivariable interpolation problems (Sarason,
Caratheodory-Schur, Nevanlinna-Pick) including the abstract noncommutative
commu-tant lifting theorem for row contractions. This proposed research is
expected to play a role in multivariable control theory and systems theory. A
new invariant, entropy, is pro-posed for n-tuples of operators, that seems to
complement the curvature invariant. The goal is to make significant progress
towards a complete set of numerical invariants that classify large classes of
completely positive maps.

Originated from the concept of quantization, operator theory links together
several branches of mathematics and is closely related to mathematical physics.
The motivation of this research is the recent worldwide interest in the
noncommutative aspect of har-monic analysis and multivariable operator theory.
The objective is to advance the under-standing of these relatively new areas of
research and apply the results to the study of completely positive maps and
their invariants, function theory and interpolation in several variables,
multivariable linear systems and control theory, and prediction and stochastic
processes. Potential applications in fields such as geophysics and image
processing are also expected.