* 0353101
* ROLE: The school as a knowing organization - Knowledge management as a strategy for continuous teacher development
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Mary Beth Rosson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 11/30/2005
* USD 523,846.00

Organizations have knowledge. The knowledge is typically
dispersed&lt;br/&gt;throughout the organization. Some of it is codified in
documents and&lt;br/&gt;policies, some is embodied in projects and strategies,
and some is tacitly&lt;br/&gt;held by individuals and small groups. The problem
of knowledge management&lt;br/&gt;is that an organization's knowledge is often
locally produced, haphazardly&lt;br/&gt;disseminated, and ineffectively indexed.
It is inaccessible when and where&lt;br/&gt;it is needed. Knowledge management
techniques take a participatory approach&lt;br/&gt;to identifying, codifying,
and integrating knowledge resources throughout&lt;br/&gt;the organization. Their
objective is to help people make sense of their&lt;br/&gt;organizations, to
develop and maintain trust, to make commitments and
take&lt;br/&gt;responsibility, to more effectively challenge, negotiate, and
learn, and&lt;br/&gt;thereby to improve the quality of the contributions people
make to their&lt;br/&gt;organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
adapt knowledge management concepts and techniques, and&lt;br/&gt;the
information technology they employ, to understand and enhance
knowledge&lt;br/&gt;management in school organizations. We will work with
school&lt;br/&gt;administrators, but chiefly with teachers. First, we will
investigate and&lt;br/&gt;characterize knowledge management practices as they
exist today, and&lt;br/&gt;identify needs and opportunities to improve knowledge
management. We will&lt;br/&gt;facilitate teacher-initiated development of
organizational knowledge&lt;br/&gt;resources, and identify, and accessibly
codify the critical knowledge of&lt;br/&gt;the school
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will assess the impact of this intervention on
teachers, on the school&lt;br/&gt;system, and on the perception of the school by
the community. We will&lt;br/&gt;compare and contrast this analysis and
intervention to knowledge management&lt;br/&gt;interventions now becoming
typical in business organizations.&lt;br/&gt;