* 0353137
* Summer field-training program in methods of data collection: Bolivia and Zambia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Ricardo Godoy, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2007
* USD 226,940.00

This project involves summer fieldwork training in research methodology in two
locations, Bolivia and Zambia. The training will be offered to graduate students
studying for their doctorate in cultural anthropology, and will expose students
to interdisciplinary research in progress; provide them with tools for
conducting successful collaborative research; teach them to adapt and apply
formal methods of data collection in the field; and provide them with a
stimulating, supportive atmosphere where they can experience the realities of
fieldwork while exploring their own research interests. Students will be taught
to collect data in ecology, demography, experimental and household economics,
cognitive anthropology, folk knowledge, natural resource use and health.
Procedures for validating data and achieving inter-observer reliability across
sites will be taught as well as how to deal with missing data; how to code,
store and clean data in the field; how to explain human subject protection
protocols to research participants; how to do preliminary data analysis and
write up, how to deal with logistical and ethical problems that arise in the
field situation; and how to give something back and explain research findings to
the host community before leaving the research site. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project relate to the enhanced education students will receive
which will heighten their commitment and ability to do excellent scientific
fieldwork in cultural anthropology. &lt;br/&gt;