* 0353807
* REU:     Summer Undergraduate Chemistry Research at James Madison University:      A Regional Site That Includes Deaf Participants
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Daniel Downey, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 02/28/2009
* USD 253,080.00

The Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at James Madison University for the summers of 2004-2006. Daniel M.
Downey is the site director and Gina M. MacDonald is the co-PI. This site will
provide research experiences for eight undergraduate students, two high school
teachers, two high school students and one non-JMU faculty mentor for 10 weeks
each summer. This REU-RET program provides special opportunties, supporting
personnel and infrastructure for participation by hearing disabled students. It
will target recruitment of students from smaller schools in the mid-Atlantic and
Shenandoah region, women and other historically under-represented groups.
Research opportunities will be available in a variety of chemistry sub-
disciplines including analytical, biochemistry, synthesis, materials science,
spectroscopy and other specialities. Weekly meetings will cover instrument
training, safety, technical writing, library skills and research seminars from
REU students and outside visitors. Each student will present orally or in a
formal poster session his/her work at the end of the summer. Assessment will be
carried out with surveys and faculty evaluation.