* 0353520
* REU Site:  Ecological Research in the Northern Rockies, the Crown-of-the-Continent REU Program
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Jack Stanford, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2008
* USD 220,575.00

The Crown-of-the-Continent REU Program is a 10-week immersion for 10 upper-
division undergraduate students into ecological research in and around Glacier
National Park. Coordinated by the Flathead Lake Biological Station (FLBS) of the
University of Montana, this broad-based, field-ecology program has a rich mix of
research projects offering many opportunities for REU students in different
disciplinary areas: population ecology, community ecology, landscape ecology,
limnology, population genetics, conservation biology, physiological ecology,
microbial ecology, geomorphology, remote sensing, biodiversity, informatics and
more.&lt;br/&gt; FLBS is an international leader in research of aquatic systems
and terrestrial-aquatic interactions at watershed to landscape scales. REU
students work alongside world-class scientists extending the scope of ongoing
research, following up on interesting leads and exploring new areas. The breadth
and interdisciplinary nature of the Bio Station's research program provides the
REU students with an understanding of how collaborative, integrative research is
conducted. REU students become better equipped to pursue a career in science,
and more capable of understanding the social context and interaction between
science and society.&lt;br/&gt; Based on interests and education, REU students
are matched with mentor scientists who lead them through overview and
apprenticeship phases and guide them in an independent research project.
Students are immersed in the mentor scientist's projects as full team members
becoming exposed to the basic set of intellectual and logistical activities of
research, from the formulation of questions and hypotheses, to designing
experimental studies, to developing field sampling and analytical methods, to
communication via written reports and presentations. The summer program
concludes with an REU Symposium where students present the results of their
research as at a professional meeting. The Symposium is advertised on the FLBS
web page and open to the public.&lt;br/&gt; An informatics component provides a
unique aspect of this REU Program. Two students of the 10 in each summer's
cohort are selected for their interest in data management and work jointly with
their mentor scientist and the Biological Station's data manager on a long-term
data set.&lt;br/&gt; The REU Program overlaps with FLBS's 100-plus year-old
program of summer classes. FLBS is a year-round research and educational
community where scientists, graduate students, undergraduate students and
technicians live, study and work together in a collegial atmosphere. Summer is
an especially dynamic time with multiple opportunities for REU students to
interact with researchers and other students in the relaxed setting of a field
station. For further information and application materials, please visit
www.umt.edu/flbs or contact Jack Stanford at
jack.stanford@flbs.umt.edu.&lt;br/&gt;