* 0353899
* REU Site:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics and Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Thomas Kvale, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

The Department of Physics and Astronomy at the University of Toledo offers a
National Science Foundation Research Experiences for Undergraduates site for 8 -
10 undergraduate students to conduct state-of-the-art research in a variety of
subfields of physics and astronomy. These students are chosen from across the
United States, and the program strives to select students from diverse
backgrounds (gender, racial/ethnic, class rank, geographical, and
institutional). The faculty in the department conduct state-of-the-art research
in: Astrophysics/Astronomy; Atomic/Molecular/Optical Physics;
Biological/Health/Medical Physics; and Condensed Matter Physics (with
specialization in thin films, photovoltaics and photonics). Undergraduate
research opportunities exist in all of these areas for both experimental and
theoretical research. Research projects are chosen such that the student's
project will in many cases lead to publication in the appropriate professional
research journals. Past REU students have coauthored 29 refereed publications
and have made 56 presentations at professional meetings over twelve years of REU
support.

Students work closely with the faculty member on their research for ten weeks
during the summer and are given a competitive stipend. Students are housed
together in one of UT's newer dormitories, with the NSF-REU grant providing the
costs of housing. The students are required to register for 1 credit hour in
Phys4910: Research Topics in Physics and Astronomy, which is also provided by
the grant. In addition to research, the students' physics experiences is
enhanced by requiring them to participate (camp organization, as well as
mentoring) in a one week Physics Summer Camp for high school science students.
All REU students present an Interim Talk midway through the summer, participate
in the Physics Summer Camp, a Final Presentation the last week of the session,
and write a 10-20 page Final Report before the conclusion of the summer session.