* 0353750
* Patterns and Processes in Natural and Managed Fluvial and Riparian Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Kenneth Adams, SUNY College at Plattsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2006
* USD 167,583.00

The Center for Earth and Environmental Science (CEES) at Plattsburgh State
University (PSU) and the W.H. Miner Agricultural Research Institute seek to
continue to provide eight-week summer research experiences for 12 highly
motivated undergraduate students with broad academic training in the natural
sciences and multifaceted interests in ecosystem research. Our principal
objectives are to promote the professional development of our student
&lt;br/&gt;researchers through their participation in ongoing interdisciplinary
research of natural and managed fluvial and riparian ecosystems in the Little
Chazy River watershed of northeastern New York. REU participants, individually
and in small groups, will work closely with the program.s faculty mentors on
research projects ranging from surface &lt;br/&gt;and ground water hydrogeology,
geochemistry (nutrient cycling), and aquatic invertebrate, riparian and wetland
ecology. The computer and laboratory resources at PSU and Miner Institute will
be available for the REU project. The Plattsburgh REU program will challenge its
student researchers to think broadly and creatively about their research, expand
their disciplinary focus and develop an interdisciplinary perspective. The REU
students will also participate in a weekly Environment and Society Workshop
series that is carefully designed to link the scientific &lt;br/&gt;aspects of
their watershed research to relevant social and ethical concerns.
&lt;br/&gt;"This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF REU program"&lt;br/&gt;