* 0353924
* REU Site: Basic Science Scholars (BASS) Program
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Roscoe Giles, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 02/28/2005
* USD 90,000.00

The Basic Science Scholars (BASS) Program is a rigorous, interdisciplinary,
research-based program that integrates molecular genetics and computer science.
Its purpose is to provide participating scholars with the scientific foundation,
academic support and intensive mentoring that will promote their entry into, and
completion of, doctoral programs in the basic sciences. BASS Scholars spend two
consecutive years (Junior and Senior years) in the program undertaking research
projects concomitant with their baccalaureate degree courses. Scholars must be
full-time (minimally 12 credits) undergraduate science majors at Boston
University or any other accredited undergraduate institution in the Boston area.
Scholars will be paid a stipend for the duration of their participation in the
program.

Scholars undertake research that integrates molecular human genetics and
computer science components. The genetics component of the BASS Program focuses
on linking African-Americans and Caribbean blacks to their ancestral ethnic
groups in Africa via Y-chromosome and mitochondrial DNA analysis (see
http://www.bumc.bu.edu/rootsproject). The computer-science component entails the
development of new computer technologies and methodologies that allow the rapid
genetic analysis of the human DNA data collected. Applicants must be rising
Juniors upon entry into the BASS program. For complete application and program
information, please contact: Dr. Bruce Jackson: bjakson@bu.edu or Dr. Roscoe
Giles: roscoe@bu.edu.