* 0353504
* US-Poland Workshop on Diagnostics of Concrete Materials for Infrastructure Facilities; April 2004; Warsaw, Poland
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Andrzej Nowak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 11/30/2004
* USD 19,657.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed Workshop is to
review the recent advancements in concrete materials and their applications for
civil infrastructure systems in Poland and the United States, identify the most
suitable topics for collaboration. The Workshop will focus on materials
properties, forms of deterioration and their effects on structural performance,
and quantitative analysis of materials. The major areas to be covered include:
(1) advanced materials (high-strength/high-performance concrete, composites,
fiber-reinforced concrete, smart materials), (2) forms of deterioration for
reinforced concrete and prestressed concrete structures, (3) diagnostic
procedures (tests, performance monitors, nondestructive techniques, signal
processing, integrated sensor systems, acoustic and optical techniques), (4)
materials and techniques for repair and rehabilitation of concrete structures
(reinforced and prestressed concrete, new composite materials). Accordingly, the
Workshop will attempt to review state of the art summary of main topics as
viewed on one hand in the U.S. and, on the other hand, in Poland, identify the
research needs, in particular, topics for cooperative projects, and derive some
recommendations that reflect the needs in manpower, technology transfer and
education for the near future. The local organizers will also organize special
meetings, lab tours and visits to the construction sites. The results will be
presented in the report.