* 0353797
* REU Site: The  Summer Systematics Institute at the California Academy of Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Rich Mooi, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2008
* USD 274,967.00

The California Academy of Sciences is among the foremost research museums in the
world. The Academy houses collections that reflect interests in global
biodiversity -- from the deep sea and coral reefs to the forests and mountains
of tropical Asia. Starting each June, the Academy's Summer Systematics Institute
will bring seven undergraduates to the California Academy of Sciences for an
8-week summer session that will provide participants with an excellent
understanding of what are among the most important aspects of biology: the study
of biodiversity and the evolutionary relationships among organisms. Each
prospective intern will apply to work with an Academy scientist on a research
project. Students will develop directed projects that provide them with an
introduction to the problem, organisms to be studied, and aspects of data
collection, interpretation, and dissemination as it relates to systematic
biology. Successful applicants will participate in formal lectures, tours of the
Academy's facilities, and research seminars. Each student will write up the
project's results in the form of a scientific paper, and make an oral
presentation to their peers. Recruitment is on a national level, with emphasis
on candidates from groups under-represented in the sciences, particularly
African-Americans, Native-Americans, and Latinos. Participants will receive a
stipend of $3500, housing/subsistence allowance, and travel funds to and within
San Francisco. Information on application procedures can be found at:
http://calacademy.org/research/index.html#sri. For specific inquiries about the
program or the application, candidates can also contact the Curriculum
Coordinator: Dr. Rich Mooi atrmooi@calacademy.org.