* 0353419
* U.S.-Pakistan Cooperative Research:  Growth and Characterization of Semiconductor and Magnetic Nanocrystals Using Buffer-Layer-Assisted Growth
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* John Weaver, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2009
* USD 43,800.00

0353419 &lt;br/&gt;Weaver&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a
cooperative research project between Dr. John H. Weaver, Department of Materials
Science and Engineering at the University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois and Dr.
Irshad Bhatti, Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan. They
will study the growth and characterization of semiconductor and magnetic
nanocrystals using buffer-layer-assisted growth (BLAG). The recently developed
technique has tremendous potential for the synthesis of novel quantum
structures. It eliminates the interaction between growing particles and the
substrate because the substrate is buffered by a rare gas solid multilayer.
Thus, nanoparticle growth occurs on the rare gas surface, and BLAG makes it
possible to grow three-dimensional crystals and clusters of nanometer
dimensions. In this project, BLAG would be used to grow magnetic and
semiconducting nanostructures where the size distributions could be varied and
their structural, magnetic, and optical properties could be determined.
Researchers worldwide are trying to synthesize nanoparticles; and the planned
approach is unique because it allows growing nanoparticles of almost any element
and a wide range of binary systems. Growth is done in vacuo under controlled
conditions. Electronic state characterization includes scanning tunneling
microscopy so that the particles can be interrogated, one by one. The PIs will
study the effect of size distributions on the physical properties, the
mechanisms of cluster nucleation, growth, and coalescence, and the interactions
of the clusters when they come into contact with the substrate. A specific goal
is to elucidate the crystal structure of the nanoparticles as a function of size
for magnetic particles (Co, Fe) and semiconducting particles (Ge,
Si).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key component of this project involves the education
and training of U.S. and Pakistani graduate and undergraduate students.
Exchanges would be possible between the two groups, with students from both
nations able to experience science in another country. Joint projects would lead
to joint publications and contributed conference papers. Focused workshops,
seminars, short courses, and visits to a larger set of institutions would enrich
a broader community. A broader impact of this program involves the development
of a research laboratory at the COMSATS Institute of Information Technology
(CIIT), Islamabad, Pakistan. This would enable the Pakistani collaborator to set
up a research laboratory in Islamabad that would include BLAG growth and optical
characterization of the nanostructures produced. The young scientists in
Pakistan would experience first-hand the international excitement associated
with nanoscience and technology. Dr. Weaver and his students would help to
establish the laboratory through advice and visits. The Ministry of Science and
Technology (MOST), Government of Pakistan, will support the research activities
at CIIT. &lt;br/&gt;