* 0353102
* Random-Blocky Copolymers: Monomer Sequencing through Templated Chemical Coloring
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Jan Genzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2010
* USD 520,106.00

The central theme of the proposed research plan is to demonstrate the ability of
random-blocky copolymers (RBCs), heteropolymers with statistically controlled
monomer sequence distributions, to undergo self-assembly in the bulk and perform
recognition of chemical patterns on surfaces. We plan to establish that
controlling the statistical nature of the monomer sequencing is sufficient in
endowing the RBC with unique assembling and recognition characteristics; these
may allow the RBCs to perform functions similar to those of more complex
biomolecules. The RBCs will be synthesized by adjusting the radius of gyration
of a homopolymer in solution, followed by chemical modification ("coloring") of
those monomers that are sterically accessible to the "coloring" moiety.
Depending on the degree of collapse (poor solvent) or expansion (good solvent)
of the homopolyer, the monomer sequence distribution in the RBC will range from
blocky (poor solvent) to random (good solvent). We propose synthetic schemes
leading to RBCs based on poly (styrene-co-4-bromostyrene) and poly(dimethyl
aminoethyl methacrylate-co-alkyl). We show that poly(styrene-co-4bromostyrene)
RBCs can be further chemically tailored by attaching other chemical
functionalties. A set of analytical probes, including NMR, elemental analysis,
and Kerr effect measurements, will be applied to establish the chemical
composition and monomer sequence distribution in the RBCs. The analytical
methods will be complemented with modeling studies using Monte Carlo
simulations, which will reveal molecular-level insight about the nature of the
"coloring" procedure. We also propose a new method for preparing RBCs on the
surfaces of small silica spheres. A comprehensive set of experiments is proposed
that aim at understanding the assembly of RBCs in solution and the adsorption of
RBCs at solution/solid and melt/solid interfaces. The main focus of the latter
methods is to investigate the interplay between the copolymer sequence
distributioin, the polymer/solid interactions, and chemical heterogeneities of
the substrate. High spatial resolution depth profiling techniques, including
neutron and X-ray reflectivity, spectroscopic ellipsometry, and ion beam
techniques, will be applied in conjunction with selective deuterium labeling to
probe the volume fraction profiles and the in-plane distributioin of the RBCs at
solid/liquid and solid/melt interfaces. Intecllectual merit of the proposed
activity: The major outcome of this work will be the demonstration that RBCs, in
spite of their statistical nature, are capable of performing functions similiar
to those of macromolecules with precisely controlled monomer sequence
distributions. We will demonstrate that simple chemical coloring methods can be
employed in order to produce RBCs with a wide range of chemistries and
functionalites. The combination of the synthesis, experiment, and modeling will
offer very powerful tools for studying the solution assembly and interfacial
activity of RBCs. Broader impact resulting from the proposed activity: The RBCs
may be considered the simplest mimics of "protein precursors". Studying their
solution self-assembly and interfacial properties is expected to reveal
important insight into the behavior of very complex biomolecules. The
technological promise of the proposed project includes, but extends well beyond,
the health of biomaterial-based applications. Understanding the interfacial
performance of such macromolecules provides unprecedented means of designing
novel materials and stuctures that can find widespread, use in a variety of
soft-condensed matter applications, including nano-reactors, "seeds" for
organizing non-polymeric nano-inclusions. We also outline our efforts in
training graduate students, outline outreach activities in an elementary school
in Mount Airy, NC, and popose to attract local K-12 students to take part in our
interdisciplinary research endeavor.