* 0353490
* Roswell Park Summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Craig Johnson, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Division of Health Research, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 186,000.00

The NSF REU Program at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute presents upper division
science &lt;br/&gt;majors with pre-graduate school summer research experiences.
The intellectual merit of the NSF &lt;br/&gt;REU program is that it provides
students the opportunity to apply "book knowledge" to the active
&lt;br/&gt;scientific method. This immersion in the scientific lifestyle
promotes learning by doing and serves &lt;br/&gt;as a further stimulus to
maintain their pursuit of advanced degrees in science. The end result is our
hopes for the development of a more diverse population of young scientists
entering the basic science careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will
participate in a challenging ten-week program focused in the area of fundamental
molecular and cell biology. Specific research topics offered to REU students
would include the following:&lt;br/&gt;Identification and characterization of
the rennin gene in Xenopus tropicalis - Prof. Kenneth Gross&lt;br/&gt;Role of
SGK1 and PMEPA1 in TGFbeta-mediated actin remodeling and cell migration - Prof.
John Cowell&lt;br/&gt;Interactions of the p53 genetic protein - Prof. Gokul
Das&lt;br/&gt;Responses induced by anti-HLA-DR monoclonal antibody H2-27 - Prof.
Soldano Feronne&lt;br/&gt;Study of SLP-76 and other tyrosine kinase signaling in
cell lines - Prof. Adam Karpf&lt;br/&gt;Histone deacetylases and p300 acetylase
in cell growth - Prof. Michael Brattain&lt;br/&gt;Suppression of cell growth by
different anti-endoglin monoclonal antibodies defining different epitopes -
Prof. Ben Seon&lt;br/&gt;Expression of the antigen processing machinery in cell
line derived dendritic-like cells - Prof. Meir Wetzler&lt;br/&gt;The regulation
of sp1-dependent transcription by the post-transcriptional modification of
sumoylation - Prof. Mary Spengler&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring lymphocyte subset
proliferation by flow cytometry, using the near infra red tracking dye, ptir275
- Prof. Paul Wallace&lt;br/&gt;The effects of hyperthermia on expression and
function of death ligands - Prof. Zhinrong Cheng&lt;br/&gt;Special efforts will
continue to be made to recruit members of recognized under-represented groups,
as well as females and students from non-research universities and colleges. The
RPCI has been successful in recruiting such students. In the past three years
68% of the participants have been from NSF recognized under-represented groups
and 76% of all participants have been female. Senior faculty, all of whom have
peer reviewed support, mentor summer participants. Participants are immersed in
a rich research environment where they work on cutting-edge research and
participate in the scientific lifestyle. Each student is assigned their own
research project within their mentor's laboratory. The culmination of this ten-
week endeavor is the students' oral poster presentations to their peers and
Institute scientific faculty. Other summer experiences include attendance at our
distinguished lecture series, career counseling sessions, and weekend social
activities. For more information, visit
http://www.roswellpark.org/reu/&lt;br/&gt;Or contact Dr. Arthur Michalek at
arthur.michalek@roswellpark.org or 716-845-2339.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;