* 0353887
* REU Site: Molecular and Cellular Biology at the University of Texas at El Paso
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2004,09/30/2009
* Kristine Garza, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2009
* USD 451,766.00

The University of Texas at El Paso will be hosting a ten-week summer Research
Experience for Undergraduates Program during the summers of 2004 - 2009. The
main goal of the program is to provide ten participating students with a
nurturing and exciting environment in which to obtain the tools, information,
and research experience that encourages the pursuit of graduate careers.
Students are required to engage in a research project under the supervision of a
faculty mentor. Students will be trained to address questions in various areas
of basic biology utilizing molecular and cellular biology techniques. Students
also attend two weekly meetings, a "Career Development Workshop" and "Careers in
Science Seminar Series". The first workshop strives to provide the students with
the tools to enhance both their oral and written communication skills and the
second seminar series introduces students to careers in science. Throughout the
summer, several social activities are also organized to help students get
acquainted with each other, with the University, and with the surrounding area.
At the conclusion of the program the students will present their research
accomplishments in both written and oral reports. In recognition of student
efforts, participants will be funded to present their research at one regional
or national conference during the regular academic year. Although not strictly
limited to this geographical area, we will focus our recruiting efforts on
students who are from the southwest U.S.- Mexico border region. Students in
underrepresented minority groups are particularly encouraged to apply. For more
information, visit http://www.reu.utep.edu or contact Dr. Garza at
kgarza@utep.edu.