* 0353673
* REU Site in Ecological and Evolutionary Research at Humboldt State University
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Sean Craig, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2008
* USD 255,390.00

Humboldt State University will host 10 students each summer in a 10-week REU
program in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. Our program is designed to provide
hands-on research opportunities for undergraduates, especially those from
traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences. Recruitment will be based
on interest in ecology and evolutionary biology, career goals, and academic
achievement. We will choose students to ensure a culturally diverse group of
participants, as well as 1-2 students who are training to become high school
biology teachers. The 17 faculty who will serve as mentors in our program have
active research programs that run the full gamut of evolutionary biology,
ranging from the diversity of microbial communities in hot springs at Lassen
Volcanic National Park to the evolutionary ecology of songbirds, the
physiological ecology of bats, and the systematics and biogeography of flying
squirrels and other Pacific Northwest mammals. Students in our REU program will:
1) learn the essentials of experimental design and statistical analysis, 2)
design and implement independent research projects in conjunction with their
peers, 3) present their work at the end of the summer in a formal seminar, 4)
write a manuscript on their work, and 5) participate in a social program that
instills an appreciation for the wide variety of natural habitats in Northern
California and the community of scholars in which they reside. Humboldt State
University offers outstanding facilities and field sites for research in
evolutionary biology. Within 30 miles of Arcata, students can visit salt
marshes, sand dunes, old growth redwoods (including a 600-acre redwood forest
directly adjacent to campus), grassland savannas, Douglas fir forests,
serpentine grasslands, mudflats, rocky tide pools, and benthic marine habitats.
HSU's approach to undergraduate education is incredibly successful; among
public, non-PhD granting institutions, HSU ranks 1st in the nation in the
proportion of undergraduates that go on to attain a PhD in biology. For further
information and application materials, please contact Dr. Sean Craig at
sfc4@humboldt.edu or (707) 826-3656, or visit http://www.humboldt.edu/~hsureu/.