* 0354671
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: In the Aftermath of Migration- Modeling the Social Consequences of Classic Period Migrations in Southeastern Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Barbara Mills, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2005
* USD 11,068.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Barbara J. Mills, Anna Neuzil will undertake
research to understand the scale and impact of Classic period (A.D. 1200-1450)
migrations into southeastern Arizona. She will focus on the Safford Basin and
Aravaipa Creek areas, which have been relatively unstudied by southwestern
archaeologists. Yet, many scholars have speculated that these areas experienced
an influx of migrants from the north during the Classic Period. Neuzil's
research will look at prehistoric ceramics, domestic architecture, and the
structure of space on the surface of 30 sites to determine 1) the scale at which
prehistoric migration into these regions occurred, and 2) the effect of
migration on the expression of identity by both migrant and indigenous
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on migration in the archaeological
record has advanced considerably in the last decade, and Neuzil's project will
take the understanding of migration an important step further. Migration is
known to have played an important role in many regions of the Southwest, but
very little of this research has addressed the ways in which people with widely
disparate cultural backgrounds dealt with each other following migration.
Neuzil's research will focus on four main types of evidence to identify and
establish the extent of migrants in the archaeological record, and understand
how the identity of migrants and indigenous populations changed following
migration. Unpainted ceramics and domestic architecture will be examined for
evidence of differences in their manufacturing techniques, which have been
demonstrated to differentiate between populations with distinct backgrounds,
such as migrant and indigenous populations. Similarly, the arrangement of space
at the sites examined will be analyzed to investigate differences between
migrant and host populations. Previous spatial analyses have shown that space
can be quantified and interpreted to reflect the unique backgrounds of people
and groups. Decorated ceramics will be used to place sites in a temporal
framework, and examine how individuals and groups expressed their identity in
the stylistic designs of these vessels. With these four types of evidence,
Neuzil will not only advance the understanding of this poorly studied area, but
also contribute to migration research with a potentially broad interdisciplinary
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have two main areas of impact
beyond its contribution to the archaeological understanding of the Safford and
Aravaipa areas and migration processes. First, the results of this research will
be presented to Native American tribes who have an interest in the area.
Although this research is not intended to demonstrate cultural affiliation
between the groups that inhabited this area in the past and any specific tribe,
the results of this research will be of interest to Native American tribes as
they establish an understanding of the overall demographics and population
dynamics of the Southwest from an archaeological perspective. Second, public
outreach, particularly in terms of the dissemination of this research to the
local Safford and Aravaipa communities, is an important aspect of this project.
Neuzil will engage in public presentations and consultation on the development
of exhibits at local museums, and disseminate publications written for the
public throughout the course of this project. Furthermore, Neuzil will gain
training in field and analysis methods important to her development as an
archaeological scholar.&lt;br/&gt;