* 0354982
* Lattice QCD studies of the spectrum and structure of hadron excitations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Colin Morningstar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2007
* USD 315,000.00

A Project summary &lt;br/&gt;The physics of hadron excitations, such as the N*
resonances, hybrid mesons and baryons &lt;br/&gt;in which the valence quarks are
bound by an excited gluon ?eld, glueballs, doubly-charmed &lt;br/&gt;baryons,
and the recently-discovered pentaquark systems, will be studied using computer
simulations &lt;br/&gt;of quarks and gluons on a space-time lattice. Such
systems should provide a wealth of &lt;br/&gt;information to help us understand
the physics of con?nement and hadron formation in quantum
&lt;br/&gt;chromodynamics, the theory of the strong interactions and one of the
fundamental forces of &lt;br/&gt;Nature. These states are also currently of
great interest to experimentalists, exempli?ed by the &lt;br/&gt;Hall B N*
program and the GlueX experiment in the proposed Hall D at the Thomas Je?erson
&lt;br/&gt;National Accelerator Facility, as well as the CLEO-c project at
Cornell. Understanding the &lt;br/&gt;physics of con?ning gluons is an important
intellectual challenge; in fact, it is one of the seven &lt;br/&gt;so-called
Millenium Prize problems announced by the Clay Mathematics Institute of
Cambridge, &lt;br/&gt;Massachusetts. &lt;br/&gt;One of the most reliable means
of investigating such systems is using computer simulations &lt;br/&gt;of quarks
and gluons on a space-time lattice. Until recently, these states were di?cult to
simulate &lt;br/&gt;and hence, received little attention. Advances in lattice
simulation technology (the use of &lt;br/&gt;better gauge and fermion actions on
anisotropic lattices, the application of variational techniques &lt;br/&gt;with
large correlation matrices, constrained curve ?tting using Bayesian priors) and
computing &lt;br/&gt;technology (clusters, dramatically faster processors) make
it possible not only to determine the &lt;br/&gt;spectra of such excitations,
but also to probe their internal structures for the ?rst time. Commodity
&lt;br/&gt;computing clusters at Carnegie Mellon University, the University of
Maryland at College &lt;br/&gt;Park, the University of California at San Diego,
and Je?erson Laboratory will be used to carry &lt;br/&gt;out these simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;A major objective of this proposal is to calculate the mass spectrum
of light-quark hybrid &lt;br/&gt;mesons and baryons, the N* excitations, doubly-
charmed baryons, and pentaquark states using &lt;br/&gt;Monte Carlo methods with
large sets of well-designed operators. Another key goal is to study the
&lt;br/&gt;excitation spectrum and structures of the stationary states of gluons
in the presence of a static &lt;br/&gt;quark-antiquark pair and three static
quarks. The proposal also includes plans to determine the &lt;br/&gt;spatial
sizes and internal structures of the low-lying pure-gauge glueballs, and to test
various &lt;br/&gt;models of con?nement using the glueball spectrum.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research incorporates the participation of three
graduate students, and possibly &lt;br/&gt;one or more undergraduate students,
whose educations will be enhanced not only by involvement &lt;br/&gt;in
scienti?c projects at the forefront of nuclear theory, but also with high-
technology &lt;br/&gt;training in the use of state-of-the-art parallel computing
resources. The broader impacts of the &lt;br/&gt;proposed activities will be
strengthened by posting results with simpli?ed background information
&lt;br/&gt;on publicly accessible web pages.&lt;br/&gt;