* 0354382
* FRG: Collaborative
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Stephen Kudla, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 292,315.00

FRG collaborative Award with lead DMS-0354353 of Ono, Zhang and Kudla with Co-PI
Yang. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves arithmetic geometry
and number theory and&lt;br/&gt;focuses on a systematic study of cycles on
Shimura &lt;br/&gt;varieties and applications. The fascination of diophantine
problems -- the study of whole number&lt;br/&gt;solutions of polynomial
equations-- goes back to ancient times.&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical techniques
developed in the last 50 year to&lt;br/&gt;attack such questions have lead to
significant advances in our knowledge&lt;br/&gt;of this subject, for example the
proof of Fermat's last theorem.&lt;br/&gt;These same tools have, meanwhile,
proved to be of great importance&lt;br/&gt;in cryptography, the construction of
new algorithms for computer science&lt;br/&gt;and new error correcting codes for
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;Shimura varieties are the geometric
objects&lt;br/&gt;associated to systems of diophantine equations &lt;br/&gt;with
a great degree of symmetry. Their diophantine &lt;br/&gt;properties have deep
connection with many important parts of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
extensive study will be made of the arithmetic geometry of&lt;br/&gt;cycles on
Shimura varieties, with an emphasis on the interaction&lt;br/&gt;of their
heights, arithmetic intersections and density properties&lt;br/&gt;with modular
forms and special values of L-functions and their&lt;br/&gt;derivatives.
Applications will be made to Gauss's class number&lt;br/&gt;problem,
equidistribution problems for cycles on Shimura&lt;br/&gt;varieties, and the
Andre-Oort conjecture, and the Tate and Bloch-Beilinson&lt;br/&gt;conjectures.
This collaborative project will take&lt;br/&gt;advantage of recent developments
including nonvanishing properties&lt;br/&gt;of Fourier coefficients of modular
forms,&lt;br/&gt;the theory of Borcherds forms and their connections with theta
&lt;br/&gt;functions, and integral representations of Langlands L-functions.
&lt;br/&gt;A long range goal of the project is to establish
relations&lt;br/&gt;between the height pairings, periods, and algebraic cycles
and the&lt;br/&gt;derivatives of L-functions.&lt;br/&gt;