* 0354932
* Spin Foam Models for Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Alejandro Perez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2006
* USD 60,000.00

This project is concerned with the problem of dynamics in the context of the
theory of quantum gravity known as {\em loop quantum gravity} (LQG). LQG is a
promising approach to the construction of a unified description of nature that
would reconcile the principles of general relativity (governing gravitational
phenomena at large scales) and the principles of quantum mechanics (governing
material phenomena at microscopic scales). Important progress has been achieved
in LQG leading to a simple understanding of the nature of the fundamental
constituents of space and time. For example the theory predicts that space
itself is discrete at the microscopic scales and constructed out of fundamental
building blocks. Space is constituted by basic objects in a way that resembles
the lattice structure of {\em atoms} in a crystalline material. My work aims at
understanding the dynamics of these fundamental constituents, i.e., how they
interact and evolve. This is an issue that remains unsolved to a large extend in
the approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of quantum gravity are expected
to be important at the extremely small length scale&lt;br/&gt;given by the
Planck length. Understanding of phenomena in these regimes is very important for
addressing issues concerning the physics of the early universe (why does the
universe has evolved into what we see today?), the structure of space and time,
and the physics of strong gravitational fields (e.g. near a black hole
singularity) among other fundamental questions. Theoretical understanding would
provide new insight into questions that are not apparent at present leading to
experimental tests and possible applications in the future.&lt;br/&gt;