* 0354942
* RUI: Investigation of suspended optics' motion of the LIGO detector and its influence on the detector's performance
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* David Norwood, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 124,479.00

The scientific objective of this project is to analyze the performance of the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave (LIGO) detector using numerical
simulation and actual data available at the LIGO Livingston Observatory (LLO).
Using the end-to-end (e2e) simulation package developed by the LIGO Laboratory
simulation group at the California Institute of Technology, various programs
will be built to simulate the input optics (IO), the chain of optics located
between the laser source and the interferometer. These programs will take floor
motions and the electric field of the laser beam entering the IO part as inputs,
and compute the resultant motions of the optics and the electric field of the
output beam from the IO. To make the numerical simulation realistic, actual
signals recorded at LLO will be used for the mechanical and optical inputs. The
output of the simulation will be compared with the corresponding signal recorded
at LLO concurrently with the input. On confirming the validity, these programs
will be incorporated into SimLIGO, the e2e program currently developed by the
LIGO Laboratory simulation group to simulate the whole LIGO detector. The
current version of SimLIGO is not equipped with a dynamic model of IO. With the
resultant program, numerical experiments will be performed to study lock-loss
and other effects of the floor motion on the interferometer performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The involvement of Southeastern Louisiana University
undergraduate students is an important element of this project. The educational
objectives of this project will be realized in two broad ways: by actively
involving undergraduate students as researchers and by using the products of the
research as tools in the lecture classes. The goal of the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) is the first direct detection of
gravitational waves and the initiation of their study to understand the
properties of the astronomical systems that produce them. This project will
contribute to LIGO in several ways. The developed simulation programs can be
used to modify the design of the control systems, to obtain indirect
measurements of properties of subsystems that cannot be measured directly, and
to inform the development of other aspects of the simulation programs.
&lt;br/&gt;