* 0354462
* FRG: Collaborative Research in Semiclassical Asymptotic Questions in Integrable Nonlinear Wave Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Jared Bronski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2008
* USD 216,058.00

Abstract

DMS-0354373 FRG: Collaborative Research in Semiclassical Asymptotic Questions in
Integrable Nonlinear Wave Theory

Peter Miller, Kenneth McLaughlin and Jared Bronski

The goal of applied mathematics is the study of equations of scientific,
engineering or industrial interest in a mathematically rigorous way.
Understanding such equations often requires considering a limit in which certain
parameters approach zero. While some of these problems behave in a predictable
manner in the limit, other interesting and important problems involve unstable
behavior that becomes less and less predictable the smaller the parameter of
interest becomes. One of the best illustrations of this concept is the behavior
of fluid flows when the viscous drag is small, and the fluid behaves in a
turbulent and chaotic way. The primary model under study in this project is the
nonlinear Schrodinger equation, which is a fundamental model for the study of
pulses in optical fibers. The small parameter limit for this model corresponds
to the limit of ultra-short pulse propagation, which is expected to find many
applications to high-speed telecommunications. This limit is known as the
semiclassical limit. This project constitutes an in-depth study of initial-value
problems for several partial differential equations (PDEs) in the semiclassical
limit. Existing formal theories fail because they lead to model problems that
are ill-posed and thus make no prediction at all for reasonable initial
conditions. The goal of this project is to develop asymptotic theories that are
not based on any particular ansatz and do not require unphysical conditions on
the initial data. Among the problems under attack is the rigorous semiclassical
analysis of the focusing nonlinear Schroedinger equation for general data, a
problem that is generally considered to be one of the most important open
problems in the field of integrable systems. The specific aims of the project
include the development of new ansatz-free methods of asymptotic analysis ---
for spectral theory and for Riemann-Hilbert problems of inverse-scattering
theory --- that are insensitive to analyticity properties of the initial data,
and have a "nonlinear Riemann-Lebesgue" character, directly exploiting
cancellation due to oscillations where analytic deformations are impossible.
These techniques, once developed, will also have important repercussions in
fields that are only tangentially related, for example, the theory of orthogonal
polynomials of large degree and the statistical analysis of large random
matrices.

The main goal of the proposed work is to develop predictive tools that apply to
extremely unstable systems when the initial conditions are rough or noisy. An
example of such a system is the one governing the propagation of ultrashort data
pulses in certain optical fibers, and therefor any new insights into such
systems will have repercussions in the field of telecommunications. Some of the
problems we propose to study admit a detailed analysis because they are
idealized and can in some sense be solved exactly; however our work is also
expected to lead to general methods that are applicable to less idealized
systems. These techniques will also have important implications in mathematical
fields that are only tangentially related, for example, the theory of orthogonal
polynomials of large degree and the statistical analysis of large random
matrices.This project also has an important educational aspect. We plan to
involve both graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in this work, and
the advanced training of the next generation of researchers is an important
component of this proposal. We also plan an interdisciplinary workshop to
further disseminate the results of this work beyond the boundaries of the
mathematical community.

