* 0354825
* GOALI:  New Cost Effective and Environmentally Acceptable Coating through Catalytic Polymerization in Aqueous Emulsion
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Donald Sundberg, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative GOALI project
between groups at the University of New Hampshire and the Rohm and Haas Company
aims at developing a new class of aqueous coatings based on the catalytic
polymerization of olefins in emulsion. Catalytic polymerization of olefins
allows control over polymer architecture while maintaining fast polymerization
rates. Aqueous coatings and adhesives are currently made by free radical
polymerization in emulsion, often leading to polymers with ill-defined or
complex microstructures. With the advent of new generations of late transition
metal catalysts, the PIs envision the preparation of polyolefin latexes by
catalytic emulsion copolymerization of ethylene and alpha- olefins, acrylates or
styrene. Here they plan to design such products by first looking at the catalyst
selection, then by identifying the key components of the emulsion process, and
finally by identifying the range of products that are going to be studied. The
resulting new materials will combine the advantages inherent to polyolefins
(cost effectiveness, wide range of mechanical and thermal properties, well-
defined structures, and chemical stability) with the unique applications offered
by polymer colloids (coatings with zero volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and
ease of manufacturing, handling and
transporting).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results have already
demonstrated the feasibility of the catalytic copolymerization of olefins in
emulsion. Upon the successful completion of this project, the commercial
manufacture of a new family of polymer latexes could be enabled via a new
platform of catalyst and emulsion polymerization technology. The research
program covers catalytic emulsion copolymerization of olefins, styrene and
acrylics with a high degree of structural control. The project links
organometallic chemistry and catalysis with emulsion polymerization and
materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this project could constitute
a breakthrough in polymer synthesis and permit the manufacture of a new class of
environmentally safe materials with zero VOCs. It could thus benefit society by
reducing waste production and energy consumption, and by making better of use of
petrochemical feedstocks. Participation by industry will foster technology
transfer. The research will also promote hands-on industrial training for the
students involved as they will spend time at the industrial facility. The
company will also sponsor one or more undergraduate students and familiarize
them with industry and its concepts of sustainable development.&lt;br/&gt;