* 0354149
* REU Site: Research by Undergraduates Using Molecular Biology Applications  (RUMBA)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Leslee Parr, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 142,485.00

The REU program at San Jose State University, called Research by Undergraduates
using Molecular Biology Applications (RUMBA), will engage 6 undergraduate
students each summer in a ten-week research program focused on molecular biology
applications. Faculty members with expertise in the areas of genetics, molecular
evolution, molecular environmental microbiology, cell &amp; molecular
developmental biology, and biodiversity will mentor students. In addition to
research, students will participate in the following: (1) molecular biology
techniques training, (2) a weekly formal group research meeting, (3) an ethics
seminar, and (4) a culminating research symposium. Students will be expected to
write up their work and present at the culminating symposium. Students will be
recruited from San Jose State University and other local undergraduate
institutions with high enrollment of female and underrepresented minority
students. San Jose State University (SJSU), the oldest public university in the
state of California, is located in downtown San Jose and in the heart of Silicon
Valley. The Biological Sciences Department at SJSU occupies a central role in
the training of biotechnology professionals in Silicon Valley. Students
interested in participating in RUMBA can contact Julio G. Soto, Assistant
Professor, Biological Sciences Department, by email at jsoto3@email.sjsu.edu or
by phone at 408-924-4925. More information about the program will be posted at h
ttp://www2.sjsu.edu/depts/Biology/facultystaff/soto/soto.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;