* 0354131
* EMSW21-VIGRE: Vertical and Horizontal Integration of the Mathematical Sciences at the University of Washington
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Peter Guttorp, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,053,000.00

VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL INTEGRATION&lt;br/&gt;OF THE MATHEMATICAL
SCIENCES&lt;br/&gt;AT THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Departments of Applied Mathematics,
Mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;and Statistics at the University of Washington will build
on&lt;br/&gt;the successes and experiences of their current VIGRE
grant&lt;br/&gt;to create an integrated program that will attract and
retain&lt;br/&gt;talented US citizens and permanent residents into
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical sciences at all levels. The
horizontal&lt;br/&gt;integration of the three departments will be extended to
the&lt;br/&gt;seven other universities in the region belonging to
the&lt;br/&gt;Pacific Institute of Mathematical Sciences (PIMS),
providing&lt;br/&gt;international opportunities of wide scope for our
students&lt;br/&gt;and postdocs. These three departments will attract
more&lt;br/&gt;talented undergraduates to the mathematical sciences
by&lt;br/&gt;encouraging them earlier, providing ample opportunities
for&lt;br/&gt;team research projects, and offering an integrated five-
year&lt;br/&gt;BS/MS program. The VIGRE graduate fellowships will
support&lt;br/&gt;students through the three critical transitions in
graduate&lt;br/&gt;school. Both undergraduates and graduate students will
have&lt;br/&gt;expanded internship opportunities. Training in
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;communication will be woven into the curriculum, and
regular&lt;br/&gt;workshops for graduate students on a wide range
of&lt;br/&gt;professional issues will be held. Finally, there will
be&lt;br/&gt;enhanced outreach efforts, using GK-12 grants and
other&lt;br/&gt;initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This grant will greatly
enhance the training of the&lt;br/&gt;next generation of mathematical scientists
through&lt;br/&gt;professional workshops for graduate students, travel
support&lt;br/&gt;for both graduate students and undergraduates to
attend&lt;br/&gt;conferences and meetings, exposure to world-class
scientists&lt;br/&gt;attending PIMS activities, and opportunities to
interact&lt;br/&gt;with the local K-12 communities. Our efforts will
increase&lt;br/&gt;the number of US citizens and permanent residents
majoring&lt;br/&gt;in the mathematical sciences, with special emphasis on
women&lt;br/&gt;and underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;