* 0354836
* High Energy Physics Research with Collider Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Dave Besson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James Joseph Reidy
* 05/31/2008
* USD 1,020,000.00

This proposal requests funds to support both research and education outreach at
The University of Kansas (KU). The KU experimental particle physics group
proposes a broad-based program of research through their involvement in the
DZero Experiment, which is now taking proton-antiproton collision data at the
Fermilab Tevatron, and in the CLEO Experiment, which is now taking electron-
positron collision data at the Cornell CESR facility. DZero analyses being
pursued include measurements of the W-to-Z cross section ratio, W b b-bar cross
section, and single top cross section; an investigation of events with missing
energy, and a Higgs-inspired study of tau-pair production. DZero is taking data
at the highest energy and the potential for an important discovery with this
experiment is great. For example, a large single top or Higgs to tau-pair cross
section could be a signal for physics beyond the Standard Model, such as
supersymmetry. With CLEO, the group will continue publishing physics analyses
done by its undergraduate researchers. The KU group has published five CLEO
journal articles with undergraduate principal authors and has several ongoing
analyses that will be pursued in this project. This work mainly focuses on
photon decays of the narrow Upsilon resonances, a rich area of physics where
CLEO maintains the best data sample. Once the CLEO-c program accumulates
sufficient data near the charm threshold, the group will study direct photon
production from charmonium. The KU group is building the CMS detector and doing
development work for a linear collider detector. With CMS, the group uses
expertise gained with the DZero silicon detector to help the U.S. effort on the
silicon tracker outer-barrel detector. The KU group maintains test stands and
testing oversight at Fermilab. It will assist in the commissioning of the
detector during the final year of this proposal. CMS is scheduled to begin
taking data near the end of this proposal period. Linear collider detector
R&amp;D will focus on studying calorimetry options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
education/outreach area, the PIs are committed to 1) the continuation of our
QuarkNet center, now in its fourth year, that fosters research and education
projects with area high school physics teachers and 2) the production of an
educational cartoon that will teach school children about the various types of
quarks and leptons by giving each a memorable animated personality. Smaller
outreach projects include participation in university open house events and
helping with science shows for grade school children. The research program is
well suited to the training of students at the undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral levels. By having projects with data to analyze, projects being
built, and projects being designed, the group can give its students a full range
of training in the experimental discipline. The KU group maintains its record of
disseminating research findings via the Internet with web sites aimed at
different communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;