* 0354782
* Studies of Solar Wind and Coronal Turbulence via Radioastronomical Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Steven Spangler, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 07/31/2010
* USD 358,476.00

The investigators will study the plasma of the outer solar corona and inner
solar wind using radioastronomical instrumentation and techniques. The
instruments are the Very Large Array (VLA) radiotelescope in central New Mexico,
and the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA) array of radiotelescopes distributed
throughout the United States. Both instruments are facilities of the National
Radio Astronomy Observatory. The research program utilizes observations of
extragalactic radio sources whose lines of sight pass close to the Sun, and thus
probe the corona and solar wind at distances from 4 to 35 times the solar
radius. The study will make use of two types of measurements, which have proven
successful in past experiments: (1) Faraday rotation measurements, and (2)
measurement of turbulence-induced fluctuations in the phases of the VLBA
interferometer. Among the scientific goals of the research program are (1)
mapping of the coronal Faraday rotation against an extended, polarized,
background radio source, to measure or constrain the global coronal magnetic
field and coronal turbulence, (2) tomography of the turbulence in the inner
heliosphere by observations of a constellation of extragalactic radio sources at
different distances and orientations relative to the Sun, (3) the use of
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations of the solar wind at the time of the
observations to illuminate the physical characteristics along the lines of
sight, and separately determine high speed and low speed solar wind turbulence
conditions, (4) study of the anisotropy of the inertial range plasma turbulence
responsible for the phase scintillation phenomena, and (5) continuation of a
program to remotely determine the heliocentric distance dependence of the
intensity of turbulent density fluctuations. The long-term goal of this program
of research is to determine the intensity and plasma physical properties of
turbulence in the inner heliosphere, so as to better assess the role this
turbulence plays in coronal and solar wind dynamics. In addition, this research
is closely related to that of the interstellar medium, including the study of
the origin of the cosmic rays associated with supernova remnants.