* 0354293
* Workshop on Reliable Engineering Computing; Savannah Campus of Georgia Institute of Technology; Savannah, Georgia; September 15-17, 2004
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Rafi Muhanna, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

This grant provides partial funding for a Workshop on Reliable Engineering
Computing to be held September 15 through September 17, 2004 at the Savannah
Campus of Georgia Institute of Technology, Savannah, Georgia. The objective of
this workshop is to promote cross-disciplinary research in the area of reliable
engineering computing. For that goal, the proposed workshop will bring together
researchers from various engineering fields as well as from mathematics and
computer science to share methods for ensuring reliability of engineering
models. Such a common forum will provide a foundation for continuing cross-
disciplinary advisements in reliable engineering computations. Reliable
engineering computing requires that computing systems accommodate several
sources of uncertainty and errors with a focus on self-validating methods and
their associated computational complexity. All branches of engineering share the
need for reliable computing. In the case of a mechanical system model,
uncertainties can originate from (1) The appropriateness of the mathematical
model to describe the physical system, (2) The discretization of the
mathematical model into a computational framework, (3) The inexact knowledge of
input parameters of a problem, and (4) Errors introduced by the nature of
computer finite arithmetic. The main topics of the workshop include (1)
Measurement of reliability of algorithms and computations, (2) Integration of
various sources of errors in engineering calculations, and (3) Integrating
uncertainty into design. While some aspects of the workshop focus are included
in conferences on general numerical methods, computer science, and engineering,
none have united all these disciplines with a focus on engineering design
calculations. This workshop is unique in combining computer science,
mathematics, and engineering analysis to discuss the reliability of engineering
computations.

The workshop will address different aspects of reliable engineering computing in
both analysis and design.