* 0354356
* Collaborative Research: Workshop on Science, Technology, and Inequalities, Washington, DC, 2004
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Susan Cozzens, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 02/29/2008
* USD 78,149.00

This collaborative proposal between AAAS and Georgia Institute of Technology is
to organize a workshop focused on several current attempts to use Science and
Technology to reduce important inequalities. Many contemporary observers are
expressing concern that inequality is growing in the Knowledge Society, but the
situation is more complicated than these assertions. The workshop discussion
will be organized around three case studies: health disparities, African
agriculture, and drug patents. Each focuses on a science or technology policy or
program that is being pursued with the goal of reducing inequalities.
Enthusiasts for these options would interact with skeptics about them. The
objective of that encounter is to synthesize experience across the specific
initiatives and begin to develop the logic that will allow agencies to design
and evaluate S&T policies and programs to reduce inequalities effectively. The
project addresses a question that is both important and neglected in science
policy studies and in science policy practice. Distributional consequences of
science and technology policies are seldom taken into account in the general
understanding of how science produces benefits for society. Yet those
consequences shape everyday lives and societies in fundamental ways. The results
of the workshop will be published in an edited volume that could contribute to
the effectiveness of S&T policies and programs designed to reduce inequalities.

