* 0354870
* Structure and Electromagnetic Moments of Exotic Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Noemie Koller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2009
* USD 720,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;One of the frontier areas of nuclear physics
involves the study of the structure of the nuclei&lt;br/&gt;of atoms which are
very dierent from the stable nuclei that represent matter as we know
it.&lt;br/&gt;These nuclei are unstable and have to be produced in dedicated
accelerators. In nuclei in general,&lt;br/&gt;the excitations of individual
nucleons from one energy level to another are expected to change&lt;br/&gt;as a
function of the constituent number of protons or neutrons. The characteristics
of any one&lt;br/&gt;single nucleon, whether proton or neutron, can be probed by
reactions in which individual nucleons&lt;br/&gt;are transferred from one
nucleus to another during a collision. Reactions in which a neutron
is&lt;br/&gt;transferred will be studied at relatively low energies with rare
isotope beams of nuclei that contain a&lt;br/&gt;large number of neutrons. These
studies can only be carried out with beams such as those produced&lt;br/&gt;at
the Holield Radioactive Ion Beam Facility (HRIBF) at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;Another challenge in nuclear physics aims at understanding
the excitations of nuclei far-from-&lt;br/&gt;stability as a function of energy
and angular momentum. The second focus of this proposal will&lt;br/&gt;address,
via measurements of magnetic properties, the microscopic structure of excited
states.&lt;br/&gt;These studies will impact on the understanding of the
interactions between nucleons, and will&lt;br/&gt;illuminate the interplay of
individual particles with the underlying spherical or deformed
nuclear&lt;br/&gt;cores. New techniques involving bombarding light nuclei with
heavier ones have been developed&lt;br/&gt;and tested with radioactive beams.
The method will now be applied at HRIBF.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts.&lt;br/&gt;The structure of the proposed activities is designed to have
as large as possible an impact on the&lt;br/&gt;education and training of
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral
associates.&lt;br/&gt;The project will also serve to enhance the diversity of
the nuclear science workforce by including&lt;br/&gt;early career scientists who
are women or come from other under-represented backgrounds.
The&lt;br/&gt;participation of these early career scholars in the forefront
research would prepare them for careers&lt;br/&gt;in education and basic and
applied research, in national laboratories and industry.&lt;br/&gt;The nuclear
physics results are also of importance in astronomy, to understand the
abundance&lt;br/&gt;of elements observed in the galaxy, condensed matter
physics, to understand the microscopic com-&lt;br/&gt;ponents of the transient
hyperfine, and national security, to understand properties of
and&lt;br/&gt;reactions on fission fragments.&lt;br/&gt;