* 0354378
* SLC Center:    CELEST:    A Center for Learning in Education, Science, and Technology
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2011
* Stephen Grossberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2011
* USD 20,769,437.00

The Center of Excellence for Learning in Education, Science, and Technology
(CELEST) brings together leading scientists, educators, and technologists from
Boston University, Brandeis University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
and the University of Pennsylvania to study real-time autonomous learning
systems by integrating experimental and computational brain science,
biologically inspired technology, and classroom innovation. Contributing
scientists are drawn from four Boston University Departments and the Center for
Adaptive Systems, the Center for Memory and Brain, the Science and Mathematics
Education Center, the Hearing Research Center, and the Center for Polymer
Studies; the Brandeis University Department of Psychology and the Volen Center
for Complex Systems; the MIT Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, the
Picower Center for Learning and Memory, and the Harvard/MIT Speech and Hearing
Bioscience and Technology Program; and the University of Pennsylvania Department
of Psychology. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Creative Concepts: CELEST
brings together educators, scientists, and technologists to carry out four types
of mutually reinforcing and integrated activities: (1) quantitative behavioral
and brain modeling of both normal and abnormal learning processes during
perception, cognition, emotion, and action; (2) interdisciplinary cognitive and
neuroscience experiments to probe these processes and to test model predictions;
(3) development of algorithms, based on biological learning models, for
incremental fast learning about complex and rapidly changing environments in
large-scale engineering and technological applications that are important in
many areas of society; and (4) integration of research and education through
contributions to educational technology, curriculum development, and early
career recruitment of underrepresented communities into scientific practice.
These goals are achieved through interactions among eight main Thrusts in:
&lt;br/&gt;Learning in visual perception and recognition: laminar cortical
dynamics of adaptive behavior; &lt;br/&gt;Learning in audition, speech, and
language; learning in cognitive-emotional interactions and planned sequential
behaviors;&lt;br/&gt;Learning and episodic memory: encoding and retrieval;
&lt;br/&gt;Learning in concept formation and rule discovery; &lt;br/&gt;Learning
in attentive recognition and neuromorphic technology; &lt;br/&gt;Educational
technology, curriculum development, and outreach; and &lt;br/&gt;Diversity
outreach. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: CELEST will foster interdisciplinary
collaborations and training across all its units: frequent seminars, workshops,
colloquia, conferences, and publications; integration of research and education
by translating basic science results into interdisciplinary curriculum
development; and web-based and hands-on training for teachers and students,
including classroom activities with a national and international impact. CELEST
will hereby provide world-class expertise towards advancing key SLC program
goals; namely, the psychological and pedagogical aspects of learning, the
biological basis of learning, machine learning, learning technologies, and
mathematical analyses and modeling of them all. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;