* 0354540
* FRG:     Collaborative Research:    Heat Equations and Geometric Flows in Riemannian and Kaehler Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Bennet Chow, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 281,540.00

&lt;br/&gt; We propose to further developments related to Perelman's work on
the&lt;br/&gt; Geometrization Conjecture, using Ricci flow through the space-
time&lt;br/&gt; formulation, new gradient estimates and monotone quantities and
their&lt;br/&gt; geometric applications, and to apply new techniques and
applications&lt;br/&gt; based on the ideas of these methods and estimates with
the aim of&lt;br/&gt; furthering the understanding of the following
interconnected topics:&lt;br/&gt; 1. Uniformization of compact and noncompact
Kahler manifolds,&lt;br/&gt; combining Kahler-Ricci flow and the study of
holomorphic &lt;br/&gt; functions/sections.&lt;br/&gt; 2. Analysis of
singularities, formulation of weak solutions, and flow past&lt;br/&gt;
singularities for geometric evolution equations and the duality
between&lt;br/&gt; the Ricci flow and the mean curvature flow.&lt;br/&gt; 3.
Study of harmonic/holomorphic functions, function theory, spectrum&lt;br/&gt;
and the geometry of complete Riemannian/Kahler manifolds.&lt;br/&gt; 4.
Existence of Einstein and other canonical Riemannian metrics on &lt;br/&gt;
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Geometric evolution equations are powerful and
central tools in the study&lt;br/&gt; of the global geometry and topology of
manifolds. Recent work of Perelman&lt;br/&gt; on Hamilton's program for Ricci
flow and its applications towards a &lt;br/&gt; possible solution to the
Poincare and geometrization conjectures provides a timely&lt;br/&gt; and
promising opportunity for a group effort on significant advancements&lt;br/&gt;
in geometric analysis and related areas. The results from the project
&lt;br/&gt; should lead to new advances in and connections between
string/duality theory and&lt;br/&gt; renormalization group flow, Ricci flow,
mean curvature flow and other&lt;br/&gt; geometric evolution equations, and may
enhance the understanding of the&lt;br/&gt; homogeneity of the universe at large
scales, as well as other areas in &lt;br/&gt; science. The project will enhance
the understanding of geometric analysis, &lt;br/&gt; linear and nonlinear
partial differential equations, algebraic geometry and &lt;br/&gt; mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;