* 0354112
* EMSW21-VIGRE at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2011
* Ken Ono, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2011
* USD 2,650,000.00

Abstract: University of Wisconsin VIGRE Program &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
critical shortage of US students and faculty in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;This has
been identified as a major source of concern by both academia&lt;br/&gt;and
industry. The UW-Madison VIGRE Program seeks to address a number
of&lt;br/&gt;critical pipeline issues which underlie this situation, via a
variety of integrated activities centered in the Department of Mathematics. We
will offer academic year collaborative undergraduate research labs (CURLs), as
well as summer research experiences for undergraduates (REUs). VIGRE fellowships
will be offered to promising domestic graduate students, and we will organize
summer enhancement programs for training beginning graduate students. We will
also offer VIGRE Posdoctoral Fellowships, which enhance our regular teaching
positions with reduced teaching and substantial faculty mentoring. Our VIGRE
program will also establish internships for graduate students in industry and in
national labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to use VIGRE support to expand
the Wisconsin Talent Search,&lt;br/&gt;building on its past success, to attract
talented high school students&lt;br/&gt;into mathematics and science. In
addition we will organize a variety of&lt;br/&gt;interactive activities,
including an expanded Brown Bag Seminar, Math&lt;br/&gt;Club, Graduate
Participation Seminars, Major Trends in Mathematics lecture series, etc. Our
VIGRE program will enable undergraduate and graduate students to enjoy an
enhanced learning experience, including research projects, internships, seminars
and many other activities. More generally the VIGRE program will foster a sense
of integrated scholarship at UW-Madison, involving students, postdocs and
faculty. The VIGRE grant will significantly enhance our ability to attract and
retain talented students and postdocs, especially from women and
underrepresented groups. It will also be a fundamental catalyst towards further
establishing a permanent tradition of mentoring young colleagues in teaching and
research, as well as deepening our interactions with other disciplines. Through
our REUs, undergraduates nation-wide will benefit from our research activities.
Science, engineering and math students at Wisconsin will benefit from curricular
changes arising from VIGRE activities. Our expanded talent search and other
outreach plans at local high schools will help attract new generations into our 
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;