* 0355062
* Study of spin structure of hadrons using intermediate energy photons
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Daniel Sober, Catholic University of America
* Continuing grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 08/31/2008
* USD 614,880.00

Ever since the discovery that elementary particles have spin, it has been clear
that the strength of the interaction between these particles depends on the
relative orientation of these spins. Until now, however, with higher energy
electromagnetic probes (photons) it has only been possible to study properties
averaged over all possible spin orientations. Support for this proposal will
allow the experimental nuclear physics group at The Catholic University of
America to continue to develop and then exploit new systems which will permit
the independent orientation of both the photon and the target nucleus. The
research will address one of the major unsolved problems in hadronic structure,
the nature and number of excited states of the proton and neutron. The spins of
the individual quarks that make up the nucleon determine the properties of the
excited states. There are many predicted excited states but only a few have thus
far been unambiguously identified. The question remains as to whether this is
due to some additional aspect of the theory not yet understood or due to
experimental problems in detecting these excited states. Much of the
experimental difficulty lies in the broad and overlapping nature of these
excited state resonances. It is only by performing measurements that selectively
excite only a few of these resonances at a time that the properties of the
individual states can be cleanly studied. In the proposed studies we will use a
newly commissioned polarized photon beam line and a new polarized target, along
with a high-resolution, high-energy photon tagger to determine the photon
energy, to initiate a number of detailed studies of these resonances. Such
measurements will cleanly discriminate between competing theoretical models and
lead to a much better understanding of the nature of the fundamental forces
between the quarks.

There are two areas where this research will have broader impact outside the
study of fundamental quark interactions. The proposed research will provide
training for postdoctoral associates, graduate students pursing an advanced
degree, and undergraduate physics and engineering students. These training
activities will cover a large range of experimental activities including
experience with cryogenics, high-speed electronics, particle detectors, vacuum
systems, and data processing. This training will enhance the pool of
scientifically and technically trained talent available in this country. Most of
the research that will be conducted within this proposed program will involve
the development of instrumentation and experience with the use of energy-tagged
polarized photon beams. These activities will lead to improvements which will be
essential to the future experiments, including those at higher energy, now being
planned.