* 0355328
* Gravitational Physics from the Cosmic Microwave Background
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Lyman Page, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 12/31/2009
* USD 3,354,773.00

The Princeton Gravity Group will continue its exploration of gravitational
physics and cosmology through the experimental study of the cosmic microwave
background (CMB) radiation. The CMB is the fiery afterglow of the Big Bang.
Measurements of the CMB form the bedrock foundation of the standard cosmological
model. Our work builds on and extends previous work that characterized the
temperature and polarization anisotropies (variations in the spatial
distribution of the radiation) and laid the foundation for the WMAP satellite.
We will measure the fine angular scale temperature anisotropy (l&gt;1000) and
polarization to understand the dark energy, dark matter, mass of the neutrino,
and ionization history of the universe. Results from our experiments are
anticipated to directly inform us of the inflationary
epoch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research include
substantial educational development for students, continued public outreach, and
the scientific impacts mentioned above. The Princeton group will continue its
vigorous program of hands-on research for undergraduates and graduate students.
As one example, we have supervised over 40 summer students over the past three
years, including 14 women and minorities. Group members will continue to give
frequent public talks and interviews, mentor the local Society of Physics
Students, interact with local school groups, develop new classes, and maintain
public web pages.