* 0355395
* Intrinsic Mechanical Properties of Nanocrystalline Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* En (Evan) Ma, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 03/31/2009
* USD 341,000.00

This renewal award to Johns Hopkins University will support Professor Ma to
study new type of bulk nanocrystalline materials prepared by a mechanical
attrition process. The dynamically recrystallized nanocrystalline surface layer
or in situ consolidated samples would be close to being "ideal" for mechanistic
studies of nanocrystalline deformation behavior. Emphasis of this award will be
on mechanical property tests with these nanocrystalline materials at different
strain rates (including stress relaxation and jump tests) and at different
temperatures. There is strong and growing interest in uncovering the novel
mechanical behavior of nanocrystalline materials. Molecular dynamics and
computer simulations revealed that when the grain size of a metal is brought
down to less than 30 nm, the conventional dislocation mechanism is no longer
dominant and several unusual deformation mechanisms associated with the large
fraction of atoms residing at the abundant grain boundaries would take over.
These mechanisms have not been well established experimentally so far. With this
award, key parameters such as activation volume, strain rate sensitivity, and
temperature dependence would be obtained to conclude on the rate-controlling
deformation mechanisms in real nanocrystalline metals. &lt;br/&gt;Results from
this research would have significant scientific impact, as they would provide
much-needed insight into the fundamental structure-property relationship in the
nanocrystalline regime. Significant broader impact is also expected because the
proposed studies would build the knowledge base that will enable nanomaterials
to be used in the technologies of the new century that demand high performances.
Students will receive systematic training on these novel materials, and results
will be disseminated by the University web site. Another component with broader
impact would be the international exchange that this project is expected to
foster.&lt;br/&gt;