* 0355430
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Use of Reinforcement-Drainage Geosynthetics in Embankment/Wall Construction with Marginal Backfill
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Dov Leshchinsky, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 12/31/2004
* USD 24,500.00

0355430&lt;br/&gt;Han&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
international collaborative research project between Professor Jie Han at
Widener University in Chester, Pennsylvania, Professor Dov Leshchinsky at the
University of Delaware and Professor J. C. Chai at Saga University in Japan.
They will undertake a study on the use of reinforcement-drainage geosynthetics
in embankment/wall construction with marginal backfill. Geosynthetics have been
successfully used as one or a combination of the following functions:
reinforcement, drainage, separation, filtration, and/or containment in earth
structures. In current embankment/wall construction, geosynthetics have been
mostly used as reinforcement for the stability of embankments/walls. Current
specifications require the use of high-quality, free-draining, granular backfill
for constructing mechanically stabilized earth (MSE) retaining walls. However,
marginal backfill including cohesive backfill has been increasingly used to
construct embankments/walls due to economic and availability constraints. Many
studies have indicated that an increase of fine-grained particles in backfill
would make the backfill more susceptible to moisture/water. The detrimental
effects of water in the backfill are to reduce strength and modulus, increase
deformations (including creep deformation), and destabilize earth structures by
increasing earth pressures and inducing seepage forces. When marginal backfill
is used, use of geosynthetics for drainage as well as reinforcement becomes
critical to the performance of embankments/walls. The researchers will be
studying the following areas: 1) the drainage behavior of the geosynthetics,
especially the long-term transmissivity of geosynthetics confined in marginal
soil; 2) the consolidation behavior of marginal soil between layers of
geosynthetics; 3) the interaction behavior between geosynthetics and marginal
soil including direct sliding and pullout; and 4) the stability of
embankments/walls using geosynthetic reinforcement with or without a drainage
function. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
research will have an impact on the use of reinforcement-drainage geosynthetics
in embankment/wall construction with marginal soil and provide guidance for the
design of earth structures using these dual function geosynthetics. The project
advances international human resources through the participation of a postdoc
and a number of undergraduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and
technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. Results of the research will be
disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific journals. The research
will also be made available on the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;