* 0355076
* Measurement of the Earth's Cosmic Ray Chronology With the SALT Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2006
* USD 40,000.00

We propose to measure the cosmic ray intensity incident on the Earth as a
function of time over the past 600 million years. That history is imbedded in
salt deposits. Since cosmic ray muons interacting with salt deposits convert
23Na into 22Ne, the concentration of 22Ne in a given salt deposit is a measure
of the integrated muon flux since the formation of that deposit. Salt deposits
have well known ages based on fossils in adjacent strata and on their own
internal clock, the ratio of 40Ar/40K: 40K decays into 40Ar with a half life of
1.28 billion years.

In addition to its intrinsic interest, the cosmic ray chronology of the Earth
also will permit us to look for variation of cosmic ray intensity over time due
to nearby supernova and see if there is a temporal relationship between these
events and mass extinctions on Earth.

It is generally assumed that high energy proton cosmic ray primaries are
generated in the outbound shock waves of supernovae. These shock waves
accelerate protons for ~106 years. The protons then proceed in spirals with
Larmor radii ~ 300 x E(eV)/B cm, where E is the energy of the proton, and B (in
TGauss) is the interstellar Galactic magnetic field. Every ~107 years (t =
1/Nosc=107 yrs), these protons collide with interstellar matter. Since these
collisions are primarily with other protons, the incident proton loses about
half its energy per collision. After several collisions the energy of the
initial proton is sufficiently reduced so that it is no longer a significant
producer of high energy muons in the Earth's atmosphere. Thus, the effective
duration of the high energy cosmic ray signal from a given supernova is 2 -3 x
107 years.

Nearby supernova, which occur every 108 years or so, will result in increased
cosmic ray intensity for a period of 2-3 x 107 years. Since salt deposit ages
range to 600 million years and beyond, they contain the records of several
nearby supernova. Indeed, we may even be living in such a high cosmic ray flux
period. Comparing the present cosmic ray flux with the average over the memory
of various salt deposits will answer that question.

The extraction of neon and argon from salt solutions is identical to the
extraction of argon from perchloroethylene, as in the Homestake chlorine solar
neutrino detector, and the extraction of xenon from the sodium iodide detector
we operated at LAMPF.

For a constant cosmic ray flux, the ratio of 22Ne/40Ar depends only on the depth
of the deposit (and on the relevant cosmic ray muon cross sections and 40K
concentration and life time). The depth history of each measured salt deposit
will be determined by a combination of vitrinite reflection, illite crystalinity
and fission track thermal-chronology together with the geological history of the
region.

