* 0355497
* Problems in Extremal and Probabilistic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Benjamin Sudakov, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 119,860.00

The proposed project covers several important topics in Extremal
and&lt;br/&gt;Probabilistic Combinatorics. The first group of questions concerns
the&lt;br/&gt;Ramsey and Turan numbers of sparse graphs. More precisely, the
author&lt;br/&gt;wants to study degenerate graphs, i.e., graphs in which every
subgraph has&lt;br/&gt;bounded average degree. Here one goal is to show that
such graphs have&lt;br/&gt;Ramsey numbers which grow linearly in the size of the
graph. An additional&lt;br/&gt;goal is to obtain tight estimates for the Turan
numbers of degenerate&lt;br/&gt;bipartite graphs. Both problems were posed many
years ago by Erdos, and&lt;br/&gt;despite all efforts are still open. Another
set of questions deals mainly&lt;br/&gt;with the study of the chromatic and
choice numbers of graphs. The author&lt;br/&gt;plans to study two conjectures
about graphs whose choice number is equal&lt;br/&gt;to their chromatic number.
Since usually there is a huge gap between these&lt;br/&gt;two parameters, cases
in which equality holds are extremely interesting.&lt;br/&gt;Another set of
questions is about asymptotic properties of random graphs.&lt;br/&gt;Here
investigators goal is to understand the distribution of
independent&lt;br/&gt;sets of nearly optimal size in sparse random graphs, and
use this to&lt;br/&gt;determine the asymptotic behavior of its choice number. It
is sometimes&lt;br/&gt;the case that an existence proof, supplied by the
probabilistic method, is&lt;br/&gt;not sufficient and it is better to have an
explicit construction. One of&lt;br/&gt;the major open problems in this field is
to construct exponentially large&lt;br/&gt;graphs, without a clique or an
independent set of size k. In this project&lt;br/&gt;investigator intends to
consider this problem together with its
bipartite&lt;br/&gt;version.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leave nothing to chance. This
cliche embodies the common belief that&lt;br/&gt;randomness has no place in
carefully planned methodologies. In modern&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorics at least,
nothing can be further from the truth. Here the&lt;br/&gt;Probabilistic Method
has been developed intensively and become one of the&lt;br/&gt;most powerful and
widely used tools. Use of probability proved to be&lt;br/&gt;helpful in tackling
many long standing open problems. Another major reason&lt;br/&gt;for the
development of this method is the important role of randomness
in&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical Computer Science. Here algorithm which make random
choices&lt;br/&gt;during its execution proved to be simplest and fastest for
many&lt;br/&gt;applications. The PI plans to develop new probabilistic tools
and&lt;br/&gt;techniques and apply them to various combinatorial problems. Some
of these&lt;br/&gt;problems and conjectures have been open for few
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;