* 0355189
* Evolutionary Analyses of the Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Ldh-B Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Douglas Crawford, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 02/28/2005
* USD 70,325.00

Many researchers have suggested that variation in enzyme expression is an
important mechanism for adaptive change, yet few studies address the molecular
mechanisms responsible for these changes. Closely related species of the
killifish, Fundulus, provide a system to investigate these mechanisms and thus
address the molecular changes responsible for the adaptive variation in the
glycolytic enzyme, lactate dehydrogenase B (LDH-B) expression. Populations among
these species have independently evolved in different thermal environments and
show adaptive changes in the levels of LDH enzyme. One can investigate the DNA
sequences that control enzyme expression among these populations and, by
applying the appropriate evolutionary analyses, distinguish between random DNA
sequence variations and DNA sequence variations that has evolved by natural
selection. The functional variation in DNA sequences that affect enzyme
expression among these closely related taxa also will be investigated. By
examining both the evolutionary and functional significance of DNA sequence
variations, this research seeks to clarify the molecular mechanisms that produce
adaptive changes in enzyme expression. The analyses among closely related
species are more likely to identify the specific molecular changes responsible
for adaptive variation than studies that focus on single model organisms. Thus,
these studies provide unique information and a persuasive perspective concerning
DNA sequence variation that could be critical for the health or performance of
humans and other animals.