* 0355340
* Research in Collider Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Neal Cason, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,872,140.00

This proposal requests support for the University of Notre Dame (UND) high
energy physics group, whose activities include the D0 experiment at the
Tevatron, the CMS experiment at the CERN/LHC, the Linear Collider Project, and
Education and Outreach through QuarkNet and RET. Their physics objectives are to
study top and beauty physics, the electroweak bosons, W and Z, and QCD processes
and to search for evidence of electroweak symmetry breaking, supersymmetry,
extra (hidden) spatial dimensions and other new phenomena. UND plays a central
role in the Run II upgrade of the D0 experiment. Currently, members of the group
are managing the operation and commissioning of the Central Fiber Tracker (CFT),
directing the offline track reconstruction, and taking the lead in analysis
groups such as Searches for New Phenomena and Higgs Searches. UND has been
instrumental in developing and designing the Trigger Upgrade to exploit the
higher luminosities expected in Run IIb. The CMS experiment is nearing the end
of its construction phase and is beginning the operation and commissioning phase
at the Surface Hall SX5. UND's contribution has been the design and production
of readout boxes (RBX) and optical decoder units (ODU), which are electro-
optical interfaces for the barrel, outer barrel and endcap hadron calorimeter
(HCAL) subsystems. UND expects to participate in the continued beam testing of
HCAL elements and the testing of the readout chain of detector subsystems.
Additionally, they intend to work on R&amp;D for upgrades of CMS calorimetry.
The Linear Collider Projects are in the beginning phase and UND is involved in
R&amp;D in Calorimetry, Muon and Accelerator Subsystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their educational objectives are not only to train
postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students but, in addition,
to make significant efforts to engage non-traditional participants, high school
teachers and high school students, in immersive research experiences in particle
physics at the scientific frontier. QuarkNet is now in its fifth year and UND is
one of the four institutions leading this national project that currently
consists of 50 Centers in 30 States and Puerto Rico. &lt;br/&gt;