* 0355463
* Complexity Induced Bimodal Anisotropic Intermittent Turbulence in Geospace
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Tom Chang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 02/29/2008
* USD 267,475.00

Considerable observational and theoretical attention has been devoted towards
the understanding of local, point observations of geospace plasma phenomena
observed by research satellites. However, it is clear that there are important
questions that involve global and multiscale issues: questions of energy and
momentum transport within the magnetosphere, ionosphere and the Sun-Earth
connection region, and of the nature of the particle populations, their source,
entry, energization, diffusion, and ultimate loss from the systems. Theoretical
models are being forced to confront issues of non-locality and "complexity". For
systems involving non-locality and complexity effects connected with the
fluctuations of the electric and magnetic fields, the in homogeneities, and
anomalous anisotropic transport and energization processes are important. This
project will quantitatively examine the plasma turbulence and the intermittent
fluctuations in the geospace region. Detailed spectra and other stochastic
properties of both the non-propagating and propagating portions of the
turbulence will be determined and compared with experimental observations. The
goal is to produce a self-consistent picture of the complexity-generated,
intermittent turbulence and the evolutionary processes of space plasmas.

The mode of approach for the first part of the research is based on the method
of path integrals and the theory of the dynamic renormalization group along with
direct numerical simulations. Realistic models characterizing the anisotropic
intermittency and anomalous transport of the auroral zone will be developed. The
second part of the research program is based on the interaction of the particle
distributions with both the intermittent propagating and non-propagating
fluctuations. A global hybrid simulation model developed for the evolution of
the polar wind, solar wind, and auroral ions will be enhanced and applied to
determine the interactions.

The project will also contribute to symposia and workshops on the physics of
space plasmas, which will be hosted at MIT in cooperation with the MIT Graduate
School and the MIT Minority Summer Research Program (MSRP). In addition there
will be collaborations with the Washington-based Center of Excellence in
Education (CEE) to sponsor the education of genius-level high school students.
By intermingling with the scientists at MIT, these young interns will obtain
first hand experience in scientific research in geoplasma physics.