* 0355487
* Development of New Dimension-Reduction Methods for Reliability, Simulation, and Design of Complex Engineering Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Sharif Rahman, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 06/30/2008
* USD 215,124.00

The objective of this research project is to develop new computational methods
for uncertainty propagation, reliability analysis, and design optimization of
complex engineering systems. The proposed effort will be based on: (1) new
dimension-reduction methods for calculating second-moment characteristics of
random response; (2) new dimension-reduction and moment-based stochastic methods
for reliability analysis; and (3) new algorithms for reliability-based/robust
design optimization of structural and mechanical systems. The proposed methods
are novel and will be able to address highly nonlinear input-output
transformations; unlimited number of random variables or processes; and
arbitrarily large uncertainty of input, yet will predict both response moments
and reliability accurately. Potential engineering applications include ground
vehicle design for durability; fatigue and fracture design of aerospace
structures; and design of microelectronics packaging systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a fundamental point of view, the dimension-reduction
methods will provide an accurate and efficient solution to a general multi-
dimensional integral over an arbitrary region. Hence, many problems in basic and
applied sciences, which involve uncertainty and/or require evaluation of such
integrals, will be solved by the methods developed in this project. The transfer
of knowledge created by this project will take place through continued
collaboration with industries; organization of symposia on reliability and
design in ASME conferences; peer-reviewed journal publications; presentations
and publications at major conferences and institutions; and student education.
The educational goals comprise recruitment of a female Ph. D. student from
underrepresented minority; implementation of software tools from this project in
upgrading design and reliability courses; and authoring a comprehensive
textbook.&lt;br/&gt;