* 0355435
* On-chip Interferometry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Darryl Bornhop, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 03/31/2006
* USD 171,336.00

This award supports the development of a device for on-chip, interferometric
backscatter detection (OCIBD) for universal on-chip solute determinations. The
primary usage of the device will be for protein detection during capillary
electrophoresis carried out in channels etched in chips made of glass, such as a
microscope slide, or similar substrate. The PI has already shown OCIBD can be
used for refractive index measurements of sub-nanoliter volumes of liquids. The
liquid passes through an etched channel with the general shape of a half
cylinder. The detection system consists of a simple, folded optical train based
and a low power laser beam. The laser light backscattered from the channel takes
on the form of a high contrast interference pattern; the pattern varies with the
bulk properties of the fluid contained within the channel. In preliminary
efforts, positional changes in the fringes of the pattern allow the detection of
test proteins at micromolar concentrations (0.2-1.0 mg/ml). The PI has also
developed a preliminary theoretical model for OCIBD that is in good agreement
with this experimental data. The model can be used to predict general system
performance as a function of proposed optical train modifications including the
chip's wall thickness and channel diameter. Improvements realized for OCIBD,
under the proposed investigations, are predicted to result in detection limits
for proteins at concentrations in the range of 150-250 nanomolar and in volumes
of much less than a nanoliter. &lt;br/&gt;The result of this research is
expected to be a sensitive universal detector system that will be broadly
applicable to miniature bioanalytical devices, often referred to as "lab-on-a-
chip" devices. These are of increasing interest in biological research because
they minimize the amounts of material needed for separation and analysis, and
are amenable to electronic, rather than mechanical, control. Detection of
individual proteins and other cellular components at these low levels should
make analysis of individual cells possible; availability of detection schemes
that do not require chemical modification of cellular components will increase
the potential utility of on-chip devices for a variety of uses.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;