* 0355246
* Oklahoma Center for Information Assurance and Forensics Education (OCIAFE)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* Sujeet Shenoi, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2011
* USD 3,073,520.00

In the early years of their development, federal cybersecurity initiatives have
primarily targeted four-year colleges and universities, largely ignoring two-
year colleges. Yet, two-year colleges educate 44% of U.S. undergraduates and
serve millions of high school students. Furthermore, they provide continuing
education and skill-upgrading opportunities to a large percentage of America's
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ATE Regional Center of Excellence addresses
the need to build viable programs at two-year colleges. It incorporates six key
entities: Oklahoma's Career and Technology Education (CareerTech) System; four
of Oklahoma's largest two-year colleges (Oklahoma City Community College,
Oklahoma State University-Okmulgee, Rose State College, and Tulsa Community
College); and the University of Tulsa, an NSA-designated national faculty
development center, which serves as the principal training provider and mentor
to the two-year institutions. These six entities cover almost 60% of Oklahoma's
population and more than 70% of its IT workforce. By leveraging partnerships
with other universities and two-year colleges, the center aims to provide
education and training opportunities throughout Oklahoma and in major population
centers in neighboring states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center is developing and
disseminating information assurance and forensics curricula to two-year
colleges, both regionally and nationally; offering professional development
opportunities to instructors from two-year colleges and assisting them in
building programs at their own institutions; and designing and implementing
workforce development programs in information assurance and forensics, which
contribute to economic development and the national homeland security
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center's curriculum has five core areas: (1)
information assurance, (2) secure electronic commerce, (3) network security, (4)
enterprise security management, and (5) forensics. This curriculum covers the
breadth of the discipline, including its technical, operational, and managerial
dimensions, and related legal and ethical issues. The curriculum and its intense
laboratory component have been incorporated into associate degree and
certificate programs in cybersecurity and are mapped to industry (Cisco,
Microsoft) and vendor-neutral (CompTIA, SCP, CIW) certifications and federal
(CNSS) standards. The curriculum is continuously refined and upgraded.
Traditional curriculum dissemination and delivery efforts are enhanced by an
e-learning network, a Web-based repository, and mobile
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instructor training and program building
efforts employ a tiered "train-the-trainer" model designed for scalability and
self-sustaining growth. The model is complemented by curriculum working group
meetings, faculty development workshops, and residency opportunities. From its
beginning with 13 instructors at 8 sites, the center aims to incorporate 84
expert instructors teaching courses at 10 CareerTech centers and 18 two-year
colleges in Oklahoma and 5 neighboring states (Arkansas, Colorado, Kansas, New
Mexico, and Texas).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center has strong mechanisms for
recruiting, retaining, and placing members of underrepresented groups and
underprivileged individuals. Minority students and females constitute,
respectively, 30% and 50% of the participating institutions' enrollments.
Moreover, first-generation college students constitute more than 50% of
enrollments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, broad participation by industry,
government, and the military and strong support from Oklahoma's Governor,
Secretary of Commerce, and Chancellor of Higher Education ensure that the center
is contributing to homeland security initiatives, workforce creation, and
economic development, as well as to academic programs at two-year institutions
in Oklahoma and in neighboring states.