* 0355079
* Static and Seismic Instrumentation of Soil Nails in a Complex Geologic Setting
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Nicholas Sitar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2005
* USD 79,997.00

The use of soil nails for temporary and, more importantly, permanent support of
excavations and slopes is rapidly increasing, particularly for highway widening
projects. It is a very attractive new technology for providing temporary and
permanent excavation support in a variety of applications and geologic
environments. However, while the experience has been generally quite positive,
the state of art of design of the soil nail support systems has lagged behind
due to a lack of verifiable performance data. This situation is particularly
acute when it comes to seismic design, since seismic events are rare and the
soil nail technology is relatively new.

The aim of this research project is to instrument soil nails in a deep
excavation in mixed rock and colluvium on the Campus of the University of
California, Berkeley. The excavation is immediately adjacent to the Hayward
Fault zone and within 200 m of the active fault trace. The Hayward Fault has
been assigned the highest probability of generating an earthquake with magnitude
>6.7 in the next 30 years in the San Francisco Bay Area, and small events occur
very frequently.

The objective of the project is to instrument a section of the excavation face
and a vertical array of 7 soil nails using strain gauges and accelerometers. The
soil nails, up to 70 feet in length, will be instrumented with paired strained
gauges (top and bottom) installed every 10 feet along the length of the soil
nail. In addition, dual axis MEMS accelerometers will be installed at the face
of the excavation and at the embedded end of the instrumented nails in order to
measure the difference in ground motions between the excavation face and the
rock mass at depth. The dual axis accelerometers will be paired to provide 3
axes of motion at each instrument location, thus allowing the resolution of the
ground motions into fault-normal, fault-parallel, vertical components. In
addition to this electronic instrumentation, the excavation face will be
continuously monitored with laser surveying instruments to measure the
excavation face deformation during excavation and following its completion. The
combined data will then provide the opportunity to correlate observed
deformations with the loads developed in the nails and to compare the observed
performance with the design loads.

Thus, this site provides a unique opportunity to measure the response of the
soil nails and the entire excavation support system under extreme loading. The
seismic response of excavations is one the major unanswered questions in
geotechnical earthquake engineering because the problem is difficult to scale in
a laboratory, and the well documented field data does not exist. In particular,
the issue of amplification of ground motions in the vicinity of slopes and
excavations is very poorly understood, and based on very limited anecdotal and
purely analytical evidence. Hence, new data on this topic should prove
invaluable to the research community.