* 0355336
* GOALI:  Short-term Scheduling Under Uncertainty: A Robust Optimization Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Nikola Juhasz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2008
* USD 90,000.00

The primary objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) research project is to develop theoretical, algorithmic and
computational techniques for addressing the short-term scheduling under
uncertainty in chemical processes. The following specific aims will be
investigated. In Aim 1, a novel robust optimization framework for addressing
uncertainty issues will be studied. In Aim2, the application of the robust
optimization framework in Aim 1 to the short-term scheduling of batch and
continuous chemical processes which feature multiproduct, multipurpose plants
with demands at intermediate due dates and a large number of uncertain
parameters will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will result in
novel robust optimization models that will form the foundation for addressing
the uncertainly in the short-term scheduling of chemical systems. A unique
contribution is that this framework can address uncertainly issues for models
that contain a large number of uncertain parameters. These robust optimization
formulations for mixed-integer linear and nonlinear models have applications in
a variety of disciplines, and hence this is a generic component in the proposed
work. These theoretical and algorithmic developments will be complemented with
industrial case studies and will benefit from our collaboration with the
research group at ATOFINA Chemicals Inc. These industrial case studies will be
used to validate the robust optimization framework for short-term scheduling
chemical systems under uncertainty.