* 0355334
* Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* William Woodin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 380,294.00

Omega-logic is the natural logic given by forcing:&lt;br/&gt;a sentence is
Omega-valid if it holds in all rank&lt;br/&gt;initial segments of all forcing
extensions of V. If&lt;br/&gt;there exists a proper class of Woodin cardinals
then&lt;br/&gt;whether or not a given sentence is Omega-valid is
itself&lt;br/&gt;generically invariant. There is a natural
candidate&lt;br/&gt;of the notion of proof for Omega-logic and the Omega-
Conjecture&lt;br/&gt;is simply the conjecture that if there is a proper
class&lt;br/&gt;of Woodin cardinals then for any sentence, the
sentence&lt;br/&gt;is Omega-provable if and only if it is Omega-
valid.&lt;br/&gt;The significance of the Omega-Conjecture is&lt;br/&gt;that if
it is true then one has a complete analysis of&lt;br/&gt;what can be achieved by
forcing and moreover the set&lt;br/&gt;of Omega-valid sentences is definable in
third order&lt;br/&gt;number theory. This places a limit on the
possibilities&lt;br/&gt;for generic
absoluteness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Omega-Conjecture is also
generically invariant and&lt;br/&gt;so it is unlikely to be independent is the
same fashion&lt;br/&gt;that CH is. Therefore any refutation of the Omega-
Conjecture &lt;br/&gt;must come from large cardinal axioms. The Omega-Conjecture
&lt;br/&gt;holds in the current generation of inner models (extender models).
&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposal is to investigate the
possibility&lt;br/&gt;that some large cardinal hypothesis refutes
the&lt;br/&gt;Omega-Conjecture by examining extender models for &lt;br/&gt;large
cardinals beyond superstrong.&lt;br/&gt;These extender models differ from the
current family&lt;br/&gt;in that long extenders are allowed on the
sequence.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results have established several key
points.&lt;br/&gt;First, for the standard generalization of extender
models&lt;br/&gt;to the case of long extenders, comparison fails as soon
as&lt;br/&gt;one reaches sequences of extenders for which the
moving&lt;br/&gt;spaces problem arises (this problem was first identified by
Steel).&lt;br/&gt;Nevertheless there is family of extender models
&lt;br/&gt;which effectively exhaust all known large cardinal axioms and for
these&lt;br/&gt;extender sequences the moving spaces problem does not arise
&lt;br/&gt;(the sequences are suitably short). If comparison&lt;br/&gt;can be
established for these models then Omega-Conjecture&lt;br/&gt;holds in these
inner models. As a corollary one would obtain&lt;br/&gt;that no known large
cardinal hypothesis can refute&lt;br/&gt;the Omega-Conjecture. Finally if a
suitable iteration&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis holds in these inner models then
assuming&lt;br/&gt;appropriate large cardinals in V (extendible
cardinals)&lt;br/&gt;the Omega-Conjecture must hold in V. Finally if, as
one&lt;br/&gt;might naturally expect, there are definable versions of these
extender&lt;br/&gt;models then there are a number of truly profound
corollaries.&lt;br/&gt;These include the following: if there is an extendible
cardinal &lt;br/&gt;then HOD correctly computes the successor for a proper class
&lt;br/&gt;of singular cardinals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cantor's Continuum
Hypothesis is arguably the most famous&lt;br/&gt;unsolvable problem in
Mathematics, it was the first problem&lt;br/&gt;on Hilbert's list of 23 problems
from 1900. The Continuum Hypothesis&lt;br/&gt;simply asserts that any infinite
collection of real numbers&lt;br/&gt;is either equinumerous with the integers or
equinumerous&lt;br/&gt;with the collection of all real
numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Around 40 years ago this problem was shown to be
formally&lt;br/&gt;unsolvable from the axioms of Set Theory. This seminal
work&lt;br/&gt;of Cohen introduced a new technique to Set Theory, the
&lt;br/&gt;method of forcing. However the fact that the Continuum
Hypothesis&lt;br/&gt;is formally unsolvable does not necessarily imply
that&lt;br/&gt;it cannot be solved. Indeed the experience in Set
Theory&lt;br/&gt;over the last 40 years has demonstrated that some
questions&lt;br/&gt;which are formally unsolvable can be answered. But
the&lt;br/&gt;precise methodology used in these cases cannot work&lt;br/&gt;for
the problem of the Continuum Hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Omega-
Conjecture (proposed around 10 years ago) arises&lt;br/&gt;naturally from an
abstract analysis of the method of forcing&lt;br/&gt;but in the context of so
called large cardinal axioms. If&lt;br/&gt;the Omega-Conjecture is true then
there is an argument, or at&lt;br/&gt;least strong evidence, that the Continuum
Hypothesis is false. &lt;br/&gt;But independent of this, whether or not the
Omega-Conjecture &lt;br/&gt;is true has profound consequences for the
foundations of Set Theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cohen's method of forcing
cannot be used to establish that&lt;br/&gt;the Omega-Conjecture is unsolvable so
it is reasonable to&lt;br/&gt;expect that whether or not the Omega-Conjecture is
true&lt;br/&gt;can be resolved. Any refutation of the Omega-
Conjecture&lt;br/&gt;must come from large cardinal axioms. This research
project&lt;br/&gt;concerns trying to prove the Omega-Conjecture by a
detailed&lt;br/&gt;analysis of the hierarchy of large cardinal axioms.
Preliminary&lt;br/&gt;results have been obtained which offer strong evidence
for&lt;br/&gt;plausibility of this approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;