* 2000714
* Center for Renewable Energy Advanced Technological Education Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Kathleen Alfano, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,246,391.00

Over the past decade, renewable energy has grown at a much faster pace than many
other industry sectors. This growth results from recent technological advances,
government policy and regulatory reforms, and tremendous reductions in the cost
of solar and wind equipment. As a result, the electricity sector is now engaged
in a dramatic shift from energy obtained from fossil fuels to energy obtained
from renewable resources. STEM careers in renewable energy provide technicians
with well-paying jobs that can support families, that cannot be easily exported,
and that benefit the local community. The Resource Center for Renewable Energy
Advanced Technological Education (CREATE) aims to support preparation of a new
generation of renewable energy educators and skilled technical professionals.
The expected outcomes include greater use of renewable energy, an improved power
infrastructure, greater resilience of US energy systems, and a larger role for
the United States as a global industry leader in renewable energy technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CREATE will support two-year institutions to develop,
promote, grow, and advance robust academic programs to provide the renewable
energy industry with a skilled technical workforce. This goal will be
accomplished through six key objectives: 1) provide support, mentoring, and
professional development for faculty and prospective NSF principal investigators
in renewable energy technology; 2) coordinate and support additional renewable
energy industry, business, and academic partnerships; 3) educate the public
about renewable energy and renewable energy technician careers; 4) develop,
screen, validate, update, and distribute renewable energy teaching materials,
curricula, and pedagogical practices; 5) connect and support existing and new
ATE project Principal Investigators in renewable energy and related fields; and
6) develop a plan for achieving sustainability and institutionalization of key
center functions. Additional plans include serving high school educators to
create bridges to higher education. The Center will also reach out to faculty at
Hispanic Serving Institutions, Tribal Colleges and Historically Black Colleges
to encourage them to apply to the ATE program. Increasing the number of women in
the renewable energy fields will continue to be a focus of CREATE. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.