* 2000595
* Multiple Academic Pathways for Mechatronics Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Alberto Luma, Lake-Sumter State College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 05/31/2024
* USD 529,073.00

This project addresses a national need for skilled technicians in the advanced
manufacturing field of mechatronics. Technicians in this field implement and
maintain integrated systems of mechanical devices, electronics, and software
that are used to control manufacturing systems. To help meet industry demand for
mechatronics technicians, this project will develop multiple academic pathways
for students to pursue mechatronics education. Pathways will be developed to
will serve incumbent workers in need of upskilling, students enrolled in a
degree program, and adult learners who have some college credits. The academic
programs will include an integrated employability skills curriculum, adapted
from the Necessary Skills Now Network, an ATE Coordination Network. This
approach will be designed to support student success on the job.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to close the manufacturing
skills gap, particularly in the central Florida region. Best practices of the
Florida Curriculum Frameworks in Engineering Technology will be adapted to
create stackable micro-credential programs in mechatronics, with each credential
requiring less than 12 credit hours. The integration of soft skills into the
mechatronics program will help ensure that the students have the skills needed
for long term success on the job and advancement in their careers. The project
will upgrade equipment in mechatronics labs so that students can be trained on
systems that they will encounter in the workplace. In addition to needing well-
trained mechatronics technicians, industry also has a critical need for a
greater number of these skilled technicians. To this end, the project’s
recruiting activities will include a focus on adult students who could complete
one or more of the training pathways and perform well in mechatronics technician
positions. Such individuals can broaden participation in the mechatronics
workforce. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.