* 2000175
* Excellence in Research: Biophysical mechanism by which mannose and N glycans modifies and protects biological surfaces
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Preethi Chandran, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 612,707.00

The surface of pathogens is shielded by short polymers of sugars known as
glycans. Glycans mask pathogens and signature molecules from host cells and
confound therapeutic treatments. N-glycans are the commonly found type of
glycans found on cell surfaces. Pathogens like Ebola, SARS, HIV, and COVID 19
are shielded by N-glycans having high mannose content, with the mannose content
sometimes increasing during the host infection. The goal of the proposal is to
investigate what biophysical properties of mannose residues present in shields
of N-glycans confer protection of pathogens against the host immune system. This
project will train graduate and undergraduate students and provide an annual
hands-on STEM workshops to engage high school students in research and everyday
science. Understanding how mannose residues presented in N-glycans protect
pathogens will help us strategically disarm the glycan shield fortress, thereby
making pathogens more vulnerable to detection, sanitizing, and treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the ubiquitous presence of glycan sugars on
biological surfaces, little is known currently about how glycans steer
interfacial effects like aggregation, biofilm formation, charge shielding,
antifouling, immune-stealth, and transport through mucus. This project will lead
to a better understanding of the biophysics of mannose residues when presented
in N-glycan architecture along with non-mannose sugars, and how they relate to
the improved solubility and aggregation, mucous penetration, and immune evasion
of glycosylated molecules. To understand the uniqueness of mannose biophysics
and how it interplays with other N-glycan sugars, the cross- and self-
interactions of all N-glycan sugars will be determined, and rules for
integrating single-sugar biophysics to glycosylated system behavior will be
evaluated. A pseudo-typed HIV virus is the controlled sugar-presentation
platform. These studies will synergistically link observations from force-
spectroscopy, rheology, and dynamic light scattering, along with perturbations
from glycosidase and lectin addition. This project is jointly supported by the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Excellence in Research
program and the Molecular Biophysics program in the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.