* 2000452
* Catalyst Project: Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting for Hydrogen and Oxygen Production Using Nanostructured Materials
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Daoyuan Wang, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 05/31/2024
* USD 149,971.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to the
University of Arkansas Pine Bluff has potential to broaden impacts in several
areas. The goal of this project is to study the use of light, electricity and
novel materials to generate hydrogen and oxygen from water. The production of
these gases proves to be useful for proposed space travel. Several undergraduate
students will participate in this work and learn techniques and theories related
to nanomaterial fabrication and energy production. This project is jointly
funded by HBCU-UP and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting using
nanomaterials is one of the most promising techniques to generate hydrogen in an
easier, cheaper and sustainable way. PEC water splitting is a process which
involves generation of charge carriers (electrons and holes) by solar radiation
and their transfer to respective electrodes to produce H2 and O2. However,
charge separation and transportation are the major concerns in PEC water
splitting. Here we propose to develop a novel and highly efficient PEC water
splitting nanocatalyst, by carefully growing a PEC-efficient catalyst with a
suitable band width nanomaterial on a three-dimensional nanographene scaffold
via a convenient one-pot hydrothermal synthesis. This novel nanocatalyst can
achieve high surface to volume ratio which therefore facilitates charge
separation and suppress electron-hole pair recombination. In addition, the
desired PEC catalyst’s band width can be realized by controlling its size and
morphology. Optimum conditions for synthesizing the desired nanostructures will
be established to maximize the water-splitting efficiency. Results will help
solve the hydrogen and oxygen shortage during space missions and surface
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.