* 2000670
* Spectrum Innovates Pathway: Preparing Autistic Students to Enter Higher Education and Careers in Advanced Technological Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Hope Chafiian, NFP NEXUS INC
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 599,836.00

Based on recent estimates, about 1 in 60 children born in the United States are
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. Autism Speaks (autismspeaks.org)
currently reports that as many as 90% of autistic individuals are unemployed or
underemployed. To address the autistic community's employment needs and the
forecasted shortage of technicians in the aeronautics industry over the next
twenty years, nfpNEXUS, Inc. will partner with Vaughn College of Aeronautics and
Technology, Inc. to develop and implement the Spectrum Innovates Pathway
project. Design of this Pathway is informed by the findings of the National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2018) on best practices for
learning, as well as recent research that has led to modified and new cognitive
models for autism. The Spectrum Innovates Pathway will support autistic students
who share a common passion for aeronautics. The primary goal of the Pathway is
to prepare autistic students to succeed in higher education and to enter the
workforce in advanced technician roles. This project will provide full immersion
of autistic students in a STEM learning environment designed to support them as
they acquire the knowledge and certifications needed for their entry into
advanced technical careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and
implement a bridge year for autistic students who have completed their high
school requirements. The project will leverage experiential learning to support
students’ acclimation to the collegiate and work environments and development of
critical life and practical skills. A robust recruitment process for students
will increase awareness of the availability of the advanced technician options
for autistic individuals. Students will be included in a cohort for the duration
of the program, which is expected to contribute to creating a supportive
learning environment. Student projects will model real world challenges to
reinforce existing knowledge and skills. Industry partners will serve a dual
role as advisors on emergent work force skills as well as identifying and
promoting opportunities for autistic individuals in the job market. The
Innovation Hub at Vaughn College of Aeronautics and Technology includes the
Maker Space, Composite Prototyping Center, Robotics Lab, Flight Simulators, and
Air Traffic Control Simulators. This Hub will inform and drive the project and
its methodology. Dissemination strategies will include postings about project
activities and results on the project website and the Autism Speaks website, as
well as through local workshops and presentations at conferences. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.