* 2000986
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: An Optimization Framework for Identifying Dynamic Risk Management Practices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* James Luedtke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

It is enormously challenging for organizations to protect information technology
(IT) systems from the myriad of risks and vulnerabilities that exist.
Organizations can reduce these vulnerabilities by implementing security controls
to protect critical IT systems from risk and responding to alerts from reports
and logs. Nonetheless, major challenges in protecting IT systems involve
determining the right combination of these mechanisms to deploy in a resource-
constrained environment and identifying how to roll out security controls at the
right time using the right resources. This project is aimed at increasing the
efficiency of using security controls in IT organizations and agencies. It
addresses these challenges by introducing and analyzing a new optimization
framework to support the choice and implementation of security procedures. The
project will contribute to the optimization literature, the field of operations
research, and links between operations research and IT security.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; This project supports forward-looking, dynamic defensive strategies
in uncertain environments that have the potential to achieve high levels of
security without a corresponding increase in costs. To achieve this goal, this
project explores how an optimization framework can be used to prescribe dynamic
protection and response policies that protect IT systems, are effective given
uncertain future events, and reduce risk in complex environments that span
people, processes, and infrastructure. The project adds new models to the
literature that draw from integer programming, multi-stage stochastic
programming, adversarial risk analysis, and network games. Solving these models
is extremely challenging, and therefore, this research explores new algorithmic
techniques to identify optimal and near-optimal model solutions. This project
advances our understanding of how to dynamically allocate resources to secure IT
systems in an uncertain environment. This project integrates research with
education to train the future workforce in cybersecurity. A comprehensive plan
for broadening participation in computing highlights the researchers' efforts
and commitment to diversity and inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.