* 2000641
* Examining Potential Causal Connections and Mechanisms between Children's Block Play and Mathematics Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2023
* David Purpura, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 01/31/2023
* USD 1,347,370.00

The purpose of this project is to further develop, refine, and evaluate a
research-based STEM learning tool (i.e. block play) that tests theories of
mathematical learning. Block play is common in preschool settings and is a
context in which mathematics skill development may occur. Although a growing
body of work has linked block play to mathematical development, there remains
little causal evidence to support these relationships. The first objective of
the project is to empirically evaluate the impacts of different types of block
play on children’s mathematics. The second objective is to evaluate the extent
to which children’s mathematical language (spatial and quantitative), spatial
skills, and executive function are mechanisms that link block play with
children’s mathematical learning. Results from this study will contribute to the
theoretical understanding of how and why block play may influence the
development of early mathematics, a key component of STEM and school readiness.
Finally, this study will advance the research base about low-cost, feasible, and
effective strategies for improving childrens’ mathematics learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the goals of this project, the project team will
conduct a randomized controlled trial in which children from low-income
backgrounds will be randomly assigned to one of three conditions: unstructured
block play, semi-structured block play, or a business-as-usual control group.
The block play sessions will be conducted with small groups of children and will
be video recorded. It is hypothesized that children who participate in either of
the block play conditions will demonstrate greater gains in mathematics compared
to children in the business-as-usual condition. Further, it is expected that
children in the semi-structured block play condition will experience greater
gains in mathematics relative to children in the unstructured condition. The
team will also test the extent to which mathematical language ability, spatial
ability, and executive function are potential mechanisms that may underlie the
association between block play and mathematics. It is hypothesized that gains in
mathematical language and spatial skills will mediate the links between both
intervention conditions and gains in mathematical learning. However, it is
possible that executive function will only be a mechanism between the semi-
structured block play condition and mathematics. The project will integrate
research findings into classroom instruction, engage in-service teachers in
intervention development, provide an early mathematics teacher training, and
make all intervention materials publicly available. This project is supported by
the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development, with co-funding by the
Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.