* 2000127
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Tracking Amazon Forest Fires from Source to Sink
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2021
* A  Joshua West, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2021
* USD 63,789.00

Fire plays a key role in Earth's ecosystem dynamics with profound effects on
biogeochemical processes, climate, and environmental quality beyond the
significant threat to people and infrastructures. This year has seen the most
forest fires in the Amazon Basin of Brazil since 2010, providing a compelling
opportunity to study the impact of fires on carbon fluxes in the Amazon River
system, and, together with an auspiciously-timed cruise planned to the Guyanas
mudbanks in 2020, to characterize the corresponding signature of biomass burning
along the entire continuum from source on land to sink in the oceans. This
project takes advantage of this opportunity through time series sampling of the
dissolved and particulate load in the headwaters and the lower reaches of the
Amazon River. This effort will be combined with targeted sampling campaigns
across the full river depth profile at high and low discharge to capture the
export of material to the Atlantic Ocean. Pyrogenic carbon concentration and
composition will be measured by combining specific molecular work (anhydrous
sugar levoglucosan and benzene polycarboxylic acids, or BPCAs) with ramped
pyrolysis oxidation to characterize the chemical continuum that makes up
pyrogenic carbon. Radiocarbon content and stable carbon isotope composition will
help to distinguish pyrogenic carbon derived from combustion of living biomass
(as opposed to that eroded from soils or old sediments, for example). Compared
to a baseline established during a period of time when fire activity in the
Amazon basin was relatively low, river samples from 2019 offer a chance to test
whether pyrogenic carbon fluxes to the ocean respond to an increase in fire
activity. The offshore samples will allow for characterizing how this pyrogenic
carbon is transformed and/or preserved in the coastal ocean. Rapid-response
funding will be essential to capitalizing on the unique combination of existing
baseline data, the pronounced increase in fire activity this year, and the
planned 2020 cruise. The outcome of this project will lay the groundwork for
future efforts at reconstructing past fire activity, e.g., in association with
upcoming drilling projects in the Amazon system supported by International
Continental Scientific Drilling Program and the International Ocean Drilling
Program. Finally, the project will interface with the Woods Hole Partnership
Educational Program, which is designed to provide college students from
underrepresented minorities opportunities to gain practical experience in marine
and environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.