* 2000531
* CombinaTexas 2020
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Huafei C Yan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2022
* USD 8,250.00

The CombinaTexas 2020 conference will be held at Texas A&amp;M University,
College Station TX on April 10-11, 2020. The conference will feature six fifty-
minute plenary lectures and a number of contributed talks in various areas of
Combinatorics and Graph Theory. The aim of the CombinaTexas conference series is
to enhance the educational and research atmosphere of combinatorialists in Texas
and the surrounding states, increase communication between mathematicians of the
region, and provide a forum for presentation and discussion of the most recent
developments in the field of Combinatorics. CombinaTexas was established in 2000
and rotated among different institutions in the South Central United States
until 2014. Since then it has been hosted at Texas A&amp;M University.
CombinaTexas 2020 is the nineteenth conference in this
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics of the CombinaTexas Series include all
branches of Combinatorics, Graph Theory, and their connections to Algebra,
Geometry, Probability Theory, and Computer Science. In 2020 the confirmed
plenary speakers are Miklos Bona (University of Florida), Tri Lai (University of
Nebraska- Lincoln), Chun-Hung Liu (Texas A&amp;M University), Nathan Reading
(North Carolina State University), Stephanie van Willigenburg (University of
British Columbia), Josephine Yu (Georgia Institute of Technology). They will
present research in enumerative combinatorics, combinatorial representation
theory, cluster algebras, tiling theory, topological graph theory, and tropical
geometry. About 70 participants are anticipated, with an estimated 20
contributed talks in parallel sessions. More information about the conference is
available at the webpage
https://www.math.tamu.edu/conferences/combinatexas/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.