* 2000048
* Harmonic Analysis, Boundary Value Problems, and Parabolic Rectifiability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Steven Hofmann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,892.00

This project is primarily concerned with the mathematical theory of heat
conduction. The subject matter lies at the intersection of geometric measure
theory, partial differential equations, and harmonic analysis. In geometric
measure theory, one studies geometric properties of sets via the behavior of
some measure on that set, where the concept of "measure" generalizes the notions
of length, area and volume. In this project, the kind of set that we consider is
typically the boundary of some region in space, or of some evolving region in
space-time. Partial differential equations describe mathematically the
conduction of heat, the propagation of waves, and many other physical phenomena.
Harmonic analysis is a mathematical tool with which one extracts information by
decomposing mathematical functions into fundamental constituent pieces. A
principal goal of this project is to understand, in a quantitative way, how the
geometry of a region influences the conduction of heat through the region, and
across its boundary. This project will contribute to the development of the US
workforce through the training of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has three main areas of focus: 1) the Neumann Problem. The PI plans to
solve the Neumann problem for Laplace's equation, with p-integrable data, in
domains satisfying a quantitative, scale invariant version of a measure
theoretic condition which is equivalent to the existence of a measure-theoretic
outer unit normal at almost every boundary point; thus, the condition is natural
for the Neumann problem, and may be sharp. Eventually, the PI seeks to
characterize geometrically the domains in which such solvability is possible. 2)
Parabolic quantitative rectifiability. At present, the theory of quantitative
rectifiability in the time-evolutive parabolic setting is quite rudimentary in
comparison to the rich theory available in the steady-state elliptic setting. In
recent work of the PI and co-authors, elliptic quantitative rectifiability has
played a central role in the characterization of those domains for which the
Dirichlet problem for Laplace's equation is solvable. The PI expects that the
proposed work would be a first step towards an analogous characterization in the
parabolic case. 3) The Kato square root problem for non-divergence form elliptic
operators. The solution of the square root problem for divergence form elliptic
operators has enabled significant progress in the theory of boundary value
problems for divergence form equations. As a first step towards opening up the
analogous theory in the non-divergence setting, the PI proposes to treat the
Kato problem for non-divergence elliptic operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.