* 2000394
* Collaborative Research: Investigating How to Better Prepare Undergraduate Students for Physics Labs that Focus on Experimental Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* David Hammer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 147,865.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying strategies to
support students’ understanding of experimental science. The major goal is to
identify instructional strategies that better prepare undergraduate students for
doing authentic scientific experimentation in physics labs. Traditional
laboratory exercises have trained students to view instructional laboratories as
places to do rote procedures that lead to known results. This project will probe
how to help students reframe their expectations so that they consider physics
labs as places to engage in scientific experiementation. Specifically, this
project intends to identify strategies that help students think of physics labs
as places where they will design their own experiments and draw their own
conclusions from the data they collect. By working across multiple institutions,
the project will provide many examples of students’ authentic science laboratory
activities, as well an extensive database of students' work and engagement. The
latter will document the rich diversity of resources and experiences students
bring from their diverse backgrounds to their science laboratory
work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand student experiences
in non-traditional science labs, specifically physics, through the theoretical
lens of framing. A person's frame is defined here as a stable (either local or
more global) set of expectations about the activity taking place. Prior
literature suggests that small things can influence the ways students frame an
instructional activity, which in turn can have a large impact on student
learning. This research project is designed to (a) identify the various ways
students frame activities in a diverse set of non-traditional labs, (b) identify
ways students shift or change how they frame lab activities, and (c) formulate
testable predictions for ways to help students develop stable, productive frames
for experimental science. This project is supported by the EHR Core Research
program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.