* 2000549
* ECR DBER DCL: Describing the Neurobehavioral Effects of Modeling-Based Instruction in Undergraduate Life Sciences Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Caron Clark, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 320,878.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by conducting basic research
about the neurobiology of learning in undergraduate life sciences education.
This Level 1 STEM learning and learning environments project aims to broaden
understanding of who is affected by modeling-based instruction in undergraduate
life sciences, and how they are affected. Modeling is vital to STEM professions
and national standards call for modeling instruction at all levels of STEM
education. Despite behavioral work indicating that modeling-based instruction
enhances STEM learning, there is a critical gap in understanding what mechanisms
make it effective and which students benefit most from this instructional
approach. The proposed project draws on the body of knowledge about STEM
expertise from cognitive science. Specifically, as disciplinary experts interact
with or create models of biological systems, they continuously engage in error
checking to evaluate a model’s credibility and simultaneously inhibit
information that is irrelevant to the task. Specific regions of the experts'
brains become activated as they evaluate models. These regions include the
lateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate regions, which are linked to error
detection and inhibition. These observations suggest that error checking and
inhibition are integral brain functions for development of STEM expertise.
However, it is not known whether undergraduate STEM students, who are not yet
disciplinary experts, use similar processes and associated neural systems during
modeling-based instruction. It is also not yet known whether error checking and
inhibition influence students’ long-term retention of disciplinary and modeling
knowledge. A deeper understanding about how modeling-based instruction benefits
students and for whom it is most effective may be used to develop more effective
STEM instruction to meet the needs of all students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to (a) describe the nature and extent to which
undergraduate life sciences students engage in error detection and inhibition
during model evaluation, and (b) determine how these processes are associated
with long-term knowledge retention. Interviews with students will enable
characterization of the types and extent of error detection. Brain scans using
fMRI will determine the functional neural responses. Comparative interviews and
neurological scans after one year of instruction will determine how variation in
ability to detect errors predicts long-term retention of conceptual and model-
based knowledge. Results from this research will be disseminated at research
conferences and through peer-reviewed literature. The research will inform
development of a modeling-based instruction case study on learning for
undergraduate life science students. The proposed project is a joint effort
between the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and Michigan State University and is
supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that
advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.