* 2000535
* Improving Student Mastery of Welding Skills through Real-Time Assessment and Feedback
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Darryl Sims, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 385,594.00

Welding technology is essential for producing many different types of products.
As a result, highly skilled welders are critical in industries including
manufacturing, construction, and energy. In particular, the rapid growth of
manufacturing amplifies the need to prepare more welding technicians to meet
industry demand. This project will expand the use of welding training systems to
provide students with real-time feedback during training sessions. The welding
trainer and virtual tracking system will capture and evaluate each action a
welder makes to complete an assignment and will create a success score for the
activity. The project will use this assessment to provide students with credit
for existing skills, to create a student portfolio for employment, and to train
incumbent employees or develop customized training profiles for specific
workplaces. This assessment-driven approach is expected to contribute to the
development of standardized welding practices. By engaging with precollege
students interested in welding pathways and employer partners interested in
providing students with experiential learning opportunities, the project also
expects to strengthen partnerships with industry and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create a
standardized welding pathway that can be scaled to other institutions and
partnerships. Students will be able to develop their technical skills through
efficient, industry-standard training. Performance data will be collected from
professional welders in industry to construct a baseline model for student
welding skills. Students’ actions during welding exercises will be captured
using a welding trainer and virtual tracking system. The baseline model will be
used to evaluate and automatically generate a formative assessment of student
performance. The project will provide professional development opportunities for
K-12 and community college instructors and will partner with Weld-Ed at Lorain
Community College for additional professional development. A veteran outreach
plan will expedite the assessment process to validate Prior Learning Assessment
experiences for veterans and will map the current military training to formal
welding education. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.