* 2000841
* Developing an Industrial Maintenance Technician Pathway to an Advanced Technology Degree
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,01/31/2024
* T Crall, Tulsa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 01/31/2024
* USD 246,726.00

The Oklahoma Employment Security Commission predicts a 7.5% annual growth in
Mechanical Engineering Technician jobs and a 10% annual growth in Industrial
Machinery Mechanic jobs. To help meet these needs, this project will develop an
Industrial Maintenance Technician pathway to prepare engineering technicians who
have electromechanical experience. This project will develop a Business and
Industry Leadership Team with representatives from electromechanical and
manufacturing industries to ensure the pathway meets the needs of local
employers. With this guidance, faculty will update the existing curriculum,
acquire new instructional equipment, and provide students with flexible access
to the existing fabrication laboratory. These changes are expected to raise
enrollment, retention, and graduation rates of Engineering Technology and
Electronics Technology students. Through targeted outreach and mentoring, this
project also aims to increase the percentage of female students seeking
technical certificates or degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project
is to increase and broaden participation in the college's technology degrees to
meet the local demand for electromechanical technicians. The specific aims
designed to achieve this goal include: 1) implementing a new industrial
maintenance technician pathway to increase student enrollment, retention, and
graduation rates; 2) developing a flexible learning lab to meet student needs;
3) expanding industry involvement to promote career paths for students; and 4)
assessing success of the project and disseminating project outcomes and lessons
learned. Curriculum improvements will include developing courses in non-
destructive testing and industrial robotics, and revision of courses in motor
controls, programmable logic controls, and hydraulics and pneumatics. The new
pathway will use stackable credentials that allow entry at each level of the
pathway, thus serving students who need specialized training to immediately
enter the workforce and students who need to start with the basics. The
nationally recognized training track of Certified Production Technician will be
embedded as a vital first step. With the Business and Industry Leadership Team
in place, industry partners will be intimately involved with the programâ€™s
design, and will enrich the program by providing speakers, industry tours, and
other resources. The results of the project, curriculum, and pathway will be
disseminated with regional and national partners. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.