* 2000965
* Providing Work-based Experiences for Community College Biotechnology Students by Developing a Biotechnology Educational Materials Supply Chain
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Ying-Tsu Loh, San Mateo County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 444,414.00

This project proposes to provide work-based educational experiences to help
prepare community college students for careers in biotechnology. Project
partners include Skyline Community College, Laney Community College, regional
high school science teachers, and a nonprofit community partner, Bay Area
Bioscience Education Community. The project will provide community college
students with skills-based job training by involving them in preparation,
quality testing, and packaging of low-cost biotechnology materials for use in
high school biology courses. Examples of these materials include solutions and
mixtures that are commonly used in processes such as DNA analysis in both
biotechnology and biological research. As they prepare these educational
materials for use in high school classes, community college students learn
industry bio-manufacturing procedures and quality control processes. Production
of these materials via community college biotechnology classrooms will result in
savings that will be passed on, helping high school teachers to more readily
provide biotechnology educational experiences in their high school science
classrooms. Through these efforts, the project aims to make biotechnology
science education materials more affordable to high schools and provide
community college students with work-based learning experiences that prepare
them for jobs as skilled biotechnicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on prior
work that developed a successful plan to recruit high school students into
community college biotechnology programs, this project aims to: 1) Expand and
improve the pilot program by building upon past success and lessons learned; 2)
Create stronger linkages and educational pathways between high schools and
community colleges; 3) Provide professional development for faculty and
collaborate with high schools to co-develop a new high school biotechnology
curriculum; and 4) Scale the project regionally, engage industry in
partnerships, and incorporate long-term sustainability measures. If successful,
the project will provide a workable and scalable template for sustainable
technician education that incorporates best practices across multiple sectors
and institutions. In providing pathways to careers in biotechnology, the project
has included approaches intended to ensure that all students have equitable
access to participate. An important feature of the project is its plan to expand
into introductory high school science courses that are required for all
students. Such an expansion will enable them to reach all students, not just
those who self-select into biotechnology electives. This approach is likely to
help the nation to develop a more diverse pipeline of employees into the highly
skilled technician workforce. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.