* 2000345
* Hamiltonian Systems and Related Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Wencai Liu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 179,955.00

This project will study the dynamics of the Schrodinger operator that describes
the wave function or state function of a quantum mechanical system. The
principal investigator will develop fundamental tools to understand many types
of phenomena in physics and chemistry, such as the quantum Hall effect, spin,
crystals and quasicrystals. In particular, the project focuses on the
conductance, transport, and localization-diffusion in both quasiperiodic and
disordered media. The development of the rigorous theory is expected to have
many applications, including to quantum information theory and semiconducting
materials. The project provides research training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, and supports related outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at studying several topics in
areas spanning mathematical physics, dynamical systems, harmonic analysis,
geometric analysis, and algebraic geometry. The Principal Investigator will
focus on transitions, hierarchical structures of eigenfunctions, quantum
dynamics and spectral gaps for one dimensional quasiperiodic operators and
further explore multifrequency and higher dimensional cases. The research will
combine methods from algebraic geometry with tools from analysis to study the
(ir)reducibility of Bloch, Fermi, and Floquet varieties arising from periodic
elliptic operators. In the area of geometric analysis, the project emphasizes
using piecewise constructions, gluing techniques, and the compact perturbation
theory to investigate the transition of singular spectra and the generic
phenomena of Laplacians on noncompact complete
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.