* 2000028
* Research Initiation Award: Microwave Synthesis of Imidazole Compounds to Investigate Allosteric Binding to VCP
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Jacqueline Smith, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 10/31/2023
* USD 354,503.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award will (1) further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, (2) improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and (3) engage more undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups in research experiences. The project from Bowie State University, a
Historically Black College/University (HBCU), seeks to study the structural
requirements for allosteric binders to certain enzymatic proteins that maintain
protein homeostasis in mammalian, yeast, and plant cells. The project integrates
computational chemistry and biology with analogous bench research. In addition,
it is designed to include undergraduate and high school students as active
researchers. Collaboration and mentorship will take place throughout the
project. The PI will collaborate with another researcher at Georgetown
University, while the undergraduates will serve as mentors to the high school
students under the supervision of the PI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VCP is an ATPase
which plays a major role in the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). The UPS is
responsible for degrading unfolded proteins through the proteasome in order to
relieve cellular stress. Once tagged with ubiquitin, VCP translocates the
proteins from the ER to the cytosol. VCP binders have been shown to cause an
accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins which ultimately leads to cell death.
This is favorable when the system is being exploited to avoid apoptosis. Six-
membered ring heterocycles have been shown to act as ATP-competitive binders and
are therefore unselective. Five-membered ring heterocycles bind to an allosteric
site of VCP and are highly selective. However, it is unclear what the structural
requirements for allosteric binders are. We propose the synthesis of imidazole
compounds through a microwave-assisted multicomponent reaction in order to
access a variety of imidazole compounds with numerous substitution patterns.
These compounds will be tested and ultimately help define the structural
requirements for allosteric binding to VCP. We will also measure the effect of
these imidazoles on VCP activity and cell death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.