* 2000202
* Research Initiation Award: Multifunctional Intracellular Nano-Probes based on Engineered Bacterial Flagella
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jamel Ali, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 548,905.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution. The award to Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University has
potential broader impacts in a number of areas. The goal of this project is to
probe the dynamic environments that exist within mammalian cells to eventually
understand disease processes and the development of therapeutic molecules. The
project is a collaborative effort with faculty at Florida State University and
involves undergraduate students in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching research goal of the project is to develop a strategy for
investigating cellular and sub-cellular environments of mammalian cells with
high spatial and temporal resolution using engineered bacterial flagella.
Towards this goal, the investigation specifically aims to characterize flagellar
polymorphism in physiological relevant environments found within the cytosol;
chemically modify flagella-based magnetic colloidal swimmers with stimuli-
responsive small molecules; and to investigate active and passive
internalization facilitated by externally driven forces and cell-mediated
biochemical mechanisms. The development of these wirelessly controlled soft
sensors will enable minimally invasive direct probing of nano scale fluidic
environments. Identification of minute physiochemical property changes within
local cellular regions will result from this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.