* 2000851
* Enabling Adaptive Voltage Regulation: Control, Machine Learning, and Circuit Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Peng Li, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2022
* USD 304,174.00

Supply voltage regulation serves the critical role of delivering power to on-
chip devices at well-regulated voltage levels. Voltage regulation presents key
design challenges of electronic systems ranging from high-performance
microprocessors to mobile system-on-a-chips. In such systems, the ever-growing
need for processing capability must be fulfilled while staying within specified
power, thermal, and battery-life limits. Power must be managed and delivered
while maximizing system power efficiency in every possible way. The proposed
research aims to address the above voltage regulation challenges by taking an
interdisciplinary approach. Innovations in control, machine learning, and
circuit design will be developed to enable adaptive supply voltage regulation
systems involving a variety of on-chip/off-chip voltage regulators. The expected
outcomes of this project will help build new generations of highly efficient
circuits and systems that can self-adapt to varying operating conditions. The
synergies between circuit/system design, control-theoretical exploration, and
machine learning as pursued in this project will promote a new interdisciplinary
direction for advancing electronic system design. The depth and breadth of this
research will expose students to outstanding educational and training
opportunities. Participation from undergraduate and underrepresented students is
an important education mission of this project and will be promoted through
recruiting and outreaching. The anticipated results from this project are
expected to be broad and will be widely disseminated as well as brought to
classroom to benefit undergraduate and graduate curriculum. Collaboration and
interaction with industry constitutes an important channel for this project to
impact the real world, which will be actively pursued.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on the vision that the ultimate
quality and efficiency in supply voltage regulation may be best achieved via a
heterogeneous chain of voltage processing starting from on-board switching
voltage regulators (VRs), to in-package/on-chip switching VRs, and finally to
networks of distributed on-chip linear VRs. Heterogeneous voltage regulation
(HVR) systems are promising as they encompass regulators with complimentary
tradeoffs in response time, size, efficiency, and cost. The ultimate aim of this
project is to enable HVR systems that will guarantee power integrity, incur
minimal power loss, and autonomously adapt to workload changes and
system/environmental uncertainties at multiple temporal scales. The above goal
will be achieved by pursuing an integrated solution of novel control theory,
circuits, and machine-learning enabled autonomous adaptation. Rigorous design
techniques for decentralized and centralized control will be developed for
distributed on-chip linear regulator networks and the HVR system with guaranteed
stability and regulation performance. Efficient machine-learning algorithms and
their on-chip integration will be employed to provide accurate real-time
prediction of time-varying load currents. Autonomous adaptation of the HVR
system will be supported by power-efficient control policies that preemptively
adapt on-chip linear regulator networks and on-chip/off-chip VRs based on
machine-learning predicted future current loads. Coping with system
uncertainties is another key objective and will be achieved via deployment of
control policies that are self-tuned by machine learning to attain the optimal
power efficiency. The project will explore system-level design optimization to
jointly optimize regulation performance, power efficiency, and design overhead
across all voltage processing stages in a HVR system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.