* 2000318
* Excellence in Research: Manufacturing of Sustainable and Environment-Friendly Bio-Binder from Algae for Epoxy-Based Composite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ajit Kelkar, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2023
* USD 498,951.00

Epoxy resin is the most prevalent thermoset polymer matrix in the field of
polymer composite materials due to its superior properties. It has also been
used in versatile industrial applications such as adhesives, electronics, and
coatings. Epoxy resin and its common hardeners (curing agents) are currently
manufactured in a fossil fuel-based chemical process. In recent years,
sustainable or "green" epoxy resin has emerged in scientific publications and in
the composite market. However, there are limitations in current green epoxy
technologies regarding mechanical performance, cost, and paired curing agent.
This award supports development of an epoxy system and value-added composite
products from a sustainable source: algae. The research has potential to
remediate environmental concern in epoxy composite materials and impact
significantly the epoxy-related industry, which is steadily growing these years
with a projection of $38.2 billion global market in 2023. This research will
enhance the competitiveness of North Carolina A&amp;T State University, the
largest public HBCU in the US, in the advanced material research sector. It will
also strengthen and expand the education/training and research experiences of
undergraduate and graduate students, especially underrepresented African
American students, in green materials. The project will generate new information
for K-12 level to promote STEM education and create public awareness about
environment and sustainable systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective
of this research is to develop an economic, sustainable and environment-friendly
bio-binder from algae through a thermochemical liquefaction process, then
directly mix bio-binder with epoxy to completely replace conventional epoxy
hardener and partially replace the epoxy resin. The collaborative research team
will identify culture conditions of algae, reveal processing parameters of algae
thermochemical liquefaction, and optimize manufacturing/curing conditions of the
epoxy resin/bio-binder system. Particularly, the research will uncover the
relationships among hydrothermal liquefaction parameters, contents of reactive
functional groups in bio-binder, degree of cross-linking reaction in the curing
process, and final mechanical properties of the cured products. The research
will eventually generate a novel epoxy resin system for high-performance,
sustainable, and economic epoxy-based nanocomposite materials. The research team
will also perform molecular dynamic simulation to understand and predict
mechanical properties of the epoxy resin/bio-binder
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.