* 2000108
* Excellence in Research: Subatomic Physics at VUU
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Narbe Kalantarians, Virginia Union University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 307,740.00

The goal of the proposed research is to understand the microscopic structure of
the neutron using modern nuclear accelerator techniques; and to train the next
generation of STEM workers in this advanced field of research. Virginia Union
University is a Historically Black College with several oustanding assets. They
have a diverse student body and so are able to recruit from an undergraduate
population of traditionally under-represented groups. In addition, the
University is only about an hour's drive from the Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility (JLAB) and so it is neither difficult, nor expensive, for
the faculty and students to travel to JLAB to do their experimental work.
Through this research, graduates of the VUU program will receive hands-on
experience and emerge as well-trained nuclear scientists who are capable of
important contributions to national energy, medical, and security
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal describes contributions to the BONuS12
experiment at JLAB. The BONuS12 experiment is designed to measure the structure
function of the neutron. In general, there is a lack of neutron structure
function data in the literature because a pure neutron target does not exist and
thus the data must be inferred from neutron rich targets (such as deuterium).
This project will contribute to the BONuS12 experiment by significantly
improving the systematic errors associated with knowing the density of the
target by building a slow controls system to monitor the flow of gas into the
target region. This is an ideal undergraduate project when mentored by an
experienced faculty member. The PI will also participate in the analysis of the
F2 structure function data. The structure function analysis project is not a
task that undergraduates can complete, alone, but elements of the analysis are
approachable by undergraduates and the analyses will serve as a excellent
tutorial for the students in modern data handling and analysis
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.