* 2000189
* Teachers as learners of equitable discussion practices
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Deborah Ball, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,771,253.00

Growing evidence about the powerful effects of skillful teaching on students’
learning creates a need for professional development that impacts teachers’
actual practice. Teaching practices have been shown to play a crucial role in
the reproduction or disruption of injustice. This project aims to create
opportunities for teachers to notice and understand how normalized practice
often reproduces inequity and learn ways to disrupt typical patterns of inequity
in their classroom. The project will design and study professional development
that works on practice centered on the disruption of patterns of injustice. This
project focuses on classroom discussions because they can be a key site for
either reproducing or disrupting inequities and they have been established as a
powerful instructional practice. In addition to studying the impact of the
professional development on teachers’ teaching skill, the project also explores
teachers’ perceptions of their learning, influences on teachers’ professional
learning, and the impact of a mathematics-focused professional development
versus a generalized focus on teaching practice and perception of learning. The
project will generate new knowledge regarding ways in which elementary
mathematics teachers can be supported to learn effective teaching practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teachers benefit from professional development that
addresses both the technical and contextual aspects of teaching practice,
including the identities of their students and associated patterns of inequity
in schools and society. This research will examine how elementary teachers’
perceptions of professional learning and influences on such learning in
combination with professional development on leading discussions, impact their
skill with and willingness to take up teaching that disrupts patterns of
inequity in classrooms. In terms of influences on teachers’ professional
learning, the project will address teachers’ beliefs about students and
learning, their understanding of the pervasiveness of inequity in normalized
practice, contextual factors such as their relationship with administration or
their status in the school community, and their readiness for, skill with, and
implementation of the practice upon beginning the professional learning. The
studies will examine: (1) What are teachers’ perceptions of their own learning,
discussion-leading practice, and attention to disrupting inequity? How well
matched are these perceptions with external measures? What supports do teachers
perceive as impacting their learning? How does principal selection criteria and
communication with teachers about their selection impact teachers’ perceptions
and engagement? (2) In what ways does professional development on leading
discussions combined with peer and coach support impact teachers’ skill and
willingness to engage in that teaching practice including disrupting patterns of
inequity? (3) Does a mathematics focus produce different outcomes than a
generalized focus for teaching practice or perception of learning? The project
will collect and analyze several types of data, including measures of skill with
leading mathematics and literacy discussions, teacher perceptions, and
willingness and skill with disrupting patterns of inequity during discussions.
This project will contribute foundational knowledge and theory related to (a)
teachers’ perceptions of and influences on their learning to lead discussions
with attention to disrupting inequity, (b) components of professional
development that impact teaching practice, and c) how subject matter specificity
effects these first two areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.