* 2000862
* Expanding Technical Career Pathways in Manufacturing for High School Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Craig Caldwell, Salt Lake Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2024
* USD 584,943.00

Engineering technology programs create pathways for students to pursue technical
careers in manufacturing companies. Industry demand for skilled manufacturing
technicians continues to grow nationally and even more so in the Salt Lake City,
Utah region. The number of students enrolled in the Salt Lake Community College
(SLCC) engineering technology program has not kept pace with the increased
demand for technicians in the region. Given regional demographics, there is also
an opportunity to broaden participation of women and minorities in the
manufacturing workforce. Regional middle and high schools that serve a diverse
population have tried several approaches to increase the awareness of students
about and better prepare them for the technical trades. SLCC will collaborate in
this effort with the local school district to increase the number of skilled
technicians in the region. The project will do so by building upon a existing,
successful model and by offering an engineering technology certificate program
for high school students. Upon graduation from high school, students will be
prepared to enter the workforce directly or to earn an Associate of Applied
Science in Engineering Technology from SLCC after one additional year of study.
Given the diverse student population participating in the certificate program,
this project will help broaden participation of underrepresented students in the
technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jordan School District, within the
Salt Lake City, Utah metropolitan area, has demonstrated success with the
nationally available Prefreshman Engineering Program (PREP). PREP includes three
years of voluntary, yet extensive, summer programming designed to improve middle
school studentsâ€™ understanding of STEM content and make them aware of locally
available technical careers. The Jordan School District PREP program draws from
a diverse population of students and has had high retention rates across
multiple years of cohorts. The goal of this project is to increase the number
and diversity of students in the engineering technology program at SLCC, and to
support their success and entry into workforce, thus addressing regional
industry needs. This project will: (1) add an additional year of PREP at Jordan
School District to extend the program into high school; (2) provide early
connections between PREP students with SLCC engineering resources; and (3)
provide high school students with on-site education at SLCC leading to a
certificate in engineering technology, as a one-year waypoint toward a full two-
year degree by the time they graduate from high school. The certificate program
and the two-year degree program will be based on a competency-based learning
strategy, which will free students from traditional scheduling constraints and
lead to greater engagement with faculty. Using institutional data and student
surveys, the project will assess the effects of the extended PREP program
components on student persistence and program completion. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.