* 2000283
* Excellence in Research: Effect of Hurricane Structure, Track, and Landfall Features on Storm Surges
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Muhammad Akbar, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 457,216.00

This study will investigate how and why hurricane structures, tracks, forward
speed, and landfall features control the generation and propagation of storm
surges in a coastal setting. Surge level simulations using coupled circulation
(ADvanced CIRCulation, ADCIRC) and wave (SimulatingWAves Nearshore, SWAN) models
will be carried out using two recent hurricanes (Harvey and Irma) as test cases.
The simulations will include forcing using observed and analytical wind models,
and multiple runs with varying hurricane sizes, intensities, tracks, forward
speed, angle of approach, and bathymetry features will be performed and
analyzed. The project activities will involve HBCU graduate and undergraduate
students and will assist in the education of well-rounded researchers and
engineers capable of addressing multidisciplinary environmental challenges, such
as hurricane storm surges. This will be achieved by providing learning-by-doing
experiences through research, training, and multidisciplinary courses while
addressing a real, global, and societally relevant challenge. Qualified
minority, women, and veteran students will be recruited for the project which
will provide them with a unique learning opportunity in a critically needed
field. In addition, the project will promote retention and entice capable
undergraduate students to pursue graduate degrees. Summer activities will be
carried out to attract talented high school students to engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation results are expected to inform
current hurricane storm surge understanding and support multidisciplinary
engineering education and research. Surge level simulations using coupled
circulation (ADCIRC) and wave (SWAN) models will be carried out using two recent
hurricanes (Harvey and Irma) as test cases. Different runs will be performed
using tropical storm wind speeds based on observation-based wind products
incorporated into the model using different drag coefficient formulations. The
results will be compared against storm surge observations from the respective
hurricanes and from additional manipulations of forcing parameters such
hurricane size, intensity, track, and bathymetry will be used to reveal the
sensitivity of the model to these parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.