* 2000515
* Fostering deep learning, identity, and agency: Minoritized students learning biology in personal and community-relevant contexts
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ravit Golan Duncan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,497,278.00

Currently, equity remains an elusive goal in science education. Many minority
groups continue to be underrepresented in science careers, limiting their
opportunities to pursue potential science trajectories and diminishing benefits
to society from diverse perspectives. Science learning environments, however,
often do not build on or recognize the lives of students resulting in persistent
marginalization. This, in turn, can lead minoritized youth to identify
negatively with science and decreases their interest and success in science.
Drawing on current research about increasing interest in and relevance of
science for students, this project will explore how to promote positive identity
development and science understandings aligned with the Next Generation Science
Standards. The project team will develop and study a learning environment that
engages middle school students in addressing health-related problems in their
own community. The team will collaborate with seventh grade students, their
teachers, and community members to develop community-based science instruction.
Students will draw on research within their own communities and use powerful
technology tools to explore and explain the underlying biological and
environmental causes of these problems. Using these resources, students will
also create solutions for their communities. The project will contribute
theoretical insights, a set of principles to inform future instructional design,
professional development for teachers and will report their findings in
journals, conferences, and a project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
participatory design approach, this project aims to deepen the understanding of
how to support minoritized youth in three interlinked aspects critical for
success in school science and beyond: authoring science-linked identities,
negotiating science epistemologies, and learning life science core ideas and
practices. Through two consecutive implementation studies, the project team will
investigate how a set of design principles related to these aspects shapes
students’ science-linked identities and understandings of science practices and
core disciplinary ideas. They will work in middle school biology classrooms and
collaborate with administrators, teachers, students, and community members to
design meaningful and consequential instruction for minoritized youth. In
particular, they hope to better understand how to support science learning while
inviting and integrating multiple epistemologies and student-salient identities.
The outcomes will contribute theoretical insights about how interactions between
epistemic agency and community-based consequential learning support identity
work as well as science understandings; educative instructional materials that
can be adapted to other communities and contexts; professional materials that
can be used to support enactment of community-based learning environments; and
adaptations of materials that can be used in teacher preparation programs. In
addition to the materials, dissemination will include research and practitioner
publications and presentations, professional development workshops for middle
school teachers, and a project website that will make the materials and
resources freely available to others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.