* 2000187
* Excellence in Research: Collaborative Research:  Real-time Fault Diagnosis for Self-Driving Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Siobahn Grady, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 190,000.00

By 2025, driverless cars will be an integral part of daily transportation.
Understanding the reliability of self-driving cars is a crucial step to ensuring
that the impending ubiquity of self-driving cars causes as few fatalities as
possible. Components like actuators, sensors, and computational elements that
make up such systems have inherent vulnerabilities to faults due to
manufacturing defects, aging, cyberattacks, and environmental factors. Repair
and replacement of such components may reduce the risk of fault occurrences, but
may be infeasible in terms of cost, safety, and availability. Alternately,
certain faults and their false positives may trigger unnecessary repair or cause
unnecessary reactions by the vehicle. Therefore, it is necessary to quickly and
accurately identify faults in real time. This research will facilitate the
development of in-the-field error mitigation techniques, resulting in more
reliable autonomous cars. Furthermore, this research will support the technical
development and engagement of an underrepresented cohort of graduate and
undergraduate students at North Carolina A&amp;T State University and North
Carolina Central University through curriculum enhancements and participation in
extracurricular activities such as the AutoDrive Challenge, a national self-
driving car competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will provide
real-time diagnosis of transient, intermittent, and permanent faults that occur
in a self-driving car. This analysis will substantially improve the performance
and accuracy of fault classification/identification in complex systems. Multi-
perspective error detection techniques, including discrete-event system
analysis, data-driven analysis, and chip-level analysis, will be combined to
diagnose faults in automotive systems. The discrete-event system analysis will
detect and isolate a system's fault occurrences from external observation of
general behaviors of the system and in the absence of full observation of
occurred events. The data-driven analysis will use a novel fuzzy type-2
clustering-based method to detect whether a fault degraded performance. The
chip-level analysis will detect when a computational component is malfunctioning
based on equivalence checking of logic signals and state traces. The combination
of these approaches will facilitate fault diagnosis of automotive systems in
real-time and with greater accuracy and speed. The multi-perspective analysis
will improve the understanding of how each perspective interacts with the other
and has the potential to identify new fault types and patterns. The enhanced
awareness created by integrating these three unique methods will facilitate
automotive system fault diagnosis in real time with greater accuracy and speed
than could be achieved by any of the methods
individually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.