* 2000433
* Research Initiation Award: Characteristics of the Annual Airborne Pollen Spectrum in Northeast Florida
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Brian seymour, Edward Waters College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution.
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Edward Waters College intends to characterize the pattern of urban airborne
pollen in northeast Florida. The proposed work will result in the construction
of a calendar of airborne pollen, provide hands-on research activity for
undergraduate students and increase the research capacity of Edward Waters
college. The proposed work will expose undergraduate students to forensic
ecology and botany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will be a 2-year
study to examine the morphological structure of the anemophilous (wind
pollinated) pollen grains in Northeast Florida. Many published palynological
studies done in the Tampa Bay area and the southern parts of Florida. However,
there are no published materials on the Northeast area of the state. A Burkard
volumetric sampler will be used to trap airborne pollen grains. The sampler will
be on the roof of Edward Waters College. This area is in the poorest, most
urban, and predominantly African American area of Jacksonville and is known as
Health Zone 1 by public health officials. Another sampler will be place on the
roof of a building in the wealthiest Health Zones (Health Zone 6) to compare
pollen grain concentrations. Pollen concentration will be determined after
transferring samples onto microscope slides for staining with Caberlaâ€™s solution
and then identification and quantification using the single longitudinal
traverse method. This seminal aeropalynological study will allow
characterization of the local vegetation in Northeast Florida. Undergraduates
will gain an appreciation of Forensic palynology in which they can use this
ideal biomarker for associating people and objects to specific places.
Undergraduate students will experience how meteorological conditions can
influence the pollen season. Global warming and climate change will affect the
pollen patterns and will affect the most vulnerable population such as residents
of Health Zone 1. Long-term pollen monitoring through this volumetric method
would generate data to establish a phenological pollen calendar for Northeast
Florida. The determination of the pollen content in the air and the data
analysis will enable the characterization of pollen types with a view to
correlating the results with pollen allergy data from the Department of
Health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.