* 2000188
* Collaborative Research: Tying deep-seated landslides to base level, earthquakes, and a changing climate in the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Adam Booth, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 229,898.00

Thousands of prehistoric landslide deposits are found throughout the heavily
populated Puget Sound region in Washington State, where the SR530 “Oso”
Landslide killed 43 people in 2014. The region also experiences other hazards,
such as earthquakes and heavy winter rain storms, that likely triggered many of
those prehistoric landslides. This project will comprehensively map and estimate
the ages of past landslides to determine which ones were likely triggered by
independently known earthquakes and climatic events, thereby improving hazard
estimates for future events. Coordination with state agencies responsible for
creating landslide hazard maps in the Pacific Northwest is planned to ensure
broad dissemination of project results. An important focus will be connecting
landslides that may have been triggered by a prehistoric earthquake on the
Seattle Fault to physics-based computer simulations of ground shaking caused by
that earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test long-standing
conceptual models for when and where landslides occur within the landscape in
response to three main forcing mechanisms: earthquakes, climate, and base level.
The main technical goal is to quantify the pattern of landslides in space and
time and evaluate that pattern against independent records of forcing
mechanisms. To date the thousands of landslides required to accomplish this
goal, the researchers will define an empirical model for landslide age that can
be efficiently measured remotely with airborne lidar data and constrained by
known ages of benchmark landslides. Simulated ground motions from a suite of
modeled Seattle Fault earthquake scenarios will be compared to landslides likely
triggered by its most recent prehistoric rupture to inform future hazard
estimates and constrain rupture parameters. The novel combination of remote
sensing-based landslide dating and 3D earthquake simulations will advance
scientific understanding of how landscapes evolve and generate
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.