* 2000705
* A Statistical Framework and Tools for Planning Multilevel Randomized Cost-Effectiveness Trials
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Wei Li, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,274,904.00

This research project is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There continues to be increasing demand for
more comprehensive assessments of the impacts of STEM education programs,
policies, and practices. In general, cost-effectiveness studies are designed to
address this demand by evaluating the comparative performance of alternative
programs in terms of both their effectiveness and the cost of producing those
effects. Current assessments have dealt almost exclusively with program effects.
New and more comprehensive assessment tools are needed to detail not just the
effects of STEM programs but also the net cost of producing those impacts across
the many organizational levels take make up school systems (classrooms, schools,
and districts). This research develops a statistical framework and software that
critically enhance the design of multilevel cost-effectiveness studies in STEM
areas (estimating and separating costs across these levels).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this study is fourfold: (1) to develop a
statistical framework that guides the design of cost-effectiveness studies in
terms of power, sample sizes, and minimum detectable effect size (MDES); (2) to
assess and substantiate the precision and utility of the resulting formulas
through Monte Carlo simulations; (3) to implement the costing formulas in an
accessible and user-friendly software program, PowerUp!. In effect generating a
new updated version of the software that includes the capacity for multilevel
cost effectiveness; and (4) to develop an empirical catalogue of parameter
values to guide researchers in the judicious implementation of these analyses.
The scope of this project includes a broad range of multilevel designs,
including ten of the most common multilevel research designs, and extends them
to sensibly include cost effectiveness analyses. Conceptually, these designs
vary along three primary dimensions: (1) the number of cluster levels
(classrooms, or schools); (2) the level of program assignment; and (3) the level
of cost information available. The statistical framework and tools for the
effective and efficient design of multisite randomized trials will explicitly
address each of these dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.