* 2000518
* Collaborative Research: Recognition of Gender Stereotyping as a Determinant of Stereotype Assimilation and Contrast Effects Resulting from Subtle Bias Exposure in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Denise Sekaquaptewa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 842,676.00

Women have been historically underrepresented in STEM fields, and research
evidence suggests that subtle gender bias occurs in many STEM settings,
especially those where women continue to be underrepresented. Social
psychological research has demonstrated the negative effects of perceived bias
or becoming aware that one is the target of stereotyping and discrimination.
This project will provide a novel contribution to and extension of the perceived
bias research by proposing that simply witnessing instances of subtle gender
bias can have differential effects on observers depending on whether they
recognize the event as an instance of gender stereotyping. When witnesses
observe stereotypic interactions but do not perceive them as instances of gender
stereotyping, the interactions serve as a subtle stereotype cue that promotes
stereotype-supporting outcomes. When witnesses to bias do recognize the
stereotypic interactions as instances of gender stereotyping, the interactions
serve as a blatant stereotype cue promoting stereotype-defying outcomes. The
researchers will undertake a series of studies designed to experimentally test
the effects of subtle vs. blatant stereotype activation (cued by witnessing bias
on men and women in computer science and engineering contexts) focusing on
performance, motivation, evaluation of peers, and group dynamics. The findings
will inform ongoing and future intervention efforts aimed at raising awareness
of and mitigating negative effects of gender bias in the STEM environment. The
proposed project is a joint effort between the University of Michigan Ann Arbor
and Michigan Technological University and is supported by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will advance
the discovery and understanding of mechanisms by which the presence of subtle
gender bias influences the climate for men and women in STEM by specifically
exploring process differences for blatant and implicit bias cues. The work will
provide insight into the influences of these cues on performance and motivation
among women, as well as the behaviors of men and women in groups and on teams.
One strength of this work is the use of experimental methodology (i.e.
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to study the effects of witnessing subtle
bias. Using RCTs provides a rigorous test of a causal relationship between
exposure to subtle bias and its purported consequences. Moreover, this research
project will also expand research and theory on the effects of experienced
discrimination, by examining these effects on witnesses of bias, including men,
with important downstream consequences. By exploring these relationships, the
research will afford better understanding of how the awareness and attribution
of subtle gender bias may modify outcomes for everyone in the setting. This
understanding may inform ongoing and future intervention efforts aimed at
raising awareness of and mitigating negative outcomes of gender bias in the STEM
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.