* 2000454
* Developing an E-book and Other Interactive Instructional Materials for Technician Education in Vacuum Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Nancy Louwagie, Erie Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop an electronic textbook (E-book) to support vacuum
technology education. Vacuum technology is a critical, enabling technology for
many industries, with semiconductor manufacturing being one of the largest.
According to the 2019 report from the Semiconductor Industry Association, the
global semiconductor industry is a key growth sector in the global economy, with
the US semiconductor industry accounting for almost half the global market share
in 2018. US-based industry semiconductor sales exceeded $200 billion in 2018 and
the industry employs over 241,000 direct jobs. Currently, a cohort of community
colleges prepares manufacturing technicians for the US semiconductor industry.
Preparing technicians for this industry is a challenge for community colleges
especially in complex technologies such as vacuum technology. One of the
challenges is finding technician-level textbooks and equipping learning
environments that facilitate the development of industry-needed skills. The
E-book is expected to fill this need through its text and its associated
animations, tutorials, video demonstrations, and interactive
assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will convert the first four
chapters of the text "Introduction to Vacuum Technology" by David M. Hata into a
modern electronic book. This format will increase access to vacuum technology
instructional resources for both students and incumbent workers. In addition,
the project will develop a laboratory guide to help community college
instructors develop hands-on learning environments for their students. This
laboratory guide will present options for implementing vacuum training systems,
along with video demonstrations of equipment set-up and operation for laboratory
experiments. All materials will be classroom-tested at Erie Community College,
Normandale Community College, and other partner colleges. Erie Community College
and Normandale Community College will license the e-book and associated
resources through a Creative Commons license, and disseminate it with help of
The Society of Vacuum Coaters, a professional society, and Lesker, Inc., a
vacuum equipment supplier. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.