* 2000887
* Expanding Pathways to a Data Science Career by Developing a Certification in Data Science and Analytics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Nancy Binowski, County College of Morris
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 235,277.00

Businesses and organizations across all industry sectors are increasingly
looking for ways to use data in their decision making. This shift to data-driven
decision making is creating a growing workforce demand for Data Science and
Analytics professionals. In a 2018 report, the US Bureau of Labor Statistics
projected that jobs in data science and analytics will grow 34% by 2026.
However, thus far, very few two-year institutions offer data analytics programs
that could prepare students for entry-level positions in data science and
analytics. To create new pathways into data science and analytics careers, this
project intends to establish a college credit-based certificate in data
analytics. In concert with this goal, it also aims to increase the College’s
capacity for high quality data science instruction and to broaden participation
in data science, with a focus on inclusion of women. In addition to its
potential to increase the capacity and quality of the data science workforce in
New Jersey, the project may also provide a model for other institutions that are
interested in building new data science programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major goal of the project is to develop a 15-credit data science certificate
that integrates technology such as R, Tableau, Python, and SQL into the
curriculum. Less than 20 community college-based data science programs appear to
exist in the US, and this certificate is believed to be the first at any
community college in the greater New York/New Jersey metropolitan area. The
curriculum will be informed by an industry advisory committee and implement
national recommendations for data science education, including teaching
statistics thinking, integrating real data with a context and a purpose, and
using project-based learning. The project intends to recruit women into the
field through collaboration with the College’s Women in STEM Club, R-Ladies
Global, and faculty development. The resulting certification will prepare
students to enter the workforce as data analytics professionals, or to transfer
to four-year programs where they can acquire the advanced credentials needed for
mid- to high-level data scientist positions. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.