* 2000073
* Training Technicians for Connected Technologies in Businesses and Smart Homes
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Melissa Hayes, Mississippi Gulf Coast Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,990.00

More homes and industries are adopting connected technology solutions known as
the Internet of Things (IoT). As a result, the workforce is facing a growing
skills gap. Trained technicians are needed to develop, adjust, install, and
troubleshoot IoT technologies, as well as to analyze the data that they
generate. This project will increase the quality, capacity, and number of
skilled IoT technicians. To achieve this goal, the project will develop an IoT
Certificate Program. Students in the IoT Certificate Program will participate in
field trips to see wide-spread IoT applications in industries and homes. The IoT
Certificate Program will culminate in a capstone course in which students will
apply the concepts and practices they learned in the classroom. Specifically,
the students will develop a secure and reliable IoT product or system either on
campus or at a Business &amp; Industry Leadership Team partner location. The
individuals who earn the IoT Certificate will help meet the national need for a
highly skilled technician workforce for smart homes and connected
cities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to (1) modify and
design new curriculum for an IoT Certificate, (2) provide professional
development activities that prepare faculty to deliver quality instruction in
IoT, and (3) recruit and retain more females and other underrepresented groups
in the IoT Technician field. The project aims to award IoT certificates to at
least 30 students by the end of the project. Curriculum modification and
development will be informed through faculty professional development at the
Cisco Academy, through knowledge provided by the projectâ€™s Business &amp;
Industry Leadership Team members, and expertise shared by related efforts.
Inclusive recruitment and retention activities will be developed to welcome
participation of females and other underrepresented populations. Additionally,
currently enrolled college students will be recruited from programs such as
Electrical, HVAC, Construction Engineering, Computer Networking, Cybersecurity,
Computer Programming, and Data Analytics. Individuals who earn the IoT
Technician Certificate will be able to program sensors, install and program
smart controllers, problem-solve and repair hardware and software problems, and
analyze the data generated by the system. The contributions of this project
include development of an IoT curriculum that reflects industry needs, equips
students for a career in a rapidly evolving world of IoT, and improves
strategies to increase participation of women and other underrepresented groups.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.