* 2000388
* Improving Evaluations of STEM Programs: An Empirical Investigation of Key Design Parameters
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Andrea Beach, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,328,108.00

To improve science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) outcomes in
K-12 classrooms, it is critical to understand the landscape of the STEM learning
environment. However, the STEM learning environment is complex. Students are
nested within teachers, and teachers are nested within schools (which in turn
are nested within districts), which implies a multilevel structure. To date,
most empirical research that uses multilevel modeling to examine the role of
higher levels on variation in student outcomes does not examine the teacher
level. The reason is that for many states, data linkages between students and
teachers have been difficult to achieve. However, in the last five years, this
situation has improved in many states, which makes this work now possible. This
study seeks to further understanding of the STEM learning environment by 1)
examining the extent to which mathematics and science achievement varies across
students, teachers, schools, and districts and 2) examining the extent to which
student, teacher, school, and district characteristics that are found in state
administrative databases can be used to explain this variation at each level.
This work will support advances in research and evaluation methodologies that
will enable researchers to design more rigorous and comprehensive evaluations of
STEM interventions and improve the accuracy of statistical power calculations.
Broad dissemination of the resulting tools and techniques will provide access
through freely available websites, and workshops and training opportunities to
build capacity in the field for STEM researchers to design cluster randomized
trials (CRTs) to answer questions beyond what works to for whom and under what
conditions. This project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
Funding is also provided by the Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12), which
supports the research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools
in order to enhance STEM learning and teaching by pre-K-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to 1) describing and
explaining the landscape of the STEM learning environment, an environment which
includes students, teachers, and schools, and 2) applying this empirical
information in the design of STEM intervention studies to enable researchers to
extend beyond the usual questions about if the intervention works and for which
types of students or schools. By adding teacher level variables, this analysis
would account for key teacher characteristics that may moderate the treatment
effect. The research will also increase the efficiency in the design of CRTs of
STEM interventions. Specifically, the findings from this study will improve the
internal validity and cost-efficiency of evaluations of STEM interventions by
increasing the accuracy of estimates for the full range of parameters needed to
conduct power analyses, particularly when the teacher level is included. The
high cost associated with CRTs makes it critical to plan accurate trials that do
not overestimate the required sample size, and hence cost more than necessary,
or underestimate the sample size and thereby reduce the potential to generate
high-quality evidence of program effectiveness. Including the teacher level in
intervention studies, a critical level in the delivery of any intervention, will
allow for more testing of teacher characteristics that may moderate intervention
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.