* 2000044
* Excellence in Research: Mathematical Analysis of the Prevention of HIV with PrEP and HAART Treatment
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Katharine Gurski, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 379,055.00

Prevention, mitigation, and eradication of HIV has been the focus of
governments, scientists, and public health professionals for decades. Recent
reports, such as the “Ending the HIV Epidemic: A Plan for America” distributed
by the US Department of Health and Human Services, have generated a renewed hope
for the millions of people around the world affected by this disease. To achieve
this goal, it is imperative to understand the most effective use of available
resources in light of the new prophylaxis treatment and the continued
improvements of the highly active anti-retroviral treatment, particularly in the
case of non-compliance. A realistic mathematical model, including these two
treatments, as well as disproportional effects on disparate subpopulations, is
essential for effective resource utilization. The broader impacts of this
proposal are far-reaching from a public health perspective, but will also serve
as a platform to train primarily underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
students at the interface of mathematics and medicine. This collaboration
between researchers at Howard University, University of Maryland, Baltimore
County, and the National Institutes of Health will train students to work in a
collaborative team environment focused on addressing a pressing scientific
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realistic mathematical models can suggest best
courses of intervention that can significantly reduce the number of HIV
infections. The effect of the pre-exposure prophylaxis treatment (PrEP) will be
included in a previously developed mathematical model of HIV. Previous models of
imperfect vaccines have shown the potential for a backwards bifurcation that can
dramatically affect the dynamics of the epidemic. As a result, the same
intervention that brings a model without a vaccine to the disease-free
equilibrium, could drive the dynamics of the model with PrEP to a stable endemic
equilibrium. Transmission of HIV depends on the viral-load of the infected
individual. Thus, realistic mathematical models must include the effect of non-
steady highly active anti-retroviral treatment (HAART) through structured
treatment interruptions, lack of adherence to drug regimen and drug resistance.
Non-steady HAART treatment regimes and the subsequent two-way movement between
virally suppressed and chronically infected will require using non-exponential
treatment stages into the model, which will be fitted to publicly available
Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS) data from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health. Since public health data will be used in the
mathematical model, parameter identifiability will be addressed structurally and
practically. Several numerical tools for accessing structural identifiability of
the model will be used. The profile likelihood method will be used to assess the
practical identifiability of model parameters and to provide confidence
intervals for parameter estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.