* 2000193
* Expanding Pathways from High School into the Biotechnology Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Pamela Pape-Lindstrom, Harford Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 493,912.00

The nation’s capital region, including Maryland, Virginia, and Washington, D.C.,
is an expanding hub of biotechnology innovation and industry. Consequently, the
number of biotechnology jobs is projected to increase in the region, as well as
nationally. Despite the growing workforce demand, the public has a limited
understanding of the biotechnology field or its promising career options. In
addition, high school students, including students from economically challenged,
underrepresented, and/or rural backgrounds, have limited exposure to the range
of possible college and career choices. This project aims to increase the number
and diversity of biotechnicians entering the workforce. To achieve this goal,
the project will engage students and their families in workshops to improve
their understanding of biotechnology as a vibrant career and to raise awareness
of other educational and career opportunities. The project will target high
schools with majority-minority enrollment and/or rural status, thus increasing
opportunities to enroll students from groups traditionally underrepresented in
STEM and in college-level biotechnology programs. This project has the potential
to provide opportunities for upward socioeconomic mobility for the members of
underrepresented communities in STEM by equipping them with the knowledge and
skills needed in biotechnology careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the
growing industry demand, the project specific aims include to: (1) develop an
associate degree in STEM with a concentration in biotechnology; (2) refresh the
curriculum of an existing biotechnology certificate; (3) increase awareness of
biotechnology careers and the number and diversity of students completing
biotechnology curricula; and (4) provide summer internships for students to
develop employability skills in biotechnology. The project includes partnerships
with local public-school districts to recruit students into a newly created
associate degree in STEM with a concentration in biotechnology. In collaboration
with local industry partners, the project will provide summer internships to
help students gain professional, field-specific, and career-readiness skills.
The project expects to increase and diversify the biotechnology workforce by
engaging high school students and their families in community-based outreach
events that use hands-on biotechnology activities. Academic and career
information, including degree programs, job descriptions, and salaries, will be
disseminated at these events. Additionally, the project will create summer
professional development opportunities emphasizing biotechnology for high school
teachers and a week-long summer institute on the Harford Community College
campus for high school students considering biotechnology as a career option.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields that
drive the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.