* 2000764
* Using High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry to Develop Advanced Laboratory Skills in Collaboration with Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Russ Read, Forsyth Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 428,082.00

Biotechnology is one of the fastest-growing industries in the country. To meet
the growing biotechnology workforce needs, the National Center for Biotechnology
Workforce at Forsyth Technical Community College has been supporting nationwide
education and training of technicians in biotechnology, bioprocessing, and
related programs at community colleges. Biotechnology industries increasingly
need workers with hands-on training in high-resolution mass spectrometry. This
project aims to expand the breadth and relevance of its support for
biotechnology technician education by acquiring a high-resolution mass
spectrometer. This state-of-the-art analytical tool can identify specific
chemicals in a sample, even when the sample contains only a trillionth of a gram
of that chemical. Such information is used in industries ranging from
environmental testing, and food and beverage production, to drug discovery and
manufacturing. The project proposes to use this spectrometer to train students
and faculty in state-of-the art high-resolution mass spectrometry technology,
thus aligning technician education with emerging workforce
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two goals. First, it plans to
acquire a high-resolution mass spectrometer and collaborate with industry
partners to use real-world bioscience projects to provide students with skills-
based instruction in how to use this technology. Second, it plans to provide
workshops that will help high school STEM educators increase their understanding
of the bioscience industry, including the use of high-resolution mass
spectrometry. These workshops are intended to provide teachers with the
knowledge and skills they need to guide students into community college
technician education programs that lead to bioscience careers. The College will
partner with educators, employers, and entrepreneurs in and around Innovation
Quarter in downtown Winston-Salem, NC, to develop instructional labs using high-
resolution mass spectrometry on industry-related projects. Labs will include
standard operating procedures on how to use the instrument to collect high-
resolution mass spectrometry data, as well as how to interpret these data. This
skills-based learning will serve faculty and students from the College and high
school STEM programs, as well as those at other local universities. The
workshops will also serve educators from across the nation who will be selected
for their interest in and potential to develop advanced skills training that
connects their local industry with the classroom. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.