* 2000148
* Cornell 7th Conference on Analysis, Probability, and Mathematical Physics on Fractals
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Robert Strichartz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,950.00

The 7th Conference on Analysis, Probability and Mathematical Physics on Fractals
will be held at Cornell University Mathematics Department from June 9-13, 2020.
The main objective of this conference is to bring together a broad range of
researchers in Analysis, Mathematical Physics, Probability on Fractals and other
research areas for the purpose of scientific exchange, planning of new projects,
and education and training of entering researchers. These conferences have been
held every three years starting in 2002. The five-day meeting will be structured
in three parts: half-hour talks in the mornings by leading researchers in the
field to describe recent important advances; mini-courses in the early
afternoons to enable advanced undergraduates, graduate students, and researchers
from related fields to learn some of the foundations of the area and discuss
important open problems, and 20-minute talks in parallel sessions in the late
afternoons to allow all attendees to present their research. A large number of
early-career researchers, including members of underrepresented groups and
undergraduate students, from both the Cornell SPUR and University of Connecticut
REU programs, are expected to benefit from these courses. A number of applied
mathematicians and theoretical physicists attend these conferences, so the
conference will help foster the growing interactions between the mathematics and
physics communities with interests in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are many ways in which fractals appear in current mathematical research. The
topics of this conference are those where the underlying space is fractal, and
the subjects studied include the analogs of differential equations, random
processes and models of physical interactions taking place on these fractal
spaces. Due to the pioneering work of Barlow, Perkins, Bass, Kusuoka, Zhou and
Kigami there is a well-established, rigorous mathematical framework for
discussing such problems. This conference is expected to expand to new
directions of research, including new trends in potential, geometric and
probabilistic analysis on non-smooth and fractal spaces. The conference website
is&lt;br/&gt;https://math.cornell.edu/7th-cornell-conference-analysis-
probability-and-mathematical-physics-fractals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.