* 2000296
* Excellence in Research: Analysis of Rare Mutations and Post-translational Modifications in Peroxidases
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jiang Li, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 596,453.00

Peroxidases are a large family of enzymes that can generate reactive oxygen
species involved in many cellular processes including aging, gene expression and
signal transduction. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins play
important roles in the cellular processes of peroxidases. Rare mutations
involved in PTMs can alter molecular interaction sites and generate deleterious
outcomes. However, the genetic mechanism of PTMs affected by rare mutations in
peroxidases remains unknown. High throughput technologies generate large
datasets for PTM sites and damaging mutations, which makes this discovering
process possible. This project will develop novel computational tools to
identify PTM sites and to predict the effects of mutations to peroxidases. The
bioinformatics tools and databases developed in this program will be expected to
have broader applications in broad biology research and machine learning
community. In addition to the new computational tools and biological knowledge,
this project will encourage the participation of underrepresented minority
students to STEM research. The creation of the Machine Learning course section
and Big Data club will help students from HBCUs develop solid foundations for
genetics and bioinformatics. The outreach activities, which include the
involvement of students in research training activities, workshops and seminars,
will help minority students develop essential skills in Big Data analytics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the effects of
rare mutations and PTM sites in peroxidases using bioinformatics tools and
experimental approaches. Novel bioinformatics approaches will be developed to
predict mutation effects and PTM sites, and to analyze the effects of peroxidase
rare mutations involved in PTMs in Human and Drosophila through three
objectives: 1) Tool Development: new biological sequence features and machine
learning algorithms will be used to develop bioinformatics tools for predicting
protein sumoylation sites and the effects of missense mutations on protein
stability; 2) Bioinformatics Analysis: sequence-based machine learning
predictors will be designed to discover the rare damaging mutations, predict the
effects of mutations on protein stability, and identify the mutations involved
in PTMs, with a structure-based energy calculation to quantify the energy
changes to assess the effects of mutations on peroxidase structure and function;
and 3) Experimental Validation: biological impacts of PTM-related mutations in
curly suppressor (Cysu), a heme peroxidase involved in the wing expansion and
the maturation process in Drosophila, will be assessed. Genome editing tools
will be used to generate mutant flies and to test neuronal functions of
homologues to inspect their contributions to the phenotypes of Cysu transgenic
flies. The new bioinformatics and experimental methods used in this study will
provide useful information for characterizing the functional effects of rare
mutations involved in PTMs in peroxidases. &lt;br/&gt;Results of this project,
including research papers and computational tools, will be made available at
http://tengbioinformatics.com/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.