* 2000256
* CAREER: Active-Loadable Poresomes for the Cytoplasmic Delivery of Membrane-Impermeable Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Juliane Nguyen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 364,244.00

NON-TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;Unlike small molecules, large molecules including
proteins and nucleic acids are unable to penetrate the cellular membrane.
However, effectively delivering proteins and nucleic acids into cells could
enable the treatment of a number of previously incurable diseases. Here, the PI
proposes to create natural small lipid vesicles that contain pores. These will
allow large molecules to be transported directly into cells. To load these small
lipid vesicles with therapeutic molecules, biomaterials composed of nucleic
acids will be engineered. To ensure that the lipid vesicles will only target
specific cells, the vesicles will be decorated with molecules that can detect
diseased cells. This research is expected to have broad impact across several
scientific disciplines including biomaterials, nucleic acid and drug delivery,
nanotechnology, and cell-mimicking materials. The fundamental knowledge gained
from the proposal will significantly change the way that membrane-impermeable
compounds are delivered to cells, especially for large molecules. This has
important implications for human health because these carriers should allow
diseases that are currently undruggable to be treated more safely and
efficiently. The project will also enhance the nation's education infrastructure
by developing a new biomaterials curriculum for graduate students and by
delivering interactive teaching modules to high schools. Further, this project
seeks to establish a mentoring-intensive program that will foster biomaterials
research for minority and female undergraduate students. It will also establish
a network of support for biomaterials graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;In
this CAREER proposal, the PI plans to develop a novel class of cell-mimicking
carriers, termed poresomes. These poresomes will be used to deliver
macromolecules to the cytoplasm while bypassing endosomes. Despite tremendous
progress in nanoscience, the cytoplasmic delivery of membrane-impermeable
compounds such as negatively charged RNA remains challenging. This is because a
significant fraction of the RNA that is delivered remains trapped in the
endosomes, where it ultimately degrades. The objective of this CAREER proposal
is to overcome these challenges by engineering cell-mimicking RNA-loaded lipid
vesicles that are equipped with pores composed of connexin membrane channels. It
is hypothesized that microRNA(miRNA)-loaded poresomes will connect to the
connexin membrane channels of recipient cells to form gap junctions. In this
way, miRNAs will be directly delivered into the cytoplasm whilst bypassing the
degradative endosomal and lysosomal environments (Objective 1). Further, to
effectively load poresomes with therapeutic cargo, the PI proposes to synthesize
EXOmers, RNA-based sequences that are capable of exploiting the cellular
trafficking machinery used to actively sort macromolecules into poresomes.
Structure activity analyses will be performed to develop highly efficient
sequences (Objective 2). Third, multifunctional poresomes that target non-
internalizing receptors will be engineered to mediate cellular anchoring and
facilitate miRNA transport through gap junctions (Objective 3). The educational
goals are to (i) increase participation of underrepresented students through
more understandable, relatable, and accessible science and (ii) improve
biomaterials and nanoscience education for graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students. We will harness the learning advantages provided by
visualization and animation to teach complex scientific subject matter. The
integrative nature of our education outreach program should improve the
communication skills of both graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.