* 2000302
* CAREER: Design of in-line controllers for continuously operating networks with structural uncertainty
* CSE,CNS
* 06/06/2019,07/31/2022
* Donatello Materassi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 344,623.00

This project focuses on designing control mechanisms for a networked system with
unknown structure by making use only of non-invasive observations. By non-
invasive observations, it is meant that what is being measured is not the system
reaction to actively injected inputs, but rather the system behavior when it is
operating under standard conditions and subject to potentially unobservable
forcing signals. The capability of designing controllers based only on non-
invasive observations is of paramount importance for any large scale network
fulfilling critical or uninterruptible functions (i.e., a power grid, a logistic
system) or in situations where it is impractical or too expensive to inject
known probing signals into the system (i.e., a gene network, a financial
network). Other relevant applications are in medicine (i.e., repeated drug
testing, computer- assisted anesthesia). Indeed, in these cases, for obvious
safety and health concerns, it is not desirable to actively test the response of
a patient to a different drug dosage or treatment, if comparably useful
information could be inferred from non-invasive
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since non-invasive observations do not always
provide full information about the network's configuration, the project will
also consider how to define adequate control mechanisms that are robust with
respect to uncertainties in the connectivity structure. These kinds of
uncertainties are not typically considered in standard techniques for control
design and the development of specific methodologies is required. Combined with
the capability of adapting to changes in the network's configuration, these
control techniques will provide a solid foundation for the realization of a
self-healing system. This project will bridge together different areas,
including statistics, computer science, and control theory with a single
unifying framework. New courses will be created to facilitate communication
among all these communities of researchers, advancing separate fields in a
multidisciplinary way.