* 2000713
* Innovation Networks: The Creation and Diffusion of Gender Equity Ideas in Universities
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Kathrin Zippel, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,434,260.00

Northeastern University will implement an NSF EHR Core Research (ECR) project
that uses a multi-method social network analysis to better understand the
evolution, operation, and outcomes of a network of grantees from the NSF-funded
ADVANCE program. The NSF ADVANCE program has made awards since 2001 to promote
systemic change that supports gender equity of the academic science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) workforce. A consequence of the program has been
the emergence of a nationwide NSF ADVANCE network of more than 195 universities
and STEM organizations, with more than 1,500 individuals. This network includes
Principal Investigators (PIs) and co-PIs, project directors and managers,
advisory board members, evaluators, STEM faculty at all ranks, and gender and
diversity scholars. Many of these participants are, or become, mid- and top-
level administrators who potentially spread ideas about how to construct
equitable academic workplaces when they move to other institutions, when they
serve in various roles on multiple grants, and when they produce scholarship and
other publications, therefore extending the reach of the network’s equity-
enhancement strategies. The ECR project will examine how the network has
multiplied the NSF’s initial investment through the exchange of ideas among STEM
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will use a multi-method
social network approach to analyze the creation and diffusion of key ideas
through the multilayered networks formed through NSF ADVANCE. The project will
combine network statistics, textual analysis, and qualitative methods to
identify ideas and practices innovated in the network, and patterns and
mechanisms of knowledge diffusion. The research will result in an original
dataset from multiple sources: grants (dates, type, size, and other general
information from the NSF award database), key documents from ADVANCE sites
(proposals, reports, and full text conference papers and publications),
individuals involved in ADVANCE grants (demographics, bibliometrics, and job
histories since 2000), universities (organizational characteristics, for example
size, type of institution with Carnegie Classification and IPEDS survey data,
and rankings in Best Colleges), and other ADVANCE-related scholarship. The
relational data will include ties created through (a) direct collaboration on
grants, (b) serving on advisory boards, (c) working at the same university, (d)
co-authoring scholarly papers, and (e) citing scholarly work. We also conduct
case studies of six ADVANCE-funded institutions with 18 interviews and 20
interviews with other individuals involved in ADVANCE. This research will
document and offer insight into how the creation, adoption, and diffusion of
innovative ideas by this unique network of university leaders and scholars spurs
comprehensive change in higher education institutions, including those without
NSF ADVANCE grants. The research will benefit funding agencies and the broader
community of higher education professionals who are interested in pursuing
equity enhancement in higher education, especially within STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.