* 2000391
* Development of More Active and More Selective Catalysts for ATRP
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Chemistry Division is supporting Professor Krzysztof Matyjaszewski at
Carnegie Mellon University to develop new Cu-based catalysts for atom transfer
radical polymerization (ATRP). Radical polymerization is a chemical reaction
that sequentially adds small molecules of monomers to form long polymer chains
that consist of hundreds or thousands of repeating units. This powerful
synthetic method is used to make nearly half of all plastics, about 100 million
tons worldwide each year. ATRP is a special type of radical polymerization that
can prepare advanced polymers with precisely controlled chain lengths and
shapes. ATRP is also used to prepare various hybrid materials by chemically
linking synthetic polymers to biomolecules and to surfaces of inorganic
particles. Professor Matyjaszewski’s team develops new catalysts for such
important ATRP processes with enhanced activity and selectivity. This study will
contribute to the creation of more precise polymers and expansion of range of
polymerizable monomers, while using diminished levels of catalyst. By employing
“green” ATRP catalysts, this research provides environmentally improved
polymerization conditions, relevant for the industrial production of polymers.
The broader impacts include the training undergraduate and graduate students in
polymer science and educating the public about controlled radical polymerization
via instructional webpages and videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this ward,
Professor Matyjaszewski and his team will explore preparation of catalysts with
much higher activity than the original ATRP catalysts and that retain
selectivity for the ATRP pathway while suppressing Cu-induced termination and
transfer reactions. ATRP is based on a reversible atom transfer process between
dormant alkyl halides and growing radicals, catalyzed by redox active transition
metal complexes. ATRP is used to prepare advanced polymers with well-defined
architecture. They include uniform linear chains and also star, comb and cyclic
polymers, as well as statistical, periodic, gradient and block copolymers. The
new ATRP catalysts are based on ligands belonging to the
tris(pyridylmetyl)amine, or tetra-aza-macrocycle families. Thermodynamic and
kinetic properties of new complexes will be determined through electrochemical,
spectroscopic and computational methods to establish the comprehensive
structure/reactivity relationship. The new catalysts being developed will be
employed for ATRP of (meth)acrylates and (meth)acrylamides and also for less
ATRP-active monomers such as vinyl esters and N-vinylamides. The catalysts will
be evaluated for their ability to activate alkyl (pseudo)halides with F-C, N3-C,
SCN-C bonds, much less active species than the alkyl bromides or chlorides that
are typically used in ATRP. The extremely reactive Cu-based catalysts react not
only with alkyl halides but also with propagating radicals, forming transient
organocuprate species. The latter paramagnetic compounds induce termination
processes. Therefore, the mechanism of Cu-catalyzed termination will be studied
in great detail to gain insight into the design of more selective catalysts and
optimize polymerization conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.