* 2000467
* Improving Automotive Technician Training Through a Flexible Industry Apprenticeship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mark Gerko, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 288,828.00

Demand for skilled automotive technicians continues to grow, providing new
opportunities for students to join the technical workforce. As technological
innovations in the automotive industry continue to increase rapidly, the
education of technicians needs to keep pace. This project will support the
development of a flexible apprenticeship program in which students will be
concurrently employed by an industry partner and enrolled in an automotive
technology program. The proposed “earn and learn” model will engage Columbus
State Community College and industry partners in the technical education of
automotive technicians. The project will support the upskilling of incumbent
workers and recruiting of high school students to increase the number of skilled
technicians who can support the automotive industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to expand the participation of industry in an
experiential student learning model and to meet industry’s demand for more
automotive technicians by partnering with local dealerships and regional high
schools. This project will implement an Automotive Fast Track Apprenticeship
program that will be jointly developed with industry partners. Based on an earn
and learn model design, the apprenticeship program will include foundational
technical coursework and field experience. Outreach efforts to recruit students
will focus on three target populations: high school students, current Columbus
State students in the automotive program, and incumbent workers in jobs at
dealerships. A new financial literacy and professional development workshop will
be developed to address topics such as completing a FAFSA, managing personal
finances, and acquiring tools as a technician. Automotive technology labs will
be upgraded with advanced diagnostic equipment that will help increase the
capacity of the labs to accommodate more students and provide students with
experiences using the latest technology. The project will use institutional
data, surveys, and student interviews to assess the impact of the project on
students and industry partners. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced- technology fields that drive the nation’s
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.