* 2000563
* Preparing Cybersecurity Technicians with the Technical and Entrepreneurial Skills Required to Work as Independent Contractors
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Skip Berry, Riverside Community College District/Riverside City College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,974.00

Across the nation, thousands of high-wage technician positions are available in
cyber defense fields. Filling these positions would greatly increase the ability
of businesses to prevent cyber breaches and to remediate them when they occur.
Many businesses hire contractors to fill this workforce need. Clearly, these
contractors must have knowledge and skills in cyber defense. However, to be
successful independent entrepreneurs or serve as entrepreneurs within consulting
firms, they also need business knowledge and skills. This project aims to
prepare cyber defense technicians with both technical and business skills. To do
so, it will create a cyber defense technician certificate program that
integrates entrepreneurial skills with cybersecurity skills to train
Cyberpreneur specialists. The Cyberpreneur program will include both new and
existing courses to provide technical and business training. Through focused
recruiting and retention activities, the project also intends to increase
diversity within the cyber defense workforce. Individuals who complete the
Cyberpreneur program will help to address cyber defense workforce needs within
the Inland Empire region of Southern California and elsewhere in the country.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a certificate program that
teaches theory and enables students to develop technical expertise in cyber
defense, auditing of systems, incident response, remediation of vulnerabilities,
and the use of artificial intelligence tools. Students will also complete
coursework in entrepreneurship, finance, and accounting. A Business and Industry
Leadership Team will guide curriculum development and provide advice regarding
curriculum modifications and experiential learning requirements. The project
includes outreach activities such as presentations at local high schools,
participation in career fairs, and advertising in media outlets that reach large
underrepresented communities. Best practices for recruiting and retention of
students from underrepresented groups, including those developed by the National
Center for Women in Technology, will be leveraged to increase diversity in cyber
defense education programs and the workforce. An external evaluator and the
project leadership team will conduct assessments to establish benchmarks for
increasing inclusion within the program. The program will leverage existing NSF
ATE Center websites (including the National Center for Systems Security and
Information Assurance, National CyberWatch, and the National Convergence
Technology Center) to promote new content modules and support the dissemination
of project-related information. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.