* 2000398
* RUI: Holographic Stars and Stripes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Matthew Lippert, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 91,135.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Matthew Lippert at
Long Island University Brooklyn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory has emerged
in recent years as a powerful tool, not just for understanding quantum gravity
and extremely high-energy physics, but also for studying a wide range of
strongly interacting systems exhibiting a variety of length scales, from
electrons in exotic superconductors to the ultra-dense cores of neutron stars.
Professor Lippert will conduct research into these systems with the goal of
developing interdisciplinary connections between string theory and gravitational
physics, nuclear physics, astrophysics, and condensed matter physics. Such
bridges enable the exchange of ideas and techniques between different fields of
physics, enriching and advancing them all. As such, this research advances the
national interest by fostering the development of basic science within the
United States. This grant will also support the research of African-American and
Hispanic students, thereby increasing the diversity of students in STEM fields
and thereby allowing these students to improve their practical quantitative and
computing skills, to gain a hands-on appreciation for how actual science is
done, and to glimpse the exciting frontier of human knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this research uses holographic gauge/gravity
duality to investigate open questions in strongly coupled quantum field
theories, organized around four topics. First, the poorly understood behavior of
cold, dense nuclear matter at the core of neutron stars will be investigated
using holographic models of QCD in order to test predictions against the recent
and ongoing observations of binary neutron star mergers. Second, strongly
coupled striped states, such as charge density waves, will be studied using
holographic models, including their response to applied electromagnetic fields
and the interplay between spontaneous and explicit spatial symmetry breaking.
Third, anyons, whose unusual behavior is poorly understood even at weak
coupling, will be analyzed at strong coupling using a holographic dual
description. Finally, using holographic duality, this research will explore the
out-of-equilibrium dynamics by which certain strongly interacting systems relax
to ground states with spontaneously broken symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.