* 2000469
* Collagen fibril structure, surface charge and vascular calcification
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Gunjan Agarwal, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2024
* USD 448,007.00

Calcification of soft tissues (e.g. arteries) is a hallmark of several
cardiovascular diseases like aortic aneurysms and atherosclerosis. Calcific
deposits lead to adverse consequences such as stiffening of arteries and
disruption of normal blood flow, often leading to morbidity and mortality. The
goal of this project is to understand where calcific deposits are formed in soft
tissues. In particular, the investigators will examine how collagen fibrils
(present in the extracellular matrix surrounding the cells in the arterial wall)
can facilitate pathological calcification. The insights gained will advance our
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms governing soft-tissue calcification
especially in its early stages. This can help improve cardiovascular outcomes by
designing new strategies for early diagnosis and treatment and aid biomaterials
development for cardiovascular bioprostheses. In addition to advancing the field
of extracellular matrix and vascular biology, the project will help train the
next generation of scientists and engineers by providing graduate and
undergraduate student(s) with multidisciplinary hands-on research experiences
and under-privileged K-8 students with enrichment activities. Furthermore, new
education materials and microscopy approaches will be developed to enhance
education and research infrastructure for the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
role of the collagen fibril in mediating vascular calcification. While it is
accepted that pathological calcification is mediated by phenotypic switching of
vascular smooth muscle cells into a ‘bone-like’ osteogenic phenotype, there is
also evidence indicating that in abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA), a
subpopulation of collagen fibrils in the extracellular matrix undergoes a
structural change as compared to the native (normal) fibrils. The project’s
overall hypothesis is that structurally altered (abnormal) collagen fibrils in
AAA serve as the major substrates for calcific deposits due to perturbations in
their surface-charge distribution. To test this hypothesis, studies will be
conducted at the single fibril level on human AAA tissue, beginning with mapping
the micro and macro-calcifications in the excised AAA tissue using micro-
computed tomography. The Research Plan is organized under two aims. The FIRST
Aim is to test the hypothesis that structurally altered collagen fibrils in AAA
are “hot-spots” for negative charges in the ECM. Surface potential and surface
charge mapping of collagen fibrils in ambient air will be accomplished using
Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), a technique available on most commercial
AFMs (Atomic Force Microscopes) that has been used for mapping surface potential
and surface charge on metals and semiconductors, but is being uniquely applied
in this project to the analysis of normal and abnormal fibrils in situ in tissue
sections. Surface charge distribution of collagen fibrils in a fluid environment
will be measured using another AFM based approach based on recording force-
distance curves, which can map both surface charge and sample topography at high
resolution in physiologically relevant fluid environments (e.g. different salt
concentrations). The SECOND AIM is to test the hypothesis that both natural as
well as bio-mimetically induced calcific deposits in AAA are localized on
structurally altered fibrils. A biomimetic approach will be used to determine if
abnormal fibrils can be a cause as well as an effect of vascular calcification.
Biomimetic mineralization will be induced in a cell free manner (in mineral-poor
regions) using ionic solutions (e.g. dental fluid) that mimic the native ion
concentrations in plasma without its biological components and by incubating
extracellular vesicles (EV) isolated from cultured cells with decellularized AAA
tissue. Spatial distribution and characterization of calcific deposits will be
determined using analytical transmission electron microscopy (TEM) approaches to
characterize the size, composition and location of minerals with respect to the
collagen fibril at the ultrastructural level. Abnormal fibrils are expected to
be more prone to calcific deposits as compared to normal fibrils both with
respect to percent of fibrils mineralized as well as number and size of calcific
deposits present per fibril, and a similar trend is expected to be observed for
biomimetic and naturally induced calcific deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.