* 2000773
* Expanding Pathways for Advanced Manufacturing Technicians in West Virginia
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Laura Busey, Blue Ridge Community & Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2024
* USD 453,597.00

Blue Ridge Community and Technical College has a unique geographical location
spanning rural communities to the west and more suburban areas of Maryland and
Virginia to the east. For many years, this location was relatively isolated and
faced economic challenges common to much of Appalachia. Recently, manufacturing-
related employment in the eastern panhandle of West Virginia is growing rapidly
as companies expand operations or open new facilities. Building on an existing
partnership with regional industry, this project aims to provide technical
education in advanced manufacturing to address industry workforce needs in the
region. Specifically, this project will develop a dual credit program in
advanced manufacturing, so that high school students can earn both high school
and college credits as they pursue advanced manufacturing credentials. The
project will also develop a gateway mathematics course to help prepare students
for college mathematics. These enhancements in the STEM educational
infrastructure and advanced manufacturing pathways are expected to expand
technical career opportunities for low income students in the West Virginia
eastern panhandle region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of this
project are to expand the collegeâ€™s Advanced Manufacturing Technology program to
include high school students and to improve completion, retention, and
enrollment of students in the program. Project activities that will be used to
achieve these objectives include: 1) implementing Math JumpStart and intensive
advising to strengthen specific STEM skills for high school students and young
adults; 2) developing new hybrid advanced manufacturing courses to expand
pathways for students employed either full- or part-time and in need of specific
STEM skills enhancement; and 3) equipping a new lab facility at the Pines Center
in Morgan County to enable experiential learning aligned with real-life
employment experiences at regional manufacturing partners. Industry will be
engaged with the project through regional industry conferences and meetings of
the Industry Advisory Committee. Outreach activities to recruit more students
will focus on high schools, community organizations, and local government
offices. Project outcomes will be evaluated through a formative and summative
evaluation design using data about project outcomes from surveys, focus groups,
and aggregated college data. A primary public benefit of this project is
increased access to technical careers for students from households with
generational poverty, thus supporting upward economic mobility. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.