* 2000507
* Maximizing the Sustained Effects of Utility-Value Interventions in Community College Math
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Christopher Hulleman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,734,978.00

This study addresses gaps in the STEM utility-value interventions literature by
studying the interventions in gateway community college math courses, which
serve as a critical barrier or opportunity to postsecondary success. Researchers
at the University of Virginia and the Tennessee Board of Regents will
investigate three research questions: (1) Do customized utility-value
interventions lead to improved academic outcomes compared to standard utility-
value interventions or a control condition? (2) Do utility-value interventions
benefit the same students in community college settings, and through the same
underlying mechanisms, as in four-year institutions? (3) Are the effects of
utility-value interventions sustained in future STEM courses? The project
involves 16,000 students at 13 Tennessee community colleges. The researchers use
a double-blind design with students randomly assigned to a customized utility-
value, standard utility-value or control condition. Measures include: studentsâ€™
reactions to the intervention materials, psychological processes (i.e.,
participant success expectancies, intrinsic value, attainment value, utility
value, and perceived cost), moderator variables (i.e., student academic
preparedness, demographics, cultural mismatch, identity threat and perceived
instructor value-supportive practice; and instructor characteristics), and
outcomes (i.e., course completion or withdrawal, course grades, STEM grade point
average and number of STEM courses). This project is supported by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research
on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The ECR program supports the accumulation of
robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and
suggest intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM
interest, education, learning and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing
a diverse and technically competent STEM workforce is critical for contributing
to the progress of science and to the health, prosperity and welfare of our
nation. The students who participant in this research project are likely to
benefit from the interventions under investigation. By studying utility-value
intervention in math gateway courses there is potential to inform post-secondary
administrators, faculty and instructors about more effective instructional
practices for student success in STEM education. Additionally, advancing
knowledge about some of the very specific underlying mechanisms that benefit
student STEM learning and persistence in community college settings, and whether
these mechanisms are similar to those already known about students in four-year
college STEM settings, could benefit implementation research about those
uniquely different post-secondary settings and may significantly contribute to
improved instruction to benefit all undergraduate students who are learning
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.