* 2000625
* A Regional Approach to College and Career Readiness Pathways in Career and Technical Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* James Pruitt, Crowder College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,993.00

This project aims to prepare skilled technical workers for high demand
occupations in southwest Missouri, including automotive technology, construction
technology, and welding technology. To achieve this goal, a community college
and six regional career and technical education centers will collaborate to
increase accessibility to education programs in these skilled technical fields.
This coordination is expected to create a seamless transition for rural students
from secondary education to a regional postsecondary institution. The increasing
demand for skilled technicians in multiple disciplines has placed pressure on
K-12 schools and postsecondary institutions in southwest Missouri to support
local workforce education and development. In fact, schools across the nation
are struggling to find effective strategies to meet such needs. One challenge is
that many students do not consider skilled technical fields as viable career
options. Another challenge is that current career and technical education
programs struggle to stay current with changing industry tools and techniques.
The project will tackle these challenges by working toward aligning career and
technical education curricula with industry needs and preparing teachers to
teach the improved curricula. To this end, the project will implement best
practices in curriculum design and educator development from the Advanced
Technological Education community. It will apply these best practices to create
a multi-program, regional model for skilled technical education. Project
activities and outcomes may serve as a model for improving program quality in
distributed career and technical education departments in other rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to develop high-quality,
vertically aligned, career and technical education pathways at a regional level.
The project focuses on three occupations that were identified by the Missouri
Economic Research and Information Center as high demand: automotive technology;
construction technology; and welding technology. The project intends to increase
high school studentsâ€™ awareness of technical careers, enhance student advising,
and provide students with seamless pathways from secondary school through
college, and into the local workforce. The project has the potential to impact
hundreds of students in 41 rural Missouri school districts as they transition to
post-secondary education. The project has four goals: 1) provide career and
technical education teachers at the secondary and postsecondary level with high
quality professional development and resources to implement professional
learning communities for three technical programs; 2) use Business and Industry
Leadership Teams to guide the development of industry-driven curricula in the
three programs so that students at the secondary level have opportunities to
earn dual credit and stackable credentials; 3) improve student and parent
perceptions about the value of these three technical programs through the
development of outreach activities and educational materials; and 4) place
students in work-based learning opportunities and track their experiences via an
online learning management system. Materials developed as a result of this
project will be packaged as stand-alone resources and disseminated broadly. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.