* 2000166
* Resource Center for Laser, Photonics, and Fiber Optics Education, LASER-TEC
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Chrys Panayiotou, Indian River State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,649,997.00

Lasers, optics, photonics, and fiber optics (LOPFO) are used in many advanced
technologies including medical instrumentation, photonics-integrated circuits,
telecommunications, advanced manufacturing, and biotechnology. The US Department
of Labor projects that, between 2016 and 2026, at least 1,700 LOPFO technicians
will be needed to fill open positions. These jobs have a median annual salary of
more than $63,000. However, the annual output of LOPFO technicians from all US
colleges is not enough to meet the growing need. This project intends to sustain
and expand efforts to meet the national shortage of qualified LOPFO technicians.
It will do so by updating, developing, and distributing LOPFA educational
resources to technical college instructors and K-12 teachers, as well as to
industry for use in training incumbent workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
goal of the project is to develop the LASER-TEC Resource Center, which will
continue to support efforts to increase the LOPFO technical workforce. The
Resource Center will update and maintain educational services and materials and
provide open access these resources to secondary, post-secondary, and industry
educational and training programs. Project aims include: 1) developing a
comprehensive, high-performing, and responsive website that will house and
distribute all LOPFO educational products funded by the National Science
Foundation and other US government agencies; 2) updating technical content and
high-impact pedagogical strategies to improve all curricular materials; 3)
creating tailored content and conducting professional development events for
teachers, college instructors, counselors, advisors, administrators, incumbent
industry members, and other communities to discuss best practices and increase
their technical knowledge; 4) conducting outreach to inform K-12 and college
educators about the availability of LOPFO resources; and 5) supporting efforts
to build or enhance bridges between industries that need LOPFO technicians and
colleges that offer LOPFO programs. All resources will be structured,
systemized, and available as Open Education Resources under the Creative Commons
ShareAlike license. In collaboration with industry, LASER-TEC will develop new
modules in the areas of Raman Spectroscopy, LiDAR, High Power Diode Lasers,
Femto Second Lasers, Disk Lasers, and other LOPFO technologies. LASER-TEC will
also continue its efforts in supporting historically underserved and
underrepresented groups to increase diversity in this technological field. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.