* 2000984
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Pneumatic Isolators in Ultra-Precision Manufacturing Machines
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Oumar Barry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2024
* USD 325,524.00

Ultra-precision manufacturing (UPM) machines enable the production of micro- and
nano-devices that are critical for the advances in the electronics, biomedical,
communications and other cutting-edge industries. As a critical step in meeting
UPM machineâ€™s stringent precision requirement, they must be isolated from
unwanted vibrations stemming from fast moving machines and ground motions. For
this purpose, pneumatic (passive) isolators are often preferred over active
systems because of their relatively low cost and energy efficiency. Recent
studies have demonstrated that the performance of pneumatic isolators can be
significantly improved using more sophisticated control approaches. However,
those past studies did not account for the well-known inherent complex, and
nonlinear, behaviors in pneumatic isolators. The aim of this award is to support
fundamental research to understand the nonlinear dynamics of passively-isolated
UPM machines and determine how the benefits of nonlinear dynamics can be
exploited to improve the performance of pneumatic isolators. The knowledge
gained will enable U.S. manufacturing industry to build cheaper, better, and
faster UPM machines, advancing national prosperity and impacting efforts to
secure the national defense. In a broader context, the findings can also be
applied to a broader class of nonlinear mechanical and electromechanical
systems. The research work will also help broaden the representation and
retention of underrepresented minority (URM) in engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will be the first to conduct a
nonlinear vibration analysis of pneumatic isolators to scientifically reveal
whether the benefits of mode coupling observed in linear systems can be extended
to nonlinear systems. To this end, a nonlinear system identification via a
direct reconciliation of experimental measurements and theoretical modeling will
be conducted to detect and quantify the nonlinear stiffness and nonlinear
damping of pneumatic isolators. A thorough theoretical analysis will then be
carried out to understand the interplay between nonlinear mode coupling,
stability, and bifurcation in pneumatic isolated UPM machines. Optimal control
theory will be used to determine the optimum design parameters, which will then
serve as guidelines for improving the design of pneumatic isolators. Rigorous
physical experimentation will be performed to guide and validate the theoretical
findings. The outcome of the researched work will lead to new insights on how to
exploit nonlinear dynamic phenomena for improving the performance of pneumatic
isolators. The PI will continue to focus on the participation from
underrepresented groups though connections to the National Society of Black
Engineers and other STEM-related activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.