* 2000268
* Catalyst Project: Evolution and biomechanics of multifunctional structures
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Stacy Farina, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,992.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Howard University intends to examine the change in the gill structure of an
aquatic species over time. Undergraduate students will participate in this
research that involves statistical analysis, 3D printers and other tools. The
research results will be shared at the regional meeting of the Society of
Integrative Biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multifunctionality (structures
performing more than one function) is common among organisms. The PI proposes
that multifunctionality can act as a catalyst for morphological evolution
through exaptation and diversification of existing structures and regionalized
specialization of serially homologous structures. This is contrary to
traditional ideas of multifunctionality as a limitation on the diversity of
structure. The PI will test these ideas in three groups of fishes that use their
cranial anatomy for burial (flatfishes), jet propulsion (frogfishes), and both
burial and jet propulsion (banjo catfishes), in addition to suction feeding and
gill ventilation (all three groups). Detailed character matrices for each clade
will be assembled and used to construct statistical models the evolution of
multifunctionality. These character matrices will include morphometrics,
ecological data, kinematics, biomechanical measurements, and multifunctionality
coded as a character. This work will contribute to our understanding of the role
of multifunctionality in producing Earth's rich
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.