* 2000827
* Collaborative Research: Development of symbolic and non-symbolic representations of exact equality
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* David Barner, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 711,888.00

The concept of exact numerical equality is central to mathematical reasoning,
and learning it in early childhood is a strong predictor of later academic
success. Unfortunately, it remains a persistent source of difficulty for many
students, with implications for the understanding of number words by
preschoolers and even the learning of algebra in middle school. The main goal of
this project, led by researchers at the University of California, San Diego, and
Brown University, is to understand the social and cognitive factors in early
childhood that affect 4- to 5-year-olds’ learning of the concept. Specifically,
the researchers will investigate how children reason about numerical equality
prior to the acquisition of formal symbols (i.e., numbers and the equal sign),
whether this initial understanding is affected by their developing intuitions
about fairness, and how their informal intuitions about numerical equality and
fairness supports the learning of symbolic representations of mathematical
equality in formal early childhood education settings. The investigation of
these ideas will create a research foundation that could lead to changes in
early childhood mathematical education. The project is jointly funded by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the fundamental
research literature on STEM learning, and by the Discovery Research K-12 program
(DRK-12), which supports the research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools in order to enhance STEM learning and teaching by pre-K-12
students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will examine the
developmental origins of children’s understandings of the core mathematical
concept of equality. They will conduct a series of behavioral studies that will
range from behavioral observations to experiments to learning interventions. In
one set of studies, they will assess children’s ability to evaluate whether two
quantities are equal when they use a strategy that does not require knowing
number words or formal mathematical symbols. The researchers will then test
whether children are more likely to use this strategy when they are motivated by
a social concern: a desire to make sure valuable resources are shared fairly.
They will also test whether the ability changes as children learn numerical
symbols (e.g., number words). Finally, researchers will test a learning
intervention that involves their leveraging their intuitive understandings of
equality, addition, and subtraction together with their motivation to ensure
fairness. They hypothesize that such an approach will help children to
understand the meaning of formal expressions (e.g., “9 + 1 = 10”) that they
might otherwise simply memorize and solve by rote. By connecting children’s
social and numerical intuitions with understanding of symbolic math, the project
will address a central challenge in mathematics education that has important
implications for early childhood education practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.