* 2000867
* Advanced Technological Education Coordination Network for Knowledge Sharing in Robotics/Automation and Cybersecurity
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Zackary Hubbard, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 443,619.00

Technologies involving robotics/automation have become prevalent in US
manufacturing and service sectors. Business leaders who adopt these technologies
must prioritize cybersecurity to ensure the safety and security of their cyber-
physical systems. As a result, the interrelated areas of robotics/automation and
cybersecurity are vital to US manufacturers. This project will create an
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) Coordination Network that includes
community colleges with active ATE projects, Manufacturing Extension
Partnerships, Manufacturing USA Institutes, and the National Initiative for
Cybersecurity Education. The goal of this Coordination Network is to increase
members’ understanding of the knowledge and skills required to operate and
maintain connected machines securely in a manufacturing
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through workshops, virtual communication, and
other modalities, this Coordination Network intends to facilitate the sharing of
best practices about how to develop community college students’ knowledge and
skills in robotics/automation and cybersecurity. It will also promote awareness
of organizations and resources that connect students to work-based learning
opportunities. This Coordination Network will connect community college students
to potential employers in the Manufacturing Extension Parternships client base.
By establishing connections and nurturing relationships among members, it is
expected that the efforts of the Coordination Network will create synergies that
magnify and broaden the impact of individual efforts. The Coordination Network's
web portal will make education and training materials available to non-members.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.