* 2000424
* Collaborative Research: Paving the Way for Fractions: Identifying Foundational Concepts in First Grade
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Nora Newcombe, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 231,389.00

Although fractions represent a crucial topic in early childhood education, many
students develop only a tenuous grasp of fraction concepts, even after several
years of fraction instruction that is aligned with current standards. The goal
of this project, led by a team of researchers at the University of Delaware and
Temple University, is to answer important questions about the informal
understandings of fractions young children have before they come to school and
what their relations are to fraction learning in more formal instructional
settings. Proficiency with fractions dramatically increases the likelihood of
students succeeding in math, which in turn increases participation in the STEM
workforce. Importantly, large individual differences in fraction understandings
are apparent at the start of fractions instruction in the intermediate grades.
Early fraction misunderstandings cascade into more severe math weaknesses in
later grades, especially when instruction may shift abruptly from whole numbers
to fractions. There is a critical need to understand the roots of individual
differences that arise before formal instruction takes place. Young children
possess important informal fraction understandings before they come to school,
but the range of these abilities and their role in formal fraction learning and
development is not well understood. The goal of this project is: a) to
investigate the extent to which individual differences in informal fraction-
related knowledge in first-grade children are associated with short- and longer-
term fractions and math outcomes; and b) to see whether there is a causal link
between level of informal fraction-related knowledge and the ability to profit
from fractions instruction that directly builds on this knowledge. The findings
from the project hold promise for informing early childhood educators how
fractions can be incorporated in the first-grade curriculum in new and
meaningful ways. Though the findings should be beneficial to all students, the
project will specifically target members of groups underrepresented in STEM
fields, including ethnic and racial minority and low-income students. The
project is jointly funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
work that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM learning, and by
the Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12), which supports the research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools in order to enhance STEM
learning and teaching by pre-K-12 students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project design includes both an observational study
and an experimental study. The observational study will: (1) document individual
differences in informal fraction-related knowledge in first grade; (2) determine
concurrent relations between this informal knowledge and general cognitive and
whole number competencies; and (3) examine whether informal fraction-related
knowledge at the beginning of first grade uniquely predicts math outcomes at the
end. The experimental study will explore the extent to which first gradersâ€™
informal and formal fraction concepts can be affected by training. The
researchers will test whether training on the number line, which is continuous
and closely aligned with the mental representation of the magnitude of all real
numbers, will help students capitalize on their informal fraction understandings
of proportionality, scaling, and equal sharing as well as their experience with
integers to learn key fraction concepts. Together, the synergistic studies will
pinpoint the role informal fraction knowledge in learning key fraction concepts.
All data will be collected in Delaware schools serving socioeconomically and
ethnically diverse populations of students. Primary measures include assessments
of informal fraction knowledge (proportional reasoning, spatial scaling, equal
sharing), executive functioning, vocabulary, whole number knowledge, whole
number/fraction number line estimation, formal fraction knowledge, and broad
mathematics achievement (calculation, fluency, applied
problems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.