* 2000093
* Subfactors, Tensor Categories, and Higher Dimensional Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Noah Snyder, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2024
* USD 258,456.00

Symmetries are movements of an object or system back onto itself. For example,
shuffling a deck of cards or rotating an atom around its nucleus. Over the last
200 years, Group Theory has been spectacularly successful in using symmetry to
study a wide variety of problems in mathematics, physics, chemistry, and
engineering. More recently, starting in the 1980s, mathematicians and
mathematical physicists have developed a theory of Quantum Groups and Quantum
Symmetry which adapt ideas from Group Theory to more general settings appearing
in quantum physics and related mathematics. The first spectacular application of
what we now call Group Theory was Galois' use of symmetries of number systems to
explain why there's a generalization of the familiar quadratic formula to solve
equations using third or fourth powers, but no such formula for solving
equations with fifth powers. Galois's number systems are parallel to von Neumann
factors developed to study quantum mechanics, and several of the first
spectacular applications of what we would know call Quantum Groups or Quantum
Symmetries appeared in Jones's study of subfactors. More recently Quantum
Symmetry has become central to certain approaches to constructing quantum
computers using so-called topological phases of matter. The main techniques used
in this project involve higher dimensional algebra. Here the idea is that we
typically write mathematical symbols on a line when doing calculations, but in
many settings it is better to use the whole plane to draw pictures, or to do the
calculation on "paper" in more interesting shapes like circles or spheres.
Sometimes the geometry allows for insight into the mathematics, for example you
can "rotate" a calculation taking place in the plane. The goal of this project
is to use higher dimensional algebra to study questions in quantum symmetry. The
project will also contribute to the development of the US workforce through the
training of Ph.D. and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
technical language, we use planar algebras, topological quantum field theory,
and higher categories to study questions coming from von Neumann subfactors and
tensor categories. These include very example-driven questions like constructing
and studying exceptional small index subfactors, as well as more theoretical
questions like understanding the structure of the 3-category of fusion
categories (where subfactors appear as 1-morphisms). More specifically, this
project focuses on four closely related research programs. First, we will
develop a purely algebraic analogue of the author's previous work on the
classification of small index subfactors. Second we will use module categories
more systematically to approach analytic questions about reconstructing
subfactors from their standard invariants. Third, we will use skein theoretic
approaches and Jones's planar algebras to study tensor categories, including
non-semisimple tensor categories. Finally, we study tensor categories and
braided tensor categories using higher-categories and local topological quantum
field theories building on the Lurie-Baez-Dolan cobordism
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.