* 2000222
* Magnetic Reconnection in Kinetic Turbulent Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Yi-Hsin Liu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 589,734.00

Understanding the close interconnection between turbulence and magnetic
reconnection has been of increasing importance to the broader solar and space
physics community. Turbulence is a fundamental physical process of transferring
energy from large-scale motions to small kinetic scales, where the turbulence
energy is dissipated as plasma heat and particle energization. Magnetic
reconnection is a universal physical process that converts magnetic energy to
plasma kinetic and thermal energies. Both processes critically influence the
dynamics and energetics in systems such as the solar corona, solar wind, and
planetary magnetospheres. Magnetic reconnection has been observed in turbulent
environments such as the solar wind and the Earth's magneto-sheath. It has been
suggested to contribute to energy dissipation of the turbulence and changes in
the turbulent cascade by spacecraft observations, simulations and theory.
Present knowledge on the physics underlying how magnetic reconnection influences
turbulence, and vice versa, is at the very early stages of development. In this
regard, the main purpose of this 3-year research project is to improve the
physical understanding of the interconnection between magnetic reconnection and
turbulence. The main goal of the project is to develop a new technique for
identifying and examining reconnection activity using gyro-kinetic simulations
of plasma turbulence. The project will support the research of an early-career
female scientist, and it will provide research opportunities to undergraduate
students at Dartmouth College. These are vital for the education and training of
the next generations of scientists, thus contributing to a more diverse STEM
workforce in the U.S. The outcome of this research project is expected to yield
an improved understanding of the connection between magnetic reconnection and
space plasma turbulence, hence leading to more accurate modeling and predictions
of the space weather conditions surrounding the Earth. This will contribute to
the stability, economy, and technology advancement of the society --- both
nationally and globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year research project has
three science objectives. The first objective is to identify active reconnecting
X-points in fully non-linear kinetic turbulence. The second objective is to
examine the properties of magnetic reconnection in Alfvenic turbulence. The
third objective is to assess the role of reconnection in the heating of
magnetized turbulence. The project is directly relevant to the NSF's Solar-
Terrestrial Research program, because it would provide important knowledge and
an innovative technique for understanding the nature of turbulence and
reconnection in space and astrophysical plasmas. This knowledge will be critical
for the modeling and predictions of space weather from the surface of the Sun to
the Earth and beyond. The new technique will be applicable for analyzing
spacecraft data from missions such as MMS, Parker Solar Probe, and Solar
Orbiter. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic
Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.