* 2000769
* An Examination of How the Lived Experiences of African American Undergraduates Affect their Persistence in their Engineering Programs
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gladis Kersaint, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,987.00

Despite efforts to broaden their participation in STEM, African Americans
continue to be underrepresented in the STEM disciplines. Even after enrolling to
major in STEM degrees, African Americans are more likely to switch to non-STEM
majors or leave college compared to other ethnic groups. The purpose of this
project through the University of Connecticut is to examine the lived
experiences of African American engineering undergraduates at three
predominately white institutions (PWI). The investigators specifically focus on
how students’ encounters with racism, stereotyping, discrimination, and gender
biases may increase their isolation and contribute to their decisions to switch
to non-engineering degrees during the first two years in their programs. They
also investigate the strategies of African American students who persist in
their engineering programs, such as joining engineering professional
organizations such as the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) or
establishing a supportive social network (includes peer and faculty mentors)
that provide cultural familiarity to reduce their isolation and likelihood to
switch to non-engineering majors. To make large-scale, long-term change in the
culture of engineering programs, the investigators will use their research
findings to develop evidence-based materials that target the ongoing problem of
racial and gender-based microaggressions (i.e., intended or unintended insults
and disparaging comments that demean African Americans and other marginalized
populations). This project is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program,
which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. While this project is primarily funded by the ECR program,
additional support has been provided by the Directorate for Engineering's
Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretically-driven, this project’s research uses
racism, intersectionality, and social capital theories to examine the racial and
gender dynamics and practices that African American students experience, in
addition to how their supportive social networks and other experiences influence
their persistence in engineering. Uniquely, in this mixed-methods study, the
investigators will use: 1) experience sampling method (ESM), which allows the
collection of both real-time qualitative and quantitative data from participants
about their experiences in their engineering programs as they occur and 2) oral
stories that show how participants construct their realities within their
engineering program cultures and harness their agency in the face of often
disempowering circumstances. Students will also complete a baseline survey and a
baseline interview about their academic, socioeconomic, and engineering
backgrounds. Quantitative and qualitative data will be analyzed and these
research findings will add to the growing literature on intersectionality and
women of color in STEM higher education. This study adds a critical
anthropological perspective to the ongoing theory-driven research and debate on
race, intersectionality, and social capital within STEM education research. The
findings will have broad impacts on the efforts of engineering and other STEM
programs to diversify their student body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.