* 2000519
* Advanced Technological Education Network for Utilities and Energy Technical Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Amy Kox, Northeast Wisconsin Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 479,724.00

As many skilled workers approach retirement and fewer qualified candidates are
available to replace them, the energy industry is suffering from shortages of
workers with key engineering and technical skills. This shortage is estimated to
affect more than 70 percent of energy employers across the nation. Northeast
Wisconsin Technical College, a two-year technical college, offers one of the
widest varieties of utility-related associate degrees, technical diplomas, and
certificates in the Midwest. However, filling the workforce pipeline will
require the coordinated efforts of many institutions, organizations, businesses,
and other stakeholders. This project aims to develop such a cross-sector network
to develop collaborations and share resources to address current and anticipated
utility and energy industry workforce and training
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty in the Northeast Wisconsin Technical College
utility and energy program, in consultation with industry, will identify and
cultivate a core leadership group of national and regional stakeholders from
industry, academia, and workforce development to create a formal utilities and
energy coordination network. The network will create a shared vision to guide
its evolution and establish the structure and norms for building member
relationships. This work will lay the groundwork to execute strategies for
utility technician training in gas, electrical power, and utilities engineering
sectors to address nationwide workforce shortages. The project will look at
methods to increase collaboration between industry and educational stakeholders.
It will also examine how best practices and information can be shared across
regions and the nation to broaden impact and create sustained progress towards
achieving network goals. This research will add to the current body of knowledge
about network development and the relevance of networks in addressing complex
problems, like worker shortages across industries with high-demand occupations.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.