* 2000750
* Understanding PhD Career Pathways: Transitions and Persistence in the PhD-Prepared STEM Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Julia Kent, Council of Graduate Schools
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 512,509.00

The Council of Graduate Schools will examine data about science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) PhD career aspirations and alumni outcomes
from a network of 70 diverse U.S. doctoral institutions. The proposed project
will conduct a survey to examine individual and environmental factors that
influence retention and persistence in STEM careers and transitions between
employment sectors. The underlying assumption of the project is that individual
attributes such as self-efficacy and career values, as well as environmental
factors such as organizational climate of the STEM workplace, could explain job
transitions and persistence of early- and mid-career STEM doctorate holders. The
project will contribute to knowledge about how these individual attributes and
perceptions of environmental factors might change with various socialization,
acculturation, and professionalization processes during and after the STEM
doctoral education is completed. The project responds to recent studies that
uncover declining interest in STEM academic careers and decreasing satisfaction
with graduate school experiences by empirically documenting how socialization,
acculturation, and professionalization activities may affect career progression
in the STEM workforce. The project also isolates potential avenues for policy
interventions designed to increase STEM
persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded in career anchor and social cognitive
career theory, the study will employ a mixed-methods design to investigate three
research questions: (1) How do factors, including participation in various
career and professional development activities, as well as prior employment as
contingent faculty and/or postdoctoral trainee, explain persistence and
transitions of STEM PhD alumni in the STEM professoriate or other STEM
workplaces? (2) How do factors, including participation in various career and
professional development activities, as well as prior/current employment as
contingent faculty and/or postdoctoral trainee, explain perceptions about
organizational climate and culture in STEM fields among doctoral scientists and
engineers? and (3) How do individual factors, including participation in various
career and professional development activities, as well as prior employment as
contingent faculty and/or postdoctoral trainee, as well as perceptions about
organizational climate and culture in STEM fields, influence career transitions
of STEM PhD alumni and students across employment sectors in and out of STEM
fields? Researchers will conduct a follow-up survey of more than 2,500 alumni
and 4,000 student participants in the current Understanding PhD Career Pathways
for Program Improvement in STEM project and include semi-structured qualitative
interviews of a purposeful sample of survey respondents. Having collected the
data, the researchers will run logistic regressions to determine which
covariates are most informative for explaining STEM field persistence and
transitions. The project will produce data that can guide investments and
strategies to support STEM career development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, STEM professional workforce
development theme. ECR funds fundamental research projects that address STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.