* 2000792
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Self-Adaptive Cyber Risk Management via  Machine to Machine Economy Supported by Blockchain and Smart Contracts  Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Nicolas Lanchier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

This project advances cybersecurity of large scale blockchain-enabled Internet
of Things (IoT) systems via a novel organization of machine to machine (M2M)
economy. Blockchain is a decentralized and distributed ledger. The IoT is a
system of interconnected computing devices on which the emergence of 5G
technology has an accelerating effect. The M2M economy is a collection of
machines acting as economic agents that autonomously interact through sequences
of transactions. Blockchain technology enables the registry of these
transactions whose logic is articulated and coded in the form of smart
contracts. These technologies have transformational potential and hold the
promise of unprecedented economic growth, but they come with many
vulnerabilities. This research contributes to the progress of science,
advancement of prosperity and welfare, and securing the national defense through
a new mechanism to enable security and cost efficient interactions on M2M
platforms. The novel idea is to design market incentives such that services
among machines are bought and sold based not only on their cost but also on the
cyber-riskiness of the devices providing those
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project envisions decentralized systems that
are self-adapting to cyber-risk and facilitate security and cost efficient
interactions on platforms based on blockchain and IoT. The challenges are lack
of: (a) real-time market design and self-optimization mechanisms; (b) scalable
approaches for real-time attack identification across programs and high-level
logics; (c) methods to assess M2M specific attack impact. Responding to these
challenges, this project interprets the problem of creating a cyber-secure and
economically efficient IoT/blockchain-based ecosystem as one of designing large-
scale interconnected markets. Each of these markets has a price adjustment
mechanism that may discriminate based on real-time cyber-risk. Collectively,
these markets give rise to an overall emergent property of cyber-risks and
economic efficiency self-adaptive optimization. Vulnerability assessment is the
key to generate cyber-risk and price appropriate adjustments. This project
comprehensively assesses M2M specific vulnerabilities by articulating attack
graphs, hence contributing to characterizing the cyber-risk of decentralized
applications for smart contract platforms. By using tools of random graph theory
and percolation theory, the project provides a representative mathematical
framework for understanding the cyber-risk of a IoT/blockchain-based ecosystem.
Finally, as a showcase, the project applies the proposed mechanism to the use
case of large-scale personalized treatment delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.