* 2000904
* Preparing Robotics Technicians for Industry 4.0
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Richard Hartmann, Stark State College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,961.00

The fourth Industrial Revolution, also known as Industry 4.0, is already
transforming the way companies create products. One consequence of Industry 4.0
is the integration of new technologies into manufacturing processes. Examples of
these technologies include the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), autonomous
robots, and cyber-physical systems. Given the rapidly changing tools and
processes, manufacturers nationwide often struggle to find technicians with the
skills needed in these new work environments. An especially critical need exists
for qualified automation/robotics technicians. This project aims to address this
urgent need in advanced manufacturing by educating technicians who have
mechanical skills, together with knowledge of and skills in emerging robotic
technologies. Working with industry and educational partners, Stark State
College plans to improve training of automation and robotics technicians who
will meet current and future industry demands. Potential societal benefits of
this project include an updated, industry-aligned automation/robotics
curriculum; a stackable technician educational pathway with lower time to
degree; development of low-cost training units that simulate advanced
manufacturing environments; and a professional development model to better
prepare instructors to train tomorrow's automation/robotics technicians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project include increasing capacity to
effectively train automation/robotics technicians, improving the quality of
technician education by better aligning it to workforce needs, and expanding
awareness of advanced manufacturing careers among high school students and thus
increase participation in automation/robotics programs at both secondary and
postsecondary levels. The project aims to achieve these goals by: 1) updating
the automation/robotics program curriculum to include training on Industry 4.0
technologies, such as IIoT; 2) creating a new IIoT-focused educational pathway
to support student recruitment and retention from high school through associate
degree completion; 3) developing low-cost training units to complement the new
pathway and curriculum; 4) conducting IIoT boot camps and workshops to engage
high school students; and 5) providing professional development to high school
and college faculty to grow teaching proficiency and encourage curriculum
adoption. Project deliverables and outcomes will be disseminated through
regional and national meetings, publications, and webinars or other online
mechanisms. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.