* 2000415
* CCSS: Collaborative Research:  Sketching for High Dimensional Data Analysis in IoT
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Lifeng Lai, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The proliferation of IoT devices generates enormous amount of data, which leads
to a tremendous demand on resources for the transmission, processing and
storage. In order to extract useful information and fully achieve the potential
of IoT for intelligent decisions, it is critical to develop novel systems to
efficiently transmit, store and process this large volume of data. Fortunately,
the data generated by IoT and many other applications typically possesses
certain low dimensional parsimonious structures. Leveraging on these low
dimensional structures of IoT data, this project will develop methods based on
low dimensional sketches to infer information of interest. This sketching based
framework will enable quick and accurate information extraction with greatly
reduced sampling rates, transmission and storage
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a sketching based
framework for the efficient processing of high dimensional data generated by IoT
and investigate its theoretical and algorithmic properties. The core idea is to
take low dimensional projections or sketches of random variables, rather than to
directly and fully observe high dimensional random variables. This project will
develop both non-adaptive and adaptive low dimensional sketching methods, and
will make the following intellectual contributions: 1) deriving fundamental
limits on sampling rates for recovering statistical information of high
dimensional random variables; 2) designing explicit sampling schemes that
achieve the corresponding fundamental limits on sampling rates; 3) providing
fast algorithms with performance guarantees for recovering statistical
information from sketches of random variables. The PIs will leverage their
research experience in compressed sensing, low-rank matrix recovery and
sequential analysis in solving these challenging problems. The generated results
are expected to extend compressed sensing from sketching of deterministic values
to a broader context of sketching of random variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.