* 2000833
* Facilitating Teacher Learning with Video Clips of Instruction in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Jonathan Osborne, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 04/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Videos of teaching have become a popular tool for facilitating teacher learning,
with the potential to powerfully impact teacher practice. However, less is known
about specific mechanisms through which teachers learn from video. The goal of
this study is to build foundational knowledge about teacher learning by using
video clips of science instruction within a professional development (PD)
context. The researchers will study the infusion of principles from cognitive
science as possible ways to enhance teacher learning from video (these include
contrasting cases and self-explanation principles). PD opportunities that
support teachers in making sense of the information about students’ thinking and
reasoning as students work are rare. Motivation to address this need has led to
the interdisciplinary collaboration in this project that will study the use of
video clips in teacher PD and explore teacher learning with and from video clips
of science instruction in-depth. The project is jointly funded by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the fundamental
research literature on STEM learning, and by the Discovery Research K-12 program
(DRK-12), which supports the research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools in order to enhance STEM learning and teaching by pre-K-12
students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design based research project
will pursue descriptive accounts of teacher learning by explaining how and why
teachers learn with and from video clips of instruction. The team will draw on
cognitive science and learning sciences research, specifically literature on
analogical reasoning and self-explanation, to unpack mechanisms through which
videos support teacher learning and the conditions under which they do so.
Evidence pertaining to teacher learning will be gathered through teachers’
participation in video-rich PD, semi-structured interviews with teachers around
video clips and prompts for interacting with the clips, and classroom
observations. Through intentionally designed video clips and supporting
structures, the project will help to uncover how to support noticing of 1)
students’ thinking and reasoning and 2) critical and often nuanced differences
between more and less productive teaching practices that facilitate students'
intellectual engagement in performance assessment tasks. The study has the
potential to extend the current knowledge on the kinds of evidence-based
learning structures that can enhance teachers’ learning to notice important
classroom interactions as they learn to develop ambitious teaching
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.