* 2000560
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Japan-U.S. Collaboration on the Seismic Performance of Reinforced Concrete Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Mohamed Moustafa, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 10/31/2020
* USD 54,617.00

Reinforced concrete (RC) structures comprise most of the multi-family
residential buildings in the U.S. and many other countries. When buildings are
subjected to catastrophic events such as earthquakes, there is the need to
assess their level of structural safety after the event. Structural assessment
activities present two challenges - collecting high quality damage data and
interpreting the acquired data in a meaningful and rational way - to produce
estimates of the level of safety and residual strength of the inspected
building. While advanced data acquisition systems are available to collect
structural damage data, new methods are needed to analyze the collected data to
assess structural performance. This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID)
will support a team of researchers from the University of Washington and the
University of Nevada, Reno, to collaborate with researchers from Japanese
universities on experimental research investigating the seismic performance of
RC building systems. The experimental research will involve the dynamic testing
of a full-scale, three-story RC building as part of the ongoing Tokyo
Metropolitan Resilience Project (TMRP) supported in Japan by the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the National Research
Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Resilience. The experiments will be
conducted at the world's largest shake table, E-Defense in Miki, Japan, in
December 2019. The main goal of this RAPID project is to acquire, process, and
analyze dynamic response and damage data pertaining to both structural and non-
structural elements of the building. The data will be collected using equipment
recently acquired by the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) RAPID Facility (https://rapid.designsafe-ci.org/) and the
high-speed, high-resolution digital image correlation (DIC) integrated
monitoring system recently developed at the University of Nevada, Reno. The
processing and interpretation of this data will advance the state of knowledge
and practice in post-earthquake structural assessments of buildings. The project
will train two graduate students and several undergraduate students in
structural integrity research and promote collaboration between Japanese and
U.S. researchers. All collected data will be archived and made publicly
available in the NSF-supported NHERI Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-
ci.org/). Additionally, the results of this project will be disseminated via
journal publications, conference presentations, a public webinar, and live
broadcasts. This project contributes to NSF's role in the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).

In this RAPID project, the Japanese and U.S. research team will investigate the
seismic performance of a full-scale, three-story RC building system tested at
the E-Defense shake table as part of the Japanese TMRP project. The key
objectives of this collaborative project are to: (1) provide better
understanding of dynamic response of RC buildings, (2) investigate the
capabilities of new instrumentation to capture structural performance and damage
data, and (3) evaluate current post-earthquake structural assessment procedures
and use the acquired data to provide information for refinements. The collected
data and structural assessment procedures will also help policymakers in the
U.S., Japan, and other countries to plan retrofit efforts strategically and
effectively.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.