* 2000621
* Improving Access and Success in Information Technology Programs Through Education-Industry Connections
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Lindsay Lynch, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 03/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to improve the quality of the information technology (IT)
workforce by improving access, equity, and success in community college IT
programs of study. It focuses on the needs of students from groups that are
currently underrepresented in the IT sector. Effective education models have
been developed to close the gender and minority achievement gap in STEM fields.
However, most of these models have focused on STEM degree completion at four-
year institutions. This project will adapt these baccalaureate pipeline models
to a two-year IT technician education program. Project activities will include
improving gateway courses through strong industry connections and experiential
learning. The improvements will be designed to lessen culturally grounded
barriers and self-limiting behaviors. The project expects to develop an
effective and replicable model for improving the success of students,
particularly underrepresented students, and thus contribute to the quality and
diversity of the nation's IT workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
includes a partnership between the University of Florida Institute of Higher
Education and Indian River Community College. The overall goal is to increase
the enrollment and persistence of students, especially women and
underrepresented minority students, in IT programs of study. Specific aims
include reconceptualizing three high-stakes gateway courses, embedding industry
certifications in program coursework, providing students with internships and
mentoring, and increasing the successful transfer of students from the community
college into IT bachelors degree programs. The project includes a mixed-methods
research protocol to investigate perceived obstacles, self-limiting behaviors,
and the effectiveness of project interventions. Through a focus on access,
graduation, and post-graduation success, the project intends to improve
diversity throughout the IT industry pipeline. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.