* 2000547
* Distance Learning in Computer Integrated Machining and Manufacturing to Engage Rural Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* DAVID GRADY, Metropolitan Community College Administrative Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project will contribute to the advanced technological workforce by a
developing a one-stop pathway to an Associate of Applied Science degree in
Computer Integrated Machining and Manufacturing. This degree program will be
housed in the newly refurbished state-of-the-art Advanced Manufacturing
Institute at Metropolitan Community College. According to the Missouri Economic
Research and Information Center, manufacturing accounts for 17% of the job
market and 18% of total income in the Kansas City Region. Due to industry
growth, the Mid-America Regional Council projects the need for 34,000 production
workers in Kansas City over the next five years. The current Computer Integrated
Machining and Manufacturing program educates technicians in Precision Machining
and offers internships and job placement with industry partners. Although
working at capacity, the program cannot educate enough technicians to meet
current industry needs. This project aims to increase the number of highly
skilled machining technicians in the Kansas City region by providing distance
learning opportunities in precision machining to students in rural areas within
the region served by the college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
increase the number of highly skilled precision machining technicians in the
Greater Kansas City area by 1) providing virtual instruction through a Zoom link
platform to students in rural service areas who cannot travel to the college
campus for classes, and 2) offering contextualized machining math through a
video module platform. The project expects these efforts to provide rural
students with access to a highly successful machining program and to prepare
them for work as precision machining technicians. As a result, the distance
program has the potential to expand the current pipeline of precision machining
technicians to include rural students who will gain the knowledge and skills
needed to enter the precision machining workforce in local industries. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.