* 2000009
* Workshop on Replication of a Community-Engaged Educational Ecosystem
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Jay Brockman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 27,438.00

The National Academy of Engineering identified solving “complex social issues”
as a grand challenge for the 21st century. This project aims to serve the
national interest by preparing engineers to work in interdisciplinary teams that
can address such complex challenges. The University of Notre Dame, through the
Center for Civic Innovation, led prior work in Indiana known as the Bowman Creek
Educational Ecosystem project. Through this project, students and faculty from
universities, community colleges, and high school worked together with community
groups, local businesses, and city government on complex problems such as storm
water management and the reuse of abandoned properties. During their work, the
students developed important STEM skills, as well as 21st century skills, such
as critical thinking and collaboration. This workshop will explore how to
replicate the successes of the Bowman Creed Educational Ecosystem in other
deindustrialized cities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exposing undergraduate
engineering students to interdisciplinary and socially relevant problem solving
has the potential to inform students’ career choices and preparation as
engineers. In addition, to have successful engineering careers, engineering
undergraduates must learn to work with professionals across sectors that include
non-governmental organizations, government agencies, and industry. The proposed
workshop will lay the groundwork to replicate a strategy for accomplishing both
goals. Specifically, the workshop will explore how to replicate Indiana’s Bowman
Creek Educational Ecosystem in communities in Youngstown, Ohio and Erie,
Pennsylvania. Participants will include representatives of academia, city
government, and other community partners to discuss evolution of the Bowman
Creek Educational Ecosystem, and to generalize the Community-Engaged Educational
Ecosystem model, build a community of practice, identify barriers to
replication, and determine funding models. Workshop organizers plan to
disseminate results through technical reports, a meeting of the Metrolab Network
(an organization devoted to civic and university partnerships), and a conference
presentation at a gathering such as the American Society for Engineering
conference. This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program: Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR) Program, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to improve and transform STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.