* 2000128
* Numerical Methods for Optimal Transport with Applications to Manifold Learning on Singular Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Jun Kitagawa, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Optimal transport concerns the classical question of how to optimize the cost of
transporting mass from one location to another. Optimal transport models have
been successfully applied in fields as diverse as atmospheric sciences, surface
matching, data clustering, and manifold learning, among others. The theoretical
study of optimal transport has greatly advanced in recent years and calls for
improved numerical tools that can be mathematically guaranteed to have good
performance. This project is aimed at the development of improved numerical
methods for optimal transport calculations and variants, employing partial-
differential-equation techniques to produce computational tools backed by
rigorous theory. The project provides research training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students. The PI will also engage in outreach by
supervising an undergraduate team through the university's Summer Undergraduate
Research Institute in Experimental Mathematics program, aimed at students who
are at an earlier stage of study, with an eye toward recruitment of students
from groups underrepresented in the mathematical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project aims to exploit the geometric information
that can be discerned from the regularity theory of the Monge-Amp√®re type
equation that arises naturally in optimal transport, in order to develop
numerical algorithms with proven convergence rates, error bounds, and
computational complexity. The project will also undertake a systematic study of
singular behavior when full regularity is unavailable to develop fast and
accurate numerical schemes in such difficult cases. One intended application of
this latter direction is toward a theory of manifold learning that can be
applied to data sets coming from singular geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.