* 2000091
* Research Initiation Award: Analyzing Imidazolium-Based Ionic Liquid Systems Using C-D Vibrational Labels on Cations
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Samrat Dutta, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 291,457.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award will (1) further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, (2) improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and (3) engage more undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups in research experiences. The project from Xavier University of Louisiana,
a Historically Black College/University (HBCU), seeks to explore the novelties
of imidazolium-based ionic liquids that have significant potential as a “green”
organic solvent for industrial applications by utilizing chemical techniques
that are readily available at the institution and through collaboration with
other local institutions. Furthermore, the project is designed to include
undergraduate students as active researchers while providing enhancements to
existing courses by integrating the results of the proposed research within
those selected courses. Accordingly, the project has significant intellectual
merit and broader impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imidazolium-based ionic liquids
are complex spatially heterogeneous liquids. In this proposal, infrared labels,
particularly the C2-D probe on the cation ring, will be used to investigate how
the complex microenvironment of these ionic liquids changes in response to a
change in temperature or in the presence of a solvent or a dissolved gas.
Analysis of the infrared response from the C-D band, both by linear and non-
linear vibrational spectroscopy, supported by computational studies is expected
to provide a deep molecular-level insights into the structural reorganization of
these liquids in response to external stimuli like temperature and the nature of
solute-solvent interactions. In doing so, the outcomes will facilitate rational
application of these green solvents both in industrial and laboratory
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Historically
Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.