* 2000440
* Advanced Industrial Instrumentation Control Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ernest Carrier, River Parishes Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 293,706.00

This project will contribute to development of a skilled technical workforce by
improving an Industrial Instrumentation degree program. The improved curriculum
will include training in advanced automation control and troubleshooting skills
in chemical manufacturing control systems. The degree will emphasize the
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) operational model, Industry 4.0
troubleshooting methods, and modern Human Machine Interface. The river region of
southern Louisiana has a growing demand for Industrial Instrumentation Control
Technicians with experience in advanced automation control and troubleshooting
skills. These technicians are vital to the daily operations of petro-chemical
plants and are responsible for troubleshooting, tuning, and programming
automation components. As a result, there is an ongoing need to advance the
skills of industrial instrumentation control technicians in IIoT operations and
in Industry 4.0 methods. The degree will also emphasize 21st century technical
skills, such as critical thinking and information literacy, to produce a well-
educated, productive technical workforce for this diverse, rural region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will deconstruct and redesign an existing
Industrial Instrumentation degree program by using the Business and Industry
Leadership Team (BILT) evaluation plan. Content will be developed by working
closely with industry partners to develop an Introduction to IIoT course and an
Industry 4.0 capstone course. In addition, selected modules in the new courses
will be incorporated into the Process Technology degree coursework. This project
has three targeted outcomes: 1) Researching intrinsically safe portable Human
Machine Interface devices that communicate equipment and personnel GPS
positioning, process systems automation control, and industrial plant process
health; 2) Designing coursework to address the interface of the IIoT â€“
Operational Technology/Information Technology communications requirements and
Industry 4.0 troubleshooting skills; and 3) Implementing core STEM skill modules
that address the academic needs of a diverse, rural student population. The
courses will immerse students in an integrated approach to plant operations and
troubleshooting. These courses will be developed out of an acknowledged need in
the business community for technicians who work in cross-disciplinary teams in
which instrumentation technicians and process technology workers are able to
envision plant controls as a system. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.