* 2000348
* Catalyst Project: Indoor Moving Objects Trajectory Generation and Query Evaluation
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Asif Baba, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 04/30/2023
* USD 188,476.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Tuskegee University seeks to develop an indoor data-based tracking framework
designed to understand the mathematical and technological foundations of indoor
data management. The project provides an opportunity for undergraduate students
to enhance their education through research experiences in computer modeling and
data management techniques. The researcher has established a strong
collaboration with faculty at Auburn University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will result in the development of a number of indoor query evaluation
mechanisms and the techniques to derive the accurate locations of indoor moving
items from raw erroneous indoor tracking data. This will improve the accuracy of
indoor spatial queries, which can support many indoor high-level applications,
including indoor location-based service and hotspot finding. Novel indoor
tracking data management techniques will be devised. The goals of the project
are to: 1) implement a simulation toolkit and a prototype system, where many
indoor environments and deployment settings will be simulated for performance
evaluation; 2) develop and compare a number of machine learning-based location
inference methods for accurate trajectory generation in indoor environments; 3)
design novel indoor query evaluation algorithms for various types of queries, in
particular spatial query types such as range query and nearest neighbor query;
and 4) invent an error model-based approach for indoor object trajectory
tracking which is a non-machine learning approach. The results of this research
will improve the performance of number of indoor location-based application
which will make it easy to locate people and help to guide people to safety
during emergency situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.