* 2000200
* Quantitative Stochastic Homogenization and Renormalization Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Scott Armstrong, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 340,000.00

This research project is focused on the development of new mathematical ideas
and tools for understanding the macroscopic properties of physical systems with
many small-scale irregularities. Composite materials, for example, are
manufactured by intermingling two or more constituent materials and often have
very different physical properties (heat or electrical conduction, for example)
from the individual components. Surprisingly, the properties of the composite
material are typically not a simple average of those of its components--it
matters greatly how the (microscopic) intermingling is arranged. We want to
understand precisely how the large number of microscopic interactions give rise
to the macroscopic behavior of such systems, to be able to predict the
macroscopic properties of the system by carefully looking at the microscopic
arrangement of a sample, and to know exactly how large such a sample must be
before our predictions are accurate. We proceed by developing and analyzing
idealized mathematical models that display the key features and complexity of
real physical systems, but still simple enough that they can be studied
mathematically. Very often, our models are partial differential equations with
stochastic coefficients--that is, the underlying microscopic behavior of the
system is assumed to be random--and the goal is to understand the statistics of
the system. Our objective is to develop mathematical approaches that are (i)
informed by the physics of the systems, (ii) robust--they can help us solve a
variety of other, similar problems arising in, for example, statistical physics
and probability theory, and (iii) quantitative--they lead to quantitative
estimates of the uncertainty and insight into the development of numerical
algorithms for simulation and prediction. This project provides research
training opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining an
"averaged" partial differential equation that describes the large-scale behavior
of an underlying highly heterogeneous equation with many degrees of freedom (for
instance, one with random coefficients) is referred to as "homogenization" in
the mathematical literature. The homogenized equation is typically much simpler
than the "true" heterogeneous one, and hence easier to work with. It is
therefore important to understand precisely how well the homogenized equation
approximates the true equation, and this is the goal of homogenization theory.
Mathematicians have recently developed a complete quantitative theory of
stochastic homogenization for elliptic equations, and this theory has already
been shown to have some surprising and important applications to probability
theory and statistical mechanics. The present project aims to continue in this
direction, by applying and developing homogenization techniques for gradient
lattice models and related models in statistical physics, to the study of
hypoelliptic diffusions arising in kinetic theory (modeling gases and plasmas)
and toward understanding the behavior of diffusions forced by random vector
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.