* 2000012
* Brazos Analysis Seminar
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Tao Mei, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 01/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

This award provides three years of funding to help defray the expenses of
participants in the semi-annual conference series "Brazos Analysis Seminar"
2020-2022, the first meeting of which will be held March 28-29, 2020 at Texas
A&amp;M University. Subsequent meetings will rotate among University of Houston,
Texas Christian University, University of Texas at Tyler, Baylor University, and
Texas A&amp;M University. The Brazos Analysis Seminar will bring together
analysts at academic institutions within the South-Central region of the United
States on a regular basis to communicate their research, with a particular
emphasis on providing an opportunity for young researchers and graduate students
to meet, collaborate and disseminate their work on a regular basis during the
academic year. The format for the seminar provides ample opportunity for
graduate students, postdocs, and junior investigators to present their work,
start new collaborations, learn about the latest developments in modern
analysis, and to advance their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
topics of this conference series will focus on the analytic theory of operator
algebras and operator spaces and their connections to harmonic analysis, ergodic
theory, dynamical systems, and quantum information theory. These connections
include free probability methods in the study of quantum groups, Fourier
multiplier theory on noncommutative Lp spaces, dynamical system methods and
K-theory methods in the classification of Câˆ—-algebras and von Neumann algebras,
etale groupoids, and inverse semigroups. In each meeting, there will be three
plenary talks given by prominent experts, six contributed talks presented by
three experts from the region and three upper-level PhD students. The goal is to
keep both early-career and senior researchers in south-central institutions
abreast of the latest major mathematical developments in noncommutative
analysis, and to enhance and advance research on related topics. Additional
information is available on the seminar website
https://sites.google.com/site/brazosanalysisseminar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.