* 2000831
* A Collaborative Approach to Expanding Nondestructive Testing Education within a Welding Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* James Colton, Pennsylvania College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,816.00

This project aims to address the growing unmet need for skilled technicians in
nondestructive testing. Nondestructive testing is used to test the safety of
structures, vehicles, or vessels using technologies such as ultrasound and X-ray
analysis. Nondestructive testing technicians help U.S. vessel, vehicle,
pipeline, and infrastructure industries meet quality and safety assurance
requirements, thus preventing injury or loss of life. The shortage of workers in
nondestructive testing results from both high industry demand and a shortage of
training programs. Consequently, the project proposes to develop a new Associate
of Applied Science degree program and two specialized certificate programs in
nondestructive testing. This curriculum has the potential to increase the
capacity of educational institutions to provide classroom training leading to
American Society for Nondestructive Testing Level II certification. Activities
will also be developed that promote diversity in high technology careers by
focusing recruitment efforts on high school students and incumbent workers from
groups that are not yet well represented in this employment sector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative aspects of the curriculum will include: (1) a
focus on weld testing, with an integration of nondestructive testing and welding
curricular content in the AAS degree program; and (2) alignment with American
Society for Nondestructive Testing certification standards to ensure the highest
quality of preparation for graduates. The project’s objectives are to: (1)
develop curricula for radiographic testing and ultrasonic testing certificates
that lead to fulfillment of American Society for Nondestructive Testing Level II
classroom requirements; (2) to align the two certificates and the associate’s
degree program to create flexible academic pathways for students; (3) to enhance
student learning with new equipment for teaching radiographic testing and phased
array ultrasonic testing; and (4) to recruit and enroll high school students and
incumbent workers in the new pathways to earning nondestructive testing
credentials. A research study will add new knowledge regarding the effectiveness
of the recruitment activities, including activities introduced in a summer camp
and in a dual enrollment welding curriculum. The project evaluation will examine
the effectiveness and impact of industry relationships, curriculum development,
use of new equipment, and recruitment activities, with regard to the intended
learning outcomes and alignment with the needs of students and employers. This
project can provide a model for career and educational pathways in
nondestructive testing that other colleges may replicate or adapt. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.