* 2000759
* The Role of Attentional Control in Early Mathematical Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Steven Piantadosi, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,995,157.00

The project, led by a team of researchers at the University of California,
Berkeley, aims to understand the relationship between attention and early
mathematical development. Children’s first mathematical skills, like counting
and number estimation, are typically measured using tasks that require children
to sustain attention. In some cases their knowledge of mathematics is
intrinsically linked to attentional processes. For example, in counting,
children must learn to attend selectively to each object in a set and do so in
sequence. They must then say a different word for each object that is selected.
Despite the importance of attention in these early mathematical skills, the
precise role that it plays in supporting or constraining early mathematical
development is not understood. The research described in this proposal will
involve tasks that measure attention in conjunction with mathematical skills for
individual children between 2 and 8 years of age in order to clarify the role
that attention plays in early mathematics. It will help point to whether
difficulties in some mathematical skills may be traceable to differences in
underlying attentional systems. The researchers will recruit both high and low
SES (socioeconomic status) children in order to understand whether SES
differences in mathematical cognition may be traceable to these systems, thereby
providing a necessary first-step in developing cognitively-based interventions
which may improve achievement in these groups. The project is funded by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the fundamental
research literature on STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two of the most
widely studied numerical skills, counting and approximate number estimation,
depend on appropriately deploying attentional resources in order to arrive at a
mental representation of quantity. However, many cognitive theories and
experimental studies treat measurements of these abilities as reflecting purely
numerical processes rather than being dependent on general cognitive resources
like attention. This project aims to quantify and formally model the role that
attention plays in counting and estimation, and to clarify the degree to which
it accounts for individual differences in performance on mathematical tasks,
thereby allowing further investigation of whether attentional limitations may
constrain mathematical development across age and SES. This will have the
potential to show, for example, how much of children’s protracted timeline in
learning counting may be due to waiting for the underlying attentional system to
develop. If successful, this work will further help suggest what kinds of
interventions on non-numerical cognitive skills may have important implications
for improving mathematical education or potentially STEM education more broadly.
The researchers will also create an open dataset of eye-tracking trajectories as
children engage in numerical tasks, create tools for analyzing eye-tracking
data, and formalize accounts of how visual information processing may give rise
to patterns observed in numerical cognition, like subitizing, Weber’s law, and
numerical estimation biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.