* 2000587
* Profiles of Technical Workforce Programs and Students at Two-Year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Ashok Agrawal, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 03/31/2024
* USD 790,339.00

To maintain and expand the nation’s skilled technical workforce, it is essential
to understand how technician education programs at two-year institutions support
students’ academic and career pathways. However, significant gaps exist in the
data needed to build this understanding. To address this gap, this project will
develop and test a centralized system to collect the needed data. It will also
develop a state-of-the-art visualization system to display and explore this
data. These resources are intended to: (a) support peer, regional, national, and
impact analyses of engineering-oriented technician programs; (b) make data
available to federal and state agencies and researchers focused on STEM
workforce issues; and (c) create a national digital directory of engineering-
oriented technician programs at two-year colleges. This effort builds on the
American Society for Engineering’s Profiles of Engineering and Engineering
Technology Colleges Survey, which focuses on programs at four-year institutions.
In addition, it responds to the National Science Board’s call for filling such
data gaps, described in its report: The Skilled Technical Workforce: Crafting
America’s Science and Engineering Enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the project are to: (1) develop and test a survey instrument and administration
process for standardizing and collecting information on engineering-oriented
technician programs at two-year institutions; (2) augment primary data
collection with existing data sources; (3) design a common taxonomy and
directory describing the types of two-year engineering degrees and certificates
offered nationally; and (4) create and maintain an interactive data
visualization system to analyze engineering-oriented technician programs at two-
year institutions for peer, regional, and national comparisons. The project will
implement a centralized data gathering effort that includes survey
design/administration, sampling, and item analyses for reliability and validity.
Additional data acquisition activities include linking existing data files to
other data repositories and to primary survey data, including development of the
algorithms required to accomplish linking of these independent data sources.
Data visualization activities include the use data analytics and other
approaches to facilitate the understanding of large, complex data sets. A
national Advisory Board will guide project activities and evaluate their impact.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.