* 2000968
* Collaborative Research: 4D Visualization and Modeling of Two-Phase Flow and Deformation in Porous Media beyond the Realm of Creeping Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Muhammad Sahimi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 266,520.00

Porous media (e.g., sponge, paper, fabrics, rock, and soil) are materials with
pores distributed in a solid matrix. When pores are connected, fluids can flow
through them. Understanding and predicting fluid flow in porous media is
important as it occurs in a wide range of applications, from contamination of
groundwater and soil to printing on paper and fabrics. By understanding flow
pathways, we can make accurate predictions of the fluid flow, which in turn,
will help us design and control related processes. However, predicting fluid
flow in porous media is still a long-standing problem. While observing fluid
flow in simple two-dimensional porous media can be straightforward, the same is
not true in more realistic three-dimensional cases. This proposal aims to carry
out an integrated computational and experimental study to provide a more
accurate description of flow pathways and realistic fluid flow and the resultant
deformations in such materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although non-destructive
3D imaging has provided much information about fluid distribution in porous
materials, fast and cost-effective 4D pore-scale visualization (i.e., over a
period of time) is still very difficult, costly and time-consuming. Furthermore,
although visualization of multiphase flow in porous media has been extensively
studied in 2D models, there have been very few of such studies in 4D (or even
3D). One goal of this proposal is to develop a 4D method for visualization of
two-phase flow in transparent porous media and the deformation that it induces
in the media beyond the realm of creeping flow, i.e. when the flow is very slow.
This goal will be achieved by collecting 2D images from various angles, which
will then be used with a computational algorithm to build a highly detailed 4D
image of the multiphase flow. Detailed computations will be carried out in which
the two-phase fluid flow and the resulting deformation will be simulated in the
same porous media beyond creeping flow. The investigators will also study and
identify the critical Reynolds number (Re) at which the transition from the
Darcy regime to Forchheimer and eventually turbulent flows occurs. The effect of
wettability on the deformation of porous media during two-phase flow will also
be investigated. Distinct deformation modes of a porous medium will also be
examined under a wide range of Reynolds number and wettability
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.