* 2000266
* Excellence in Research/Collaborative Research: Smart Technology-enabled Nutrient Lifecycle and Supply Chain Management for Microgreens
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lealon Martin, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 316,000.00

This Excellence in Research (EiR) award supports research to engineer next-
generation smart technology to improve farm-to-table food management of
microgreen crops. Microgreens are edible plants that are only grown to the
juvenile stage. These greens are known to have dense nutrients; however, they
have a short production cycle and are easily perishable. This project represents
a collaboration among three universities to study methods to support
cultivation, harvesting, and transport in order to ensure the delivery of a
high-quality nutritional product to the consumer. The project will investigate
the effects of growth media and integrate data collection across experimental
and commercial production platforms. The project's objective is to discover
methods that support the optimization of the entire microgreen life cycle to
deliver nutritious food to consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will
integrate expertise in plant biology, large scale food cultivation, and supply
chain management of perishable products. The research activities include (1)
investigation of the role of different growth media on beneficial phytochemicals
in microgreens; (2) exploration of the metabolic pathways to identify conditions
that boost amounts of select nutrients; (3) data collection on the cultivation
and harvesting methods of microgreens; and (4) development of multiscale models
to optimize the microgreen supply chain from production to consumer. The
collaborating PIs will integrate biological studies with cultivation and
harvesting studies using data collected across multiple systems with different
time scales. Using smart technology, including sensors and data analytics, these
studies will lead to establishing an optimal farm-to-table supply network. The
project will expand the research capabilities of the collaborating institutions
and provide educational and mentoring opportunities to produce HBCU graduates
better prepared to enter the research workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.