* 2000329
* Building a Pipeline of Biodiesel Technicians for Careers in Fields and Cities
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Christopher Reynolds, Lewis and Clark Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop a diesel/biodiesel certificate track in the Associate
of Applied Technologies in Automotive Technology degree. This track is intended
to address regional needs for diesel technicians who have the specialized
technical skills needed to support current and emerging agricultural and urban
applications. Employers across Illinois and the country have an urgent need for
skilled diesel mechanics and there is a growing need for a workforce that can
plan, design, build, and repair transportation systems and energy-efficient
vehicles. The project will increase student interest in next-generation diesel
technician careers by implementing strategies to serve underrepresented and
underserved students with a dual focus on rural and urban schools. By preparing
students for careers in high-growth technical fields, the project has the
potential to advance innovative methods for meeting the nation's changing
employment needs. This project will generate evidence regarding effective
practices for using learning communities in rural technician education. Outreach
and recruiting efforts will replicate successful efforts from other ATE projects
that have been successful in engaging underrepresented students. Results will be
disseminated throughout Illinois and to the ATE community. The project supports
ATEâ€™s focus on rural technician education aligned with in-demand careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop pathways to next-
generation diesel/biodiesel technologies careers with a primary focus on
providing a skilled workforce equipped to fill jobs in rural and urban sectors.
The objectives of the project are: 1) implement a new diesel/biodiesel
technology pathway program with stackable credentials; 2) train secondary and
post-secondary faculty to recruit students, implement curriculum and
instruction, collaborate with industry, and support rural and urban student
success in technician education and careers; and 3) increase partnerships with
rural and urban diesel technology employers to expand career opportunities for
students and meet local and regional workforce needs. The project will improve
student outcomes by providing secondary school educators with professional
development and customized skill-training modules, emphasizing dual-enrollment
courses, leveraging partnerships to provide students with 21st century work-
based learning, and aligning curricula with industry standards. The project
intends to produce these deliverables: aligned curriculum, new courses and a
certificate in diesel/biodiesel technology, stackable credentials leading to
college degrees, work-based learning, and recruitment and outreach collateral
designed to engage underrepresented students. Graduates will be ready for work
with industry partners, thus contributing to the nation's skilled technical
workforce. Project materials and results will be widely shared and disseminated
through statewide and national meetings. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.