* 2000158
* Catalyst Project: Computer algorithms and simulations for CT image reconstruction and segmentation utilizing optimal sampling lattices and efficient domains
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Xiqiang Zheng, Voorhees College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,966.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Vorhees College seeks to develop computed tomography (CT) image reconstruction
and segmentation methods using optimal sampling lattices and provides an
opportunity for undergraduate students to enhance their education through
research experiences in computer modeling. The researcher has established a
strong collaboration with faculty at the University of South Carolina.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computed tomography is an important tool to create the
internal image of a physical body. Image reconstruction is to compute the
internal image from the scanned data and image segmentation may help to locate
the internal objects or their boundaries in the image. The usual CT computations
are done on a Cartesian lattice whose pixels are squares or cubes. However
optimal sampling lattices, such as 2D hexagonal and 3D face centered cubic and
body centered cubic lattices, provide more efficient sampling and better
adjacency relation than the traditional Cartesian lattices. In this project, for
the 2D case, images will be reconstructed from scanned data using the filtered
back-projection method over a hexagonal lattice and in a regular hexagonal
region. Then image segmentation methods such as graph-cuts on the reconstructed
images are applied. Because a CT machine rotates to perform scans from different
directions, a 2D object to be scanned may be assumed to be circular. Since the
circular region can be embedded into a regular hexagon more tightly than into a
square, fewer number of lattice points may be involved and the lattice points
can be efficiently indexed for image segmentation. Hence the computational time
for image segmentation may be reduced and the quality may be improved. Computer
simulations will be done to evaluate the new algorithms in terms of image
segmentation quality and computational efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.