* 2000170
* Excellence in Research: Processes and Interactions in Hybrid Plasmonic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Tigran Shahbazyan, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2023
* USD 467,080.00

This award is funded jointly by the Condensed-Matter-and-Materials-Theory
program in the Division of Materials Research and by the HBCU-UP program in the
Division of Human-Resource
Development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project "Excellence in Research:
Processes and Interactions in Hybrid Plasmonic Systems" involves theoretical and
computational studies in the area of plasmonics with the main focus on plasmon-
enhanced optical spectroscopy. Surface plasmons are collective electronic
excitations in metal-dielectric composite structures which can interact strongly
with excited states in molecules and solids to significantly change their
optical characteristics. In plasmonic systems, the optical interactions between
surface plasmons and excitations in semiconductor nanostructures or dye
molecules underpin numerous plasmonics applications in photovoltaics, optical
sensing, and photochemistry, among others. The project aims at modeling the
optical properties of hybrid plasmonic systems that are defined by coherent
interactions and/or energy transfer between system constituent parts. This
research will be carried out at Jackson State University and will substantially
aid the development of human resources capacity in a historically black
university that primarily serves educational needs of local minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims at modeling the optical processes and interactions in hybrid
plasmonic systems such as metal-dielectric structures conjugated with
semiconductor nanostructures or dye molecules. The main topics include studies
of (a) spontaneous emission beyond the plasmon field enhancement limits, (b)
Forster energy transfer and the transition to the strong-coupling regime, (c)
intermediate exciton-plasmon coupling and exciton-induced transparency, (d) Fano
interference in hybrid plasmonic systems, and other pertinent issues. The
research will be mainly focused on coherent interactions between the system
constituents and on related optical processes that determine the optical
properties of hybrid systems. The methods include a combination of analytical
and numerical tools suitable for analyzing plasmonic systems with many
constituent parts. The results will be used for modeling of experimental
findings and are expected to aid the development of plasmon-based device
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.