* 2000779
* Collaborative Research: Developing Business Communication Skills in Manufacturing Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kris Acheson-Clair, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 07/31/2024
* USD 383,059.00

The advanced manufacturing and production fields have growing need for skilled
technicians who can communicate effectively in teams. In response to this
workforce demand, the project team will develop and test an adaptive virtual
reality (VR) platform to help manufacturing technician students learn business
communication skills. The platform will deliver interactive case studies that
allow students to practice business communication skills needed in a smart
factory context. To support integration of these adaptive VR case studies within
courses, faculty in advanced manufacturing programs will participate in
extensive professional development as they collaboratively develop new VR
business communication case studies. In addition, the project will support
faculty externships in industry to enhance their knowledge of current trends,
skills requirements, new tools, and career opportunities in advanced
manufacturing. This knowledge will help them improve their teaching and better
serve their students. To strengthen the alignment between coursework and job
tasks, the project draws on the long-standing partnership between Ivy Tech
Community College of Indiana, Purdue University, and industry partners.
Recognizing that the incumbent manufacturing workforce is maturing, the project
also focuses on fostering and investigating the communication skills that
facilitate the transfer of highly specialized technical skills, knowledge, and
expertise across the multiple generations in the manufacturing workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project rests on the
implementation of a research and development cycle that facilitates the
development, testing, investigation, and revision of project activities and
deliverables for improvement and goal attainment (e.g., advanced manufacturing
technicians who develop the technical knowledge and skills, as well as the soft
skills to work efficiently and effectively in modern manufacturing). To answer a
priori and emerging questions, the project will conduct a mixed methods study to
advance knowledge of the effectiveness of integrating the learning of technical
knowledge/skills with soft skills in curricular and educational materials (i.e.,
case studies within a virtual reality platform). The quantitative and
qualitative study will examine the integration of manufacturing and
communication job tasks through pre-post outcomes assessments, structured
interviews and focus groups, descriptive and trend analyses, analyses of the
quality of deliverables and products, and thematic content analyses of
information from interviews, focus group discussions, and open-ended survey
questions. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.