* 2000988
* CAS: Near-IR Absorbing Intramolecular Charge Transfer Complexes: Syntheses, Symmetry-Breaking Charge Transfer, and Charge Transfer Reversal by External Stimuli
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Francis D'Souza, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2024
* USD 404,266.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Francis D’Souza of the Department
of Chemistry at the University is developing new classes of charge transfer
complexes able to absorb light in the near-infrared region. The research could
lead to materials with novel optoelectronic properties, which are needed for
efficient solar energy harvesting devices and luminescent sensors. The project
lies at the interface of organic, physical and materials chemistry, and is well
suited to the education of scientists at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
The project provides extensive teaching and training of graduate students, and
undergraduate students. The technical knowledge, problem-solving abilities, and
communication skills learned through participating in the project help to
strengthen the nation’s high technology workforce while contributing to the
energy efficiency of clean energy technologies. Outreach efforts contribute to a
highly diversified research group and collaboration with the Elm Fork Education
Center to enhance general science education are also part of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Francis D’Souza’s group will address several
scientific challenges. First, can the absorption of the intramolecular charge
transfer complexes be extended into the near-infrared region and beyond by
utilizing highly interacting strong electron donor and strong electron acceptor
pairs? Second, can nanocarbon materials such as fullerene, endohedral fullerene
and single-wall carbon nanotubes be used to enhance near-infrared absorption and
emission in these intramolecular charge transfer complexes? Third, Are the
appended photosensitizers capable of triggering efficient ultrafast charge
separation upon photoexcitation, thereby leading to charge-separated states? Are
novel photochemical events such as symmetry-breaking charge transfer observed in
the multi-modular symmetric intramolecular charge transfer complexes? Finally,
can external stimulus be used to modulate ground and excited state charge
transfer in these intramolecular charge transfer
complexes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.