* 2000787
* Education for Technical Applications in Agriculture
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Carl Aakre, Central Lakes College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 700,098.00

This project aims to advance national interests in health, prosperity, and
welfare by educating high school students in technologies used in modern farming
equipment and operations. These technologies include geospatial technologies,
robotics, electronics, sensors, and computer controls. The agricultural
equipment industry has a significant shortage of qualified technicians trained
to manufacture, use, and maintain modern equipment. To address this agricultural
technician workforce gap, the project plans to develop a partnership among
community college and secondary school faculty, and equipment manufacturers and
dealers. This partnership will collaborate to develop and implement a secondary
school curriculum and faculty professional development initiative for technical
agricultural education. The resulting courses will be designed for dual
enrollment credit at high schools and colleges. Secondary students who complete
the credential and earn college credit will be prepared to move seamlessly into
an agricultural technician training program at partnering colleges or directly
into the agricultural technician workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of the project is to build a secondary school agricultural technician
program that focuses on skills and knowledge that are directly relevant and
transferable to higher education and to agricultural technician careers. The
partners, led by AgCentric at Central Lakes College and the Curriculum for
Agricultural Science Education (CASE), include Northland Community and Technical
College, Ridgewater College, and industry collaborators. These partners will
leverage their resources and experience to ensure this project meets industry,
student, and faculty needs in agricultural technician education. The project
intends to have a national reach, through developing course content that links
agricultural science with complex mechanical systems. The curriculum will be
written, field-tested, and revised following the CASE model, which is based on
evidence and current pedagogical approaches. The project evaluation will measure
the progress of curriculum development and implementation, hypothesized student
outcomes of increased college and workforce preparation, and impacts on the
agricultural technician workforce. A culminating feature of this project will be
the development of an industry-recognized credential that will help further the
college, career, and workforce aspirations of secondary and post-secondary
students. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.