* 2000649
* Significance of Ice-loss to Landscapes in the Arctic: SILA (Inuit concept of the physical world and weather)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,244,966.00

Ice sheets have advanced and retreated across approximately 15% of Earth’s land
surface over the past three million years. This glacial cycling produces fine-
grained sediments that are easily altered by chemical reactions. As glacial
retreat exposes landscapes, ecosystems develop, sediments react, and stream
water compositions change. In southwestern Greenland, streams draining glacial
meltwater and non-glacial streams separated from glacial meltwater discharge
similar amounts of water relative to their drainage areas, but because of
distinct chemical compositions, they deliver differing amounts of greenhouse
gases to the atmosphere and nutrients to coastal ecosystems. These differences
may affect climate, ecosystems, and people, highlighting the need for effective
communication of glacial environmental changes to the public. Developing
effective communication skills is an integral part of this interdisciplinary
study to evaluate how biological, geochemical, and hydrologic processes control
stream water composition as glaciers retreat. This insight will enhance
evaluations of the effects from past glacial retreat and responses to future
Arctic warming. Project results will be shared through environmental civics, a
component that will improve researchers’ science communication and leadership
skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sediment compositions, exposure age, plant and
microbe colonization, water availability, and stream-landscape connections are
hypothesized to vary systematically across periglacial watersheds and thus
control weathering extent, stream geochemistry, and solute and gas fluxes. This
hypothesis will be tested in watersheds stretching from the Greenland Ice Sheet
to the coast over two melt seasons by an interdisciplinary group of U.S. and
Greenlandic researchers who will a) measure non-glacial stream discharge, solute
and gas concentrations and fluxes, microbial community structures, plant
community distributions, carbon and nutrient cycling, and radiogenic isotopes in
stream and bedload sediment; b) maintain automated weather observations, dust
collection, and stream chemistry loggers; and c) perform stream dosing
experiments. These data will reveal feedbacks between weathering extent,
ecosystem characteristics, biogeochemical processes, and stream chemistry and
their controls on solute and gas fluxes from periglacial watersheds. In
collaboration with Greenlandic colleagues, the results will seed environmental
civics plans to develop and implement environmental science curricula at levels
appropriate to Greenlandic high schools through a teacher-education program and
to create educational materials for tourism in Greenland, Greenlandic secondary
schools, and the Arctic Technology Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.