* 2000730
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Educational Experiences, Outcomes, and Career Pathways of Welding Technology Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ece Yaprak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2024
* USD 815,982.00

Despite the increasing demand for welding technology professionals at local,
regional, and national levels, the number of welding technology (WT) graduates
has declined. This project aims to address this need, as well as to help develop
a deeper understanding of WT career pathways. To do so, the project team will
investigate the experiences and perceptions of WT students who begin their
education and training at community colleges and the expectations of WT faculty,
higher education administrators, and employers. The purpose of this exploratory
research study is to: (1) identify personal/social/life factors that affect the
career pathways of WT students and their decision to obtain credentials
(associate degrees, certificates) and matriculate into a four-year program; (2)
identify obstacles and issues that contribute to WT student attrition; and (3)
create materials and activities to support retention, associate degree
attainment, and matriculation into a 2+2 program in welding technology. The
project is a collaboration between researchers and technician educators from the
University of Michigan, Macomb Community College, Monroe County Community
College, and Wayne State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by a conceptual
framework that draws on the work of Hisrchy, Bremer, and Castellano (2011) and
Phelps and Prevost (2012), this qualitative and quantitative exploratory mixed
methods research project is guided by the overarching question: What are the
factors and experiences associated with the career pathways of welding
technology students? The research team will investigate (1) specific welding
technology program features (e.g., articulated dual-credit high school courses,
internships, etc.) that are associated with optimal student outcomes (e.g.,
retention, degree completion, matriculation, employment). They will also examine
ways in which key stakeholders (e.g., faculty; administrators) can use the
findings to inform strategic program improvement and decision-making. Thematic
analysis of qualitative data will be applied to uncover and test the elements of
the career pathways framework. Survey data will be analyzed using analysis of
variance to test the mean differences and interaction effects that may occur
among variables/elements of the career pathways framework. This approach will
identify non-significant and significant differences across different groups of
students, variables, and institutions and provide insights into the
phenomenological aspects of education and career development. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.