* 2000201
* Collaborative Research: HBCU-Excellence in Research--Planetary Boundary Layer Processes from an Incipient Surface/Upper Air Mesonet Network in the Baltimore-Washington Region
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Ricardo Sakai, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 231,791.00

This award funds the acquisition of instruments that measure meteorological
properties from the Earthâ€™s surface to lower atmosphere. The main research goal
of this project is to study the influence of the urban heat island in the
Baltimore to Washington DC greater metropolitan areas. This region has varied
land use, topography, and water bodies that complicate forecasts of weather,
especially for air quality. The instrumentation will enhance the research
capacity at two Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and provide
hands-on instrumentation opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching long-term goal of the project is to use a combination of ground-
based and remote sensing techniques to answer questions about how the Planetary
Boundary Layer (PBL) changes based on land surface characteristics. A small
collection of instrumentation for boundary layer studies exists in the
Baltimore-Washington region, and this award will add to that by providing funds
for three eddy covariance systems for surface fluxes, a ceilometer for the
assessment of boundary layer height, and two radiosonde ground stations for
balloon-based observations of the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.