* 2000183
* Research Initiation Award: Non-apoptotic Functions for Fas-associated Death Domain (FADD) in Osteosarocma
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mario Hollomon, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 05/31/2024
* USD 294,832.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award will (1) further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, (2) improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and (3) engage more undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups in research experiences. The project from Texas Southern University, a
Historically Black College/University (HBCU), seeks to study the non-apoptotic
functions of the Fas-associated protein with death domain (FADD) protein in
osteosarcoma (OS) biology. The specific objectives include the investigation of
(1) the mechanism of action responsible for death ligand-induced cell death; and
(2) the role of FADD in cellular homeostatic activities. The project includes
mentoring two Texas Southern University undergraduate students in research
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fas-associated protein with death domain was
initially discovered as an adaptor protein that facilitates Fas-mediated
apoptosis. Subsequent studies reported non-apoptotic functions of FADD in immune
cells. Non-apoptotic functions of FADD have not been extensively studied in
cancer, and no reports are available on non-apoptotic functions of FADD in
osteosarcoma (OS). Osteosarcoma is the most common type of bone cancer found in
children and teens. The Principle Investigator has previously reported that
decreased FADD expression sensitizes OS to death ligand-induced cell death,
indicating that FADD protects OS against death ligand-induced cell death. The
aim of this study is to investigate the non-apoptotic functions of FADD as well
as the signaling pathways associated with the non-apoptotic functions of FADD in
cancer, specifically OS. The specific objectives of this research are: 1) to
determine the mechanism of action responsible for death ligand-induced cell
death in OS with altered FADD status and 2) to elucidate the function of FADD in
cell homeostasis to include regulation of oxidative stress, cell proliferation
and regulation of cell cycle. Level of FADD expression, cellular localization of
FADD and FADD phosphorylation affects FADD function. To investigate the non-
apoptotic functions of FADD, three OS cell models will be used: 1) cells with
reduced expression of FADD, 2) cells with impaired nuclear localization of FADD,
and 3) cells with inhibited FADD phosphorylation. The experimental approach
presented investigates the different cellular states of FADD that affect FADD
function. Assessment of pro-survival and pro-death signaling pathways and
expression of pro-survival and pro-death molecules will elucidate mechanisms
responsible for death ligand-induced cell death in OS with altered FADD status.
Cell growth, cell viability, metabolic activity, and cell cycle regulation in
the three OS cell models will be assessed to determine the impact of altered
FADD status on cell homeostasis. The results generated from this investigation
will contribute to a better understanding of FADD function in OS and will serve
as a basis for the direction of research on the biological function of FADD in
other cancers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.