* 2000310
* Research Initiation Award: Nanoscale fine-tuning of porosity of NiO/carbon hollow nanocomposites templated by polymeric micelles for next generation energy storage devices
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Bishnu Bastakoti, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 352,046.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State University has
potential to broaden impacts in several areas. The proposed study will develop
one-pot synthetic methods that will have an impact in electrochemical energy
storage. The research will result in the development of new tools and
fabrication of new materials. Undergraduate students will received training in
research, design, development and manufacturing of new materials for energy
storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to synthesize porous
hollow NiO/carbon nanocomposites for electrode materials. A bottom up sol-gel
approach will be adopted in which the laboratory synthesized block copolymer and
low molecular weight surfactant will be used as template and structure directing
agent. The main challenge in sol-gel synthesis is the interaction of inorganic
sources with polymer template. The polymeric template will be designed in such a
way that it can arrest inorganic/organic source strongly. Fine-tuning of shape,
size, porosity, and crystallinity of nanoporous materials will be readily
achieved by changing either the templateâ€™s molecular weight or its solution
properties. This research will provide a greater understanding of combination of
soft and hard chemistry to design hierarchical nanoporous hollow NiO/carbon
nanocomposites. The nanoporous materials will be explored as an electrode
material for supercapacitors. The hollow nanospheres with an interior nickel
oxide layer and an exterior carbon layer will protect each of these components
from electrochemical dissolution and show improved supercapacitive performance.
The project will make a significant contribution to fundamental understanding of
the relationships among morphologies, pore structures, and surface atomic
structures of electrode materials to enhance the electrochemical properties of
energy storage devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.