* 2000923
* Collaborative Research: Untangling the Complex Role of Anthropocentric Thinking in Undergraduate Biology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Laura Burrus, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,936.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
biology education. It will do so by conducting basic research on how the
intuitive thinking of biology students helps and/or hinders their learning of
biological concepts in STEM learning environments. The project focuses on
anthropocentric thinking, a particular kind of intuitive thinking that anchors
understanding of the biological world in human terms. Anthropocentric thinking
results in a tendency to see humans as biologically exceptional or to reason
about other organisms by analogy to humans. Previous NSF-sponsored findings show
that anthropocentric thinking may have a complex role in how undergraduates
learn biological science. This project intends to examine this issue from three
perspectives: 1) How students from different backgrounds may vary in the degree
to which they bring with anthropocentric conceptions to the biology classroom.
2) How teaching biology concepts using anthropocentric language might help
and/or hinder student learning. 3) How faculty may intentionally or
unintentionally use anthropocentric language in their own teaching. This
research has the potential to contribute to the NSF EHR mission by discovering
how specific systems of cognitive understanding may interact with formal
classroom teaching to help and/or hinder science
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage a successful long-term
collaboration between cognitive scientists and discipline-based education
researchers to investigate the educational consequences of intuitive
understandings. These investigatorsâ€™ previous work revealed systematic
relationships between patterns of intuitive, informal thought about biology,
including teleological, essentialist, and anthropocentric thinking, as well as
revealing misconceptions about biological concepts among students. It showed
anthropocentric thinking is more strongly and consistently related to biological
misconceptions than other types of intuitive thinking. However, widespread and
frequent use of anthropocentric language by biology faculty in classrooms
suggests that at least some instructors see pedagogical merit in such thinking.
Moreover, although this project's researchers have found similar anthropocentric
thinking and misconceptions among students in two different urban institutions,
anthropocentric thinking has been shown to be reduced among people from rural
backgrounds. Therefore, this project intends to probe relationships between
anthropocentric thinking and biological misconceptions among students from rural
backgrounds. It is important to explore in depth the ways in which
anthropocentric framing may facilitate learning formal biology concepts (via
human examples and analogies) and/or engender misconceptions (via human
exceptionalism). Accordingly, the project aims to investigate the effects of
anthropocentric framing on biology learning by experimentally presenting biology
concepts framed in different ways and assessing resulting learning and
misconceptions. Finally, although there is widespread evidence of
anthropocentric language in faculty lectures, the degree to which instructors
consciously employ such language as a pedagogical strategy is unknown.
Therefore, this project seeks to assess faculty metacognitive awareness of their
use of anthropocentric language in biology explanations. Results of this
research are expected to inform the building of an important and generative
theoretical framework integrating disconnected yet theoretically interdependent
lines of inquiry in cognitive science and discipline-based science education
research. It has the potential to translate this theoretical framework for
understanding the acquisition of expertise in life sciences into pedagogical
best practices and thus influence the way undergraduate biology is taught. The
proposed project is a joint effort between the Conceptual Organization,
Reasoning, and Education Laboratory (CORE Lab) at Northeastern University and
the Science Education Partnership and Assessment Laboratory (SEPAL) at San
Francisco State University, and is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.