* 2000161
* Ohio River Analysis Meetings 2020-2022
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Michael Goldberg, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 01/31/2024
* USD 16,000.00

This award provides three years of support for the participants in the 2020-2022
Ohio River Analysis Meetings (ORAM), of which the first will be held on March
28-29, 2020, at the University of Kentucky. The 2021 meeting will take place in
Spring 2021 at the University of Cincinnati; the conference returns to the
University of Kentucky in Spring 2022. ORAM seeks to make the latest advances in
mathematics available to a broad scientific audience and at the same time
promote the entrance to the field of new researchers. To that end, most funds
are devoted to the support of early-career participants without other research
funding: graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and junior
faculty members. Consistent efforts are made to broaden participation of members
of groups underrepresented in mathematical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
annual regional conference series will celebrate its tenth year in 2020. ORAM
aims to stimulate scientific collaboration and exchange of ideas, focusing on
the general area of Analysis and, in particular, on the fields of partial
differential equations, mathematical physics, harmonic analysis, and geometric
analysis. The meetings feature invited lectures by distinguished mathematicians
and parallel sessions for contributed talks, mostly by early-career
mathematicians. Anticipated plenary speakers for the 2020 event are: Mario Bonk,
Michael Christ, Sergiu Klainerman, Katya Krupchyk, and Natasa Pavlovic. More
information can be found on the conference website:
https://math.as.uky.edu/oram20&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.