* 2000088
* RUI: Rational Schur Functions and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Kelly Bickel, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 119,703.00

This project lies at the intersection of operator theory and complex analysis,
two areas of pure mathematics. Operator theory began with the study of matrices
(arrays of numbers), and by the early twentieth century, had given much of the
mathematical foundation for quantum mechanics. Since then, operator-theoretic
techniques have had several applications, especially in constructing and
studying a variety of useful functions, i.e., rules that encode specific types
of information. For example, in control engineering, setups such as autopilot
systems that accept inputs, receive feedback, and release outputs can be modeled
with general matrices (or operators), while a system’s key information is often
encoded in its transfer function. Recently, operator theory techniques have also
been used to decompose signals into simple pieces, via something called a
wavelet construction. In this project, the principal investigator will use
operators to study problems related to a specific class of functions, called
rational functions, which appear in such applications. Many of these problems
have parts that are amenable to undergraduate research, and much of the research
in this project will be explored alongside diverse groups of undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, this project concerns rational
functions in one and more variables that are bounded on certain domains. Such
rational functions include finite Blaschke products (FBPs), which have played
significant roles in factorization, interpolation, and approximation problems in
complex analysis. Recently, FBPs have arisen in the context of a famous open
problem in operator theory called Crouzeix’s conjecture, which basically says
that the numerical range of a bounded operator on a Hilbert space is a
2-spectral set for that operator. The first goals of this project are to use
FBPs to investigate and solve various cases of Crouzeix’s conjecture, use
Crouzeix’s conjecture to ask and answer new questions about FBPs, and to explore
related questions about spectral sets, compressed shifts, and truncated Toeplitz
operators. The second topic of this project concerns multivariate (rational and
non-rational) functions on the bidisk and polydisk. Specifically, the second
main goal is to use model/realization theory to systematically characterize the
structure and fine boundary regularity of bounded analytic functions on the
bidisk and polydisk. This goal is motivated by recent work on both the structure
of rational inner functions near boundary singularities and new canonical
realization formulas for general bounded analytic
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.