* 2000715
* Improving Pathways into the Geospatial and Unmanned Aircraft Systems Technician Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Chris Carter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2024
* USD 561,977.00

Demand for skilled technicians in geospatial technologies and small unmanned
aircraft systems continues to increase as new applications are developed for
these emerging technologies. To help meet these demands, this project is
designed to increase the number of students who are trained to use these
technologies in multiple disciplines. Specifically, Germana Community College
will create new academic pathways that provide students with multiple
opportunities to enter the technical workforce. Building on previous work, an
online version of a course that prepares students for the FAA Remote Pilot
Certificate exam will be developed to increase student access and enrollment.
Students will learn how to apply geospatial and unmanned aircraft technologies
to solve real world problems through service-learning projects that will be
integrated into existing courses. The project will also support professional
development programs and mentoring to increase the capacity of community college
faculty to teach in these technical areas. By supporting the integration of
geospatial and unmanned aircraft systems technologies into community college
technical programs, this project has the potential to increase opportunities for
students to enter the technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
project are to: 1) develop new pathways for students at Germana Community
College to pursue technical education in geospatial technology and small
unmanned aircraft systems; 2) provide faculty professional development programs
that will prepare community college faculty for implementing courses that will
train students in this field; and 3) increase the number and diversity of
students in these technical programs through high school outreach activities.
The pathways at Germana Community College will include two stackable
certificates that students can use to complete requirements for an Associate of
Applied Science degree. To support the new pathways, an online course will be
developed that will facilitate completion of the remote pilot certificate.
Instructors will assess student learning through knowledge tests and videos of
students demonstrating their flying capabilities. The project will offer two
faculty institutes to train community college faculty in best practices for
implementing curricula relevant to these technologies. Training of faculty will
provide hands-on experiences with the technologies using project-based learning
that will span different disciplines aligned with participant interests. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.