* 2000538
* CAREER: Novel Photonic Structures Using Non-Hermitian Exceptional Points
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Mercedeh Khajavikhan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 09/30/2021
* USD 290,799.00

Abstract Title: Novel Photonic Structures for Lasers and Sensing by Using Gain
and Loss &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research aims to introduce a new paradigm in optics by utilizing the
unconventional properties of exceptional points arising in systems with gain and
loss. These features can be employed to build structures with customized
properties and functionalities- previously thought to be unattainable. The
applications of such developments range from on-chip communication systems, to
high power semiconductor lasers, to sensing. This research will result in a
better understanding of how amplification and attenuation can be independently
manipulated and harnessed in both optically and electrically pumped arrangement
and will shed light on the role and the fundamentals of exceptional points in
optics. In addition, the proposed work provides a bridge between mathematics,
quantum physics, and engineering while promoting the concept of exceptional
points in optics. These ideas could lead to new design tools that can be
deployed to address some of the long-standing problems in laser physics. If
successful, this effort could potentially transform chip-scale integrated
photonics and high power semiconductor laser technologies. Due to the
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed activity, the students engaged in this
project will have the opportunity to prepare for a broad range of future careers
by experiencing all the steps involved in a scientific endeavor, starting from
conceiving an idea that perhaps originates from mathematics, to experimentally
demonstrating the anticipated behavior, and finally building a prototype device.
By means of presentations, publications, and classroom/laboratory teaching, the
knowledge acquired during the course of this project will be disseminated to a
broader audience. This program will provide research opportunities not only to
graduate, but also to undergraduate, and K-12 students. Finally, students from
minority and under-represented groups will be proactively integrated into the
research environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will make use of the physics and peculiarities of
non-Hermitian exceptional points (EPs) in order to develop alternative
strategies in designing novel photonic devices that complement and/or improve
existing integrated photonic circuits. In a photonic system, exceptional points
can be advantageously introduced through a judicious interplay between
refractive index shaping and gain-loss contrast. Along these lines, two
endeavors associated with chip-scale photonic components and networks will be
pursued: (i) demonstrating a new class of single mode integrated lasers with
increased brightness and/or spectral purity, (ii) enhancing the sensing
characteristics of active photonic molecules by exploiting the inherent features
of higher-order exceptional points. The prospect of using InP technologies as a
versatile platform to explore the physics and applications of exceptional points
in optics will also be investigated.