* 2000330
* Excellence in Research: Biofilm Adhesive and Kinetic Properties Under Hydrodynamic Influences During Early Evolution Stages
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Patrick Ymele-Leki, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2024
* USD 712,172.00

Biofilms are aggregates of bacteria. Biofilms play important roles in
ecological, industrial, and biomedical processes of national relevance. For
example, they are associated with biofouling, where microorganisms attach to
surfaces and reduce the performance of machines. In medical fields, biofilms
play a key role in the development of antibiotic-resistant microorganisms.
Biofilms often form in wet environments under fluid flow. Although a large body
of knowledge on biofilm formation exists, little is known about how initial
single- and multi-cell interactions and fluid flow influence the growth and
final structure of biofilms. This project will analyze the fundamental processes
that govern cell interactions within a biofilm in fluid flow environments. The
results will improve understanding of the developmental stages of microbial
biofilm formation by investigating the bacteria cell responses under flow
conditions. This may ultimately lead to a way to control biofilm evolution.
These outcomes could also help with novel diagnosis and treatment methods for
problems caused by biofilms. This project is a collaboration between researchers
at two two Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and one national
lab. The institutions are Howard University, Florida A&amp;M University, the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. The project supports the
interdisciplinary training of underrepresented groups. Undergraduate, graduate,
and K-12 students in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics)
will participate at their respective institutions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Biofilms constitute an inherent part of the natural life cycle of
most microorganisms, and most bacterial biofilms develop under hydrodynamic
stress. The hypothesis is that the cost of growing and evolving in hydrodynamic
conditions for these banks of bacteria has a net effect of initiating and
promoting intrinsic physical, physiological, and kinetic properties that may
contribute to biofilm resistance and resilience. This project presents a novel
strategy to investigate the impact of hydrodynamics that occurs within bacterial
communities using live and model bacteria systems and high-resolution
fluorescent velocimetry. This research integrates theoretical and experimental
work with the following objectives: (1) Investigate the various hydrodynamic
conditions at the substratum boundary and their effect on the adhesion kinetics
and spatial distribution of bacterial cells and (2) Determine the impact of
hydrodynamic forces on the intercellular and interspecies interactions during
biofilm evolution, and (3) Develop a working model for predicting the kinetics
of recruitment and detachment of bacteria to and from biofilms under
hydrodynamic milieus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.