* 2000328
* RAPID:  The Impacts of Graduate Education Policies and Practices on the Success and Career Goals of Graduate Students in Physics &amp; Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Jordan Gerton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2021
* USD 198,143.00

Understanding and supporting graduate education policies and practices is
crucial to maintaining a well-trained workforce in the US, particularly for
careers that require a PhD in the critical areas of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM). Within this mandate it is essential that all
persons, regardless of background, are included in STEM training at the PhD
level. Among STEM disciplines, physics has shown persistent issues regarding
representation of persons from diverse backgrounds. This project will assess
current reforms in a US-based graduate physics and astronomy program to
understand their impacts on students’ educational experiences and success. The
results of this study will be used to refine the program at the University of
Utah and to develop best practices that can be adopted
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the 2018-19 academic year,
admissions into the Physics &amp; Astronomy graduate program at the University
of Utah was halted while a complete overhaul of all aspects of the program was
initiated by the Department. The program reform included the recruitment and
admissions process, orientation and teaching assistant training, advising
practices and other student support, the curriculum, and the exam structure. The
first incoming class of graduate students has now entered the new program and
are navigating these new policies and practices. The investigators will conduct
a qualitative semi-ethnographic study on the experiences and outcomes of
graduate students under the newly revised graduate program. This will be done by
conducting multiple interviews with the new cohort of students throughout their
first year in the program. Additionally, open ended survey data will be
collected from the legacy students in the program to understand their
experiences under the previous policies. This will offer a pseudo-control group
to further understand the changes created for students by the new policies. In
addition, the results will be the basis for a longitudinal study of graduate
student experiences at the University of Utah, and will be disseminated to the
broader community through the literature, conference presentations, and visits
to other departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.