* 2000275
* Excellence in Research: Investigating the Water Quality of the Lumber River
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Tonya Gerald Goins, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 196,600.00

North Carolina is under a state-wide fish consumption advisory due to the
presence of mercury in water. Mercury bioaccumulates through food webs and can
be harmful to human health. Several fish species in the Lumber River have been
contaminated with methylmercury. The Lumber River flows through Robeson county,
where many indigenous populations and African-Americans reside. Robeson county
is also located along the coast of North Carolina and has been battered by
hurricanes in the past, creating more water quality concerns. This project seeks
to analyze the mercury levels of water and sediment in the Lumber River. The
intellectual merit aspect of this project will lead to extra monitoring of
impaired watersheds especially those near minority communities. Broader Impacts
for this research include engaging underrepresented minorities in authentic
geoscience and providing insight to mercury contamination in freshwater sources
and elucidate solutions to these problems. The project will also support the
development of an early-career researcher at a Historically Black College and
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will generate water quality data
to assess the level of contamination and exposure that may be reaching
underserved populations in the Lumber River. The project will also serve to
develop research capacity at North Carolina Central University, a Historically
Black College and University, by 1) supporting the development of a professional
network in the hydrological sciences for an early career faculty who is a member
of underrepresented groups in STEM, 2) obtain preliminary data to build a
working hypothesis and 3) create and submit a competitive NSF-Excellence in
Research (EiR) proposal. The research activities involve collecting water and
sediment samples on a monthly basis from 2 sites along the Lumber river and
analyzing them for total mercury and methylmercury. Water quality parameters,
including pH, temperature, dissolved oxygen, turbidity and conductivity, will be
measured in situ to develop relationships between easily measured water quality
parameters and contamination. Broader impacts include the development of a
diverse workforce in earth sciences. The project will support participation of
underrepresented students in research and science dissemination. Students will
submit abstracts to present data at national conferences and will glean
laboratory skills that will make them marketable as they look for jobs and
graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.