* 2000685
* Collaborative Research: Preparing the Workforce for Industry 4.0's Intelligent Industrial Robotics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Khalid Tantawi, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 198,065.00

According to the International Federation of Robotics, nearly 75% of the global
market for next-generation industrial robotics is in China, Japan, Korea, and
Taiwan. To remain competitive, U.S. industries need to rapidly accelerate the
use of intelligent robotics. As a result, the nation needs to train highly
skilled technicians who can program, use, maintain, and repair intelligent
industrial robots. This collaborative project will address the nationâ€™s
shortfall of qualified technicians in intelligent industrial robotics. It
intends to do so by establishing a collaboration between academic institutions
and major manufacturers in the eastern and central regions of Tennessee and
Alabama. Together these partners will define the necessary skillset for the
next-generation industrial robotics technical workforce. They will also develop
a curriculum that will allow students to learn those skills. This project will
result in one of the first programs in the nation for workforce training in
intelligent robotics and artificial intelligence technologies. This effort will
thus support U.S. businesses and industries to rapidly and effectively
incorporate next-generation robotics in their
workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the following specific aims: 1)
develop intelligent robotics curricular modules; 2) implement train-the-trainer
workshops for educators; 3) identify skill sets needed for handling the next-
generation robotics; 4) develop a knowledge base of next-generation robotics for
secondary and post-secondary educators; and 5) increase public awareness of
next-generation robotics. By using a collaboration among four academic
institutions in the eastern and central regions of Tennessee and Alabama, and
involving major manufacturers in the region, the project expects to deliver
outcomes that will be sustainable and can be replicated or adapted at other
institutions. This project intends to develop one of the first programs in the
nation for workforce training at community and technical colleges in intelligent
robotics and artificial intelligence technologies. Since community and technical
college supply a significant percentage of the industrial workforce, this
project has the potential to help U.S. businesses and industries rapidly and
effectively incorporate next-generation robotics in their workplace. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.