* 2000863
* RAPID: MICROBIOME AND POPULATION DYNAMICS IN SCLERACTINIAN CORAL TISSUE LOSS DISEASE INFECTED CORALS IN PUERTO RICO
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Juan Cruz-Motta, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 10/31/2023
* USD 197,830.00

Modern coral reefs are the result of thousands of years of growth and
development, but their demise is occurring at alarming rates around the World.
In the Caribbean alone, over 60% of live coral cover has been lost in many reefs
in just 30-40 years. Consequently, their ecological and economic benefits to
coastal communities are also declining. Disease outbreaks and more intense and
frequent bleaching (loss of the microalgae in coral tissues) events associated
with increasing water temperatures are some of the main factors for coral reef
mass mortalities. The highly infectious and deadly Scleractinian Coral Tissue
Loss Disease (SCTLD), first identified in 2014 in Florida, is quickly moving
through the Caribbean causing extensive mortalities across important reef-
building corals. Current research is focused in after-infection events to
identify the pathogen and characterize the signs, patterns and consequences of
SCTLD transmission. This study investigates coral tissues and the coral-
associated bacteria communities before, during and after the infection has
occurred in reefs in Puerto Rico. The societal broader impact of the project
relates to the significant ecosystem services provided by coral reefs, which are
threatened by SCTLD. The project will also support training of a graduate
student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Questions about etiological variability and the
temporal dynamics of the microbiome in SCTLD-affected coral species remain
unanswered. Specifically, this proposal addresses the following questions: (1)
What are the changes in the microbiome composition and abundances of the
susceptible coral species when infected with SCTLD? (2) What is the variability
in virulence, prevalence and mortality within and amongst species in different
phases of the infection and in different habitats? The research site is in La
Parguera Natural Reserve, southwest Puerto Rico, where the research team has
characterized and monitored several reefs and environmental conditions from the
shore to the shelf edge since 2003. This project includes surveys of permanent
transects and molecular characterization of tissue/mucus samples, and microbial
communities within those, collected from healthy colonies of two to three of the
most susceptible coral species (i.e., Meandrina meandrites, M. jacksoni and
Orbicella faveolata) and colonies of two resistant species (i.e., Montastraea
cavernosa, Porites astreoides) at the long-term monitoring site. The expected
arrival of SCTLD to Puerto Rico in Fall 2019, offers the team of researchers a
unique window of opportunity to capture reef biological conditions before,
during and after infection to complement other research efforts to better
understand the ecological dynamics, prevalence and consequences of this new
deadly coral disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.