* 2000239
* Excellence in Research: Parallel Linear Feedback Shift Register Based Encryption on Commodity Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Daniel Okunbor, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,172.00

This research is an effort to advance knowledge in computer security as it
relates to cellular telecommunications and image encryption. The present digital
revolution with the ubiquitous mobile technologies and the surge in social media
usage raise serious security challenges. This project is designed to address
such challenges. The research will strengthen mobile device communication
channels in order to secure conversations, ensure that data is protected from
interception, and prevent cellular fraud from occurring. There are two prominent
standards for mobile networks in the country, and they are the Global System for
Mobile Communications and the Code Division Multiple Access. While the latter is
widely used in the United States, the former has become the de-facto standard
for global networks with its subscribers surpassing five billion in 2017. It is
estimated that this number will increase to 5.7 billion subscribers within the
next decade. This rapid growth brings with it security concerns that are
addressed in this project through the development and analyses of cost effective
and efficient encryption algorithms. The results and findings of the research
will be widely disseminated through print media, professional conferences,
seminars, and workshops. The software that will be developed from this research
project will be made publicly available. Undergraduate students from under-
represented minority groups in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
will be exposed to research in information security. Overall, the products from
this research will have far reaching benefits to the society in areas of secure
mobile communications, image encryption and the development of information
security research at Fayetteville State University (a historically black college
and one of the seventeen constituent institutions in the University of North
Carolina System).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Encrypted data transmissions through
mobile communication channels are potentially vulnerable to cryptographic
attacks since malicious agents may steal confidential information by running
algorithms that can break the security of the encrypted data. Secure transfer of
data through the combination of encryption and decryption, known as cipher, is
the general approach to solving this problem in mobile communications.
Specifically, stream ciphers do not suffer from propagation errors compared to
other ciphers, and they tend to have better software efficiency. This research
is focused on the applications of mobile communications and image encryption for
which stream ciphers are often the typical choice. The research will span many
aspects of stream ciphers, particularly Linear Feedback Shift Registers-based
stream ciphers and their relationships to binary primitive polynomials and
matrix operations. The project will include development of comprehensive
software libraries written in two prominent computer-programming languages;
comparative complexity and security analysis of algorithms that are stream-
based; application of Graphics Processing Unit clusters for cryptanalysis of
algorithms based on Compute Unified Device Architecture programming; engagement
of undergraduate students in authentic research; and building research capacity
in information security at Fayetteville State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.