* 2000190
* A New Technician Training Program for Advanced Building Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lora Eddington, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 455,641.00

This project aims to prepare future Air Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration
(AHR) technicians for the rapidly changing technological advances in Building
Automation Technology. Knowledge and skills in Building Automation Technology
are not included in traditional AHR training. This project intends to address a
serious workforce shortage in AHR by training skilled technicians to install and
maintain advanced building technologies. The project team will work with
industry to develop educational materials, equip a new laboratory, recruit
students into the Building Automation Technology pathway, and share best
practices. Qualified Building Automation Technology technicians will serve the
national interest by ensuring that buildings reach their potential energy
efficiency, contributing to energy savings that have positive environmental
impacts and national security implications. Properly implemented building
controls, which students will learn in apprenticeships and in a new Building
Automation Technology laboratory, will also improve occupantsâ€™ productivity and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a new Building Automation
Technology program to prepare students for new and high-demand technical
careers. Goals include developing four new Building Automation Technology
courses and a building technology laboratory to support the courses; providing
faculty professional development opportunities; and recruiting new students into
the program, especially women and underrepresented minorities. The project will
work with the Building Efficiency for a Sustainable Tomorrow Center and industry
partners to ensure that the program will be aligned with industry workforce
needs and will result in high quality educational resources, including a
Building Automation Technology laboratory that emulates actual building
conditions. The Building Automation Technology program will support life-long
educational pathways including work-based learning, apprenticeships, and four-
year options. Upon validation of the curriculum and laboratory best practices,
materials will be disseminated across the North Carolina Community College
System and through the Building Efficiency for a Sustainable Tomorrow Center.
This project will help inform the technical education community about effective
practices for recruiting women and underrepresented minorities, implementing
apprenticeship programs, and developing Building Automation Technology programs.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.