* 2000021
* Collaborative Research: ECR EIE DCL: The Development and Validation of a Scale to Assess Epistemic Exclusion in Minoritized and Non-Minoritized STEM Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kristie Dotson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 550,194.00

This collaborative research project, involving Michigan State University, the
University of North Texas and the University of Michigan, will examine whether
epistemic exclusion, a form a scholarly devaluation, may create a barrier to the
full inclusion and participation of women and faculty of color in STEM.
Epistemic exclusion is the devaluation of certain types of scholarship that
occurs when invisible biases in systems of evaluation are coupled with prejudice
toward, and negative stereotypes about, historically underrepresented groups.
Because faculty members' career outcomes (e.g., promotion, tenure, and turnover
intentions) are determined by how well they meet evaluative standards, bias in
systems of evaluation that disproportionately harm women and faculty of color
may impede their retention and advancement in academia. The project team will
create and validate a scale assessing faculty epistemic exclusion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of the project have the potential to benefit
society by providing a tool that researchers can use to investigate epistemic
exclusion in STEM faculty. Advancing this line of research may result in
potential interventions and policy changes at institutions of higher education
that improve the retention and promotion of women and underrepresented minority
STEM faculty at our nationâ€™s colleges and universities. There is a plan for
dissemination to scholarly audiences through peer-reviewed presentation and
publications in professional journals that will help inform the research and
academic communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental
research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development. The ECR program supports the accumulation
of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and
suggest intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM
interest, education, learning and participation. The project was co-funded by
the NSF ADVANCE program which supports the implementation of organizational
change strategies to address systemic inequities that impact women in STEM
faculty careers. The project was also funded by the Alliances for Graduate
Education and Professoriate (AGEP) program, which funds projects designed to
advance knowledge about increasing the number of African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, Native American Indians, Native Hawaiians and Native Pacific
Islanders in STEM faculty careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.