* 2000539
* Enhancing Welding Technician Education through the Transition of the National Center for Welding Education to a Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Monica Pfarr, Lorain County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,799,256.00

Welding and materials joining are basic requirements for most types of
manufacturing. Welders and welding technicians are employed in diverse fields,
including energy, mining, construction, agricultural equipment manufacturing,
and ship and automotive manufacturing. The complexity of the welding field
continues to advance and change. For example, to do their work, today's welding
professionals need knowledge in chemistry, metallurgy, materials science,
physics, mathematics, codes and standards, and inspection techniques. A report
from the Economic Modeling Specialists predicts a clear need for skilled
welders, partly because of retirements in the existing workforce. The Welding
Education and Training (Weld-Ed) Resource Center will address the changing
welding industry and the need to disseminate current industry data to welding
instructors and industry professionals. It will also support welding programs
with competency-based curricular materials, professional development activities
for teachers and faculty, and the development of an accreditation program for
two-year institution welding programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To complement and
enhance its portfolio of services to improve welding technician education, the
Weld-Ed Resource Center aims to achieve the following goals: continue to offer
professional development workshops at ten regional partner sites; develop new
instructional modules for instructors and an online Welding Simulation activity
for high school students; develop a Resource Guide to Outreach Events that will
provide guidelines and examples to assist partners in creating additional
events; develop STEM lessons for faculty to deliver to students in grades 7
through 9; develop a welding technology application for smart devices; and
encourage partners to develop activities that will increase the enrollment of
underrepresented populations in all levels of welding technology and welding
engineering programs. Examples of these activities include a collaboration with
the Society of Women Engineers, providing technical assistance to welding
instructors in the Job Corps program, and development of a new series of
Students in Welding videos featuring diverse students preparing for welding
careers. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.