* 2000511
* STEM Literacies, Learning, and Identities through Cascading Models of Near-Peer Mentorship
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Eli Tucker-Raymond, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,155,005.00

Despite decades-long efforts to broaden STEM participation, the
underrepresentation of people from communities of color persists in STEM across
many areas, including, for example, laboratory work, engineering, and teaching.
Research suggests that more expansive STEM learning opportunities are possible
in school and out of school when youth have opportunities to develop and share
their experience with others, both in and beyond the classroom. Mentoring is a
widely accepted strategy for supporting youth learning and identity development
across a variety of sectors including education and workforce development. There
is broad concern, however, that more empirical research needs to be done,
especially related to middle school and high school youth in STEM. Young people
can be effective leaders in both formal and informal learning contexts and such
mentorship and pedagogy can lead to STEM learning and positive identity
development with implications for broadening participation. In formal and
informal contexts, having youth act in facilitator roles holds promise for
identification with engaging in STEM content and practices. As such, this
project investigates the ways in which young people construct and develop
affiliations with STEM in their capacity as mentors, facilitators, and curators
of STEM ideas and practices among younger youth. Additionally, the project
outcomes seek to understand the design of formal and informal learning
environments that support STEM identity development for youth of color by
orienting to youth as knowledgeable experts and focusing on youth's ongoing
pedagogical development as mentors in STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In partnership
with two informal and two formal learning partners in the Boston area, this
project will work with 140 young people, aged 14-24, 96% from communities of
color, who participate in activities related to youth mentoring initiatives in
STEM areas. These partners have a rich history of initiatives focused on
developing high school and college youth mentors to work in STEM summer camps
and juniors and seniors in high school to mentor freshmen and sophomores in
mathematics and digital fabrication engineering. The project intends to
investigate how youth mentors teach, where they are successful and where they
need support, and to develop principles for professional learning opportunities
for schools and out-of-school organizations. The project focuses, in particular,
on understanding “youth pedagogical development” (YPD), or youth’s ongoing
process of learning to be mentors. Exploring YPD involves understanding youth’s
learning of STEM ideas, literacies, and pedagogical strategies and how youth
come to identify with STEM and STEM mentoring. Youth mentors can reach large
numbers of learners, and more importantly they can connect deeply with other
youth in meaningful ways. This participatory project draws on ethnographic and
case study methods and employs areas of work shown to support broadening
participation in STEM: a) prior research on youth as mentors in STEM learning;
b) distributions of power and authority in formal and informal learning
contexts; c) academic identity development; and d) STEM literacies. By
collecting and analyzing data from four different contexts with organizations
that have shared values and practices, including distributed authority for
knowing, the partnership intends to understand program design principles that
support students as mentors in regard to STEM literacies, learning, identity
development, and pedagogy. By following youth mentors over two years, the case
studies will highlight how STEM learning, identity building, and pedagogy are
developed when youth participate as mentors in sustained ways over longer
stretches of time. In addition to disseminating this work at academic
conferences, the project will have a website that will be useful to other
community groups and schools that utilize mentoring practices and will host a
conference that will involve all partner organizations as well as groups from
around the US who use mentoring to support STEM learning and identity
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.