* 2000136
* Excellence in Research: Optimizing Quantum Circuits for Fast Cryptanalyzing Pre-Quantum Encryptions and Securing Post-Quantum Cryptographies
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Shuangbao Wang, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 04/30/2024
* USD 439,852.00

This project promotes the progress of science in quantum computing algorithms
and cryptologic techniques in order to improve security of encrypted
information, which will have national security and defense applications.
Currently, the commonly used encryption algorithms such as RSA are considered
“unbreakable” by modern digital computers due to the complexity of computation
that would be required. However, this may change in the next decade or so in
light of advances in quantum science. Quantum mechanics has led to the discovery
that considerable numbers of states can be manipulated at the same time thus
significantly reduce the amount of time in processing. New quantum computers
have shown the baseline of “quantum supremacy” in solving problems that
classical digital computers practically cannot. Efficient quantum algorithms are
key to enable computer scientists to take full advantage of the next generation
of practical quantum computers to efficiently solve today’s unsolvable problems.
Advances in quantum science in both breaking and securing the encryptions are
paramount for national security and preventing adversaries from taking advantage
of critical areas of national defense. This project seeks to discover efficient
quantum cryptologic methods (i.e. the art of revealing the secret) and secure
quantum cryptographic techniques (i.e. the science of making the secret more
secure). This project not only exhibits the excellence in scientific research,
but also supports diversity and inclusion goals for the benefit of society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum cryptoanalysis plays an important role in finding
vulnerabilities of existing crypto systems. It can also become an effective tool
in fighting adversaries in cyber operations. Efficient quantum algorithms are
indispensable to the utilization of quantum computer resources to solve today’s
unsolvable problems. It has the potential to break the current crypto systems
such as RSA with the advances of next-generation quantum computers. Currently,
most quantum cryptanalytic algorithms have limited capability to factor multiple
integers due to the fact that each Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT), the speed
machine to find out a period of a particular integer, requires a unique quantum
circuit. According to Shor’s algorithm, once the period is found, finding
factors (crypto keys) becomes easy. To break the RSA encryption, one needs to
design a unique quantum circuit for each integer being exploited. Since there
are a large number of integers to exploit, the current one integer-one circuit
factor finding approach is not practically useful. This project aims to discover
techniques to automatically generate quantum circuits and factor multiple
integers at once. The research also explores how artificial intelligence can
assist in designing efficient quantum algorithms and test those algorithms using
quantum simulators and on real quantum computers. Computational-wise, the
project speeds up the cryptanalytic process by improving the order of
approximation significantly on top of a polynomial degree that the QFT has saved
from the unsolvable exponential degree. The findings from this research will
have significant impact on both quantum cryptology and quantum cryptography.
This research seeks to transform cryptanalytic study from theoretical to
practical, and improve the integrity of the next-generation Quantum
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.