* 2000029
* Excellence in Research: Yakubovsky Calculations for Six-Nucleon Bound States
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Mohammadreza Hadizadeh, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2024
* USD 367,591.00

Understanding the structure and properties of the atomic nucleus, which is about
100,000 times smaller than the atom it lives inside, and the fundamental forces
between the protons and neutrons that constitute the nucleus, has been made
possible by quantum theory. In quantum mechanics, this information can be
acquired by solving the Schroedinger Equation, which describes the properties of
the physical system. This equation describes how protons and neutrons are
confined inside a nucleus by the Strong Nuclear Force. This project will allow
the development of sophisticated computer algorithms and programs in a parallel
environment to solve the Schroedinger Equation for Helium-6 and Lithium-6
nuclei. These are each light nuclei consisting of six nucleons. The PI will
mentor undergraduate STEM students at the Central State University (CSU), a
historically black college. The students will gain practical skills in parallel
programming and high-performance computing, while gaining confidence in using
computational physics to study the structure of atomic nuclei. CSU students will
learn the critical skills of computer programming and numerical methods by
participating in this project, thereby increasing their qualifications for the
STEM workforce or advanced degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Schroedinger
Equation is often solved to benchmark and develop nucleon-nucleon interaction
models in nuclear physics. Although the study of a six-nucleon bound state is
computationally a challenging and expensive problem, its investigation provides
insights into the rich structure of nuclear interactions. The main goal of this
project is the numerical solution of the Schroedinger Equation in the Faddeev-
Yakubovsky form in momentum space to calculate the six-nucleon binding energy
and wave function. This project aims to implement the numerical solution of six-
nucleon Yakubovsky equations in a partial wave decomposition by developing the
relevant parallel computer algorithms and codes. This investigation will show
how the full solution of coupled Faddeev-Yakubovsky integral equations in a
complete six-body treatment can probe the modern two- and three-nucleon
interactions. It also provides an in-depth insight into the halo structure of
He-6 and also the ground state properties of Li-6. This project has potential
broader impacts beyond nuclear physics. The existence of six-body bound systems
in other areas of physics, ranging from atomic physics (exploration of Efimov
physics in ultracold quantum gases) to particle physics (dibaryon resonance
composed of six quarks), brings a broader application of the project and its
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.