* 2000980
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: Mainstream deammonification by ion exchange and bioregeneration via partial nitritation/anammox
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2024
* John Kuhn, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2024
* USD 207,443.00

Conventional wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) are designed to remove harmful
microorganisms, organic matter, and nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus. They
achieve this using a combination of physical, chemical, and biological treatment
processes. Recent research has established that the integrated biological
process called partial nitritation and anammox (PN/A) can remove nitrogen while
reducing energy costs or even producing energy. However, the concentration of
ammonia in domestic wastewater is too low to support the growth of the
microorganisms required to carry out the PN/A process. The goal of this project
is to develop a novel system to create the conditions needed to run the PN/A
process. To achieve this goal, an interdisciplinary team of researchers will
pool their knowledge and resources to improve the PN/A process using low-cost
naturally occurring mineral ion exchange (IX) material called zeolite. These
will be combined to develop IX-PN/A reactors to create conditions for the growth
of PN/A microbes. The team will then investigate and optimize the reactor
operating conditions that favor the IX-PN/A process. Successful completion of
this project will benefit society through the development of new designs for
next-generation sustainable WWTPs. Further benefits to society will be achieved
through student training and education including the recruitment and mentoring
of students from community colleges and underrepresented groups in Pennsylvania
and Florida. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasingly stringent nutrient discharge
limits and concerns with energy consumption have driven a shift from energy-
intensive wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) to more sustainable energy
positive resource recovery facilities. Integrated partial nitritation and
anammox (PN/A) is one such process that has the potential to enable significant
reductions in the energy consumption and carbon footprint of conventional WWTPs.
However, the concentration of ammonia in domestic wastewater is too low for the
microorganisms required to carry out the PN/A process to flourish. The goal of
this project is to develop the fundamental knowledge required to advance the
implementation of the PN/A process into conventional WWTPs. To achieve this
goal, the research team will couple ion exchange (IX) with the PN/A process to
create the microenvironment needed to improve the kinetics of the PN/A process.
This will be achieved using new zeolite-based biofilm carriers in conjunction
with novel bioreactor designs and operational strategies to advance the IX-PN/A
process. The specific research objectives of this project are to: 1) evaluate
the effects of reactor configuration and operating conditions on the performance
of the IX-PN/A; 2) investigate the synergistic metabolic processes of the PN/A
microorganisms using genomics and molecular tools; and 3) characterize flow and
reactive transport in attached-growth biofilms using X-ray microtomography
(micro CT). Successful completion of this project has potential for
transformative impact through the development of new knowledge that will reduce
the carbon footprint of biological nutrient removal processes used in WWTPs to
manage eutrophication and health issues caused by nitrogen
discharge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.