* 2000577
* Investigating the Benefits of Using Worked Examples to Improve Mathematical Explanations for Students Who Struggle
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Barbara Dougherty, RG Research Group
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,498,511.00

When students explain their solution approaches in mathematics, they are able to
make linkages with prior knowledge, build new insights, and deepen their
understanding of the mathematics they are learning. Students with mathematics
difficulties (those performing below the 25th percentile) struggle to articulate
their understanding of mathematical principles as they explain their solution
approaches. Learning and understanding fractions in upper elementary school is
especially challenging for students and often impedes learning for students as
they advance in middle and high school mathematics. The purpose of the project
is to improve mathematical explanations for students who struggle in
mathematics, specifically with fractions. To accomplish this, the project will
investigate the benefits of worked examples (i.e., already worked-out problems)
as a mechanism to improve explanations for students who struggle. The project
will develop worked example materials focused on fractions concepts for use with
students with mathematics difficulties in Grade 5 and examine whether this
approach to instruction enhances students’ mathematical explanations during
intervention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project consists of three
phases: development work, two short-duration randomized controlled trials
(RCTs), and a feasibility pilot study followed by a multi-site RCT. First, the
team will develop various types of worked examples (correct vs. incorrect
solutions; one vs. two solutions) that address critical fractions concepts and
operations in Grade 5 standards. Researchers will then conduct two short-
duration RCTs to determine which worked example types are most promising for
developing explanations for students with mathematics difficulties. Finally,
worked example materials will be further developed and embedded as an
instructional component into a previously validated fractions intervention.
Intervention lessons will be examined in a feasibility pilot, which will be
followed by a multi-site RCT. Eighty eligible students will be randomly assigned
to receive small-group fractions intervention with worked examples or business-
as-usual control. Student data will include measures of fractions concepts and
procedures and assessments of written and verbal explanations. Assessments of
working memory and attention will also be included. Implementation data will be
collected using fidelity of treatment instruments and the CLASS observation
system. Data analysis procedures involve a two-level hierarchical model and will
explicitly account for the nesting of students in small instructional groups in
the treatment condition but not in the control condition. A moderator analysis
will be conducted by adding the interaction of condition with prior fractions
knowledge, working memory, and attention. This project is supported by the EHR
Core Research Program (ECR) which supports fundamental research on STEM teaching
and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.