* 2000902
* Preparing High School and Community College Students for the Cybersecurity Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* John Scarpino, Pittsburgh Technical Institute
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 02/29/2024
* USD 359,995.00

The growing number and sophistication of cybersecurity threats have created a
need for many more workers with the knowledge and skills to protect digital
infrastructure. To ensure the security of computers and information systems, all
sectors need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect, and investigate
cybersecurity breaches. Toward meeting this need, the project will launch a
project designed to align K-12 curricula with industry needs and to foster
proficiency in cybersecurity for students in the Pittsburgh area. Through this
project, the College aims to: (1) increase the number of students, especially
students from underrepresented groups, in its cybersecurity-focused associate
degree program in information technology; (2) improve instruction to better
prepare students for the local cybersecurity workforce; and (3) introduce
educational activities into secondary schools to prepare students for further
education in cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop
an innovative model for partnerships with high schools by collaborating with the
Beaver County Career and Technology Center, which works with more than 17 high
schools in the Pittsburgh area to prepare students in technical areas, including
cybersecurity. To broaden participation in cybersecurity, the project team will
target middle school and Career Tech Center students from underserved
communities for participation in summer camps, cybersecurity competitions,
conferences, and mentoring. To expand and strengthen cybersecurity instruction,
the project team will engage teachers in applied active-learning-and-teaching
methods using virtual lab environments and will offer workshops on curriculum
development and topics in cybersecurity. To align the college's cybersecurity
curriculum with needs of business and industry, the project team will enhance
the advisory board's role in shaping the curriculum, providing presentations
about the field, mentoring students, and designing internships and other
pathways to jobs. The project will add instruction that helps students research
the requirements for specific cybersecurity jobs and connect those requirements
with the knowledge and skills they are developing in their coursework. The
project evaluation will examine the effectiveness of virtual environments in
training job-ready cybersecurity students, the effectiveness of industry-led
approaches for encouraging high school students to apply to two-year
cybersecurity programs, and the effectiveness of practices to engage
business/industry partners in designing and developing curricula and recruiting
students from underrepresented groups. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of technicians
for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.