* 2000964
* Using the Pathways in Technology Early College High School (P-TECH) Model to Build the Future Cybersecurity Technical Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Brandon Shaffer, Front Range Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 494,175.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a critical need and a major
challenge. To meet it, business, industry, and government need well-prepared
technicians who can prevent, detect, and investigate cybersecurity breaches. The
growth of cyber-threats has created a need for many more workers who have the
knowledge and skills to protect digital infrastructure. For example, in Boulder
County, Colorado, the location of this project, an analysis in 2019 found more
than 800 open cybersecurity positions. In this project, Front Range Community
College and St. Vrain Valley School District, along with industry partners, will
collaborate to develop and implement a Pathways in Technology Early College High
School (P-TECH) program in cybersecurity. This project is expected to build a
diverse pipeline of cybersecurity technicians to address the significant
regional workforce shortage. The P-TECH model was pioneered in 2011 by the New
York City Public Schools in partnership with IBM and the New York City College
of Technology. The P-TECH model provides students with a high school diploma, an
associate degree in a high-demand technical field, and significant industry work
experience, at no cost. Front Range Community College, St. Vrain Valley School
District, and IBM launched the first P-TECH program in the western United States
in 2016, focused on the field of computer information systems. This project will
develop a new P-TECH program in cybersecurity. A primary goal is to provide
underrepresented students, including first-generation college students, minority
students, and girls, with a strong pathway into the technology
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new cybersecurity P-TECH program will be
implemented through a partnership involving Front Range Community College, St.
Vrain Valley School District, and several major companies. With college
coursework beginning in students' 9th Grade year, this project will provide
participants with a high school diploma, an associate degree with a
concentration in cybersecurity, and significant industry experience, all within
four to six years and at no cost to the students. The project will serve two
cohorts of 30 students over the project period, with the intent of expanding
cohort size to 50-60 students beginning in 2023. When full capacity is reached
(after the end of this award), the program is expected to enroll approximately
200-250 students and graduate approximately 50 new technicians annually. The
course of study within the program will be co-developed with the industry
partners to address industry's skill needs. Students will receive significant
work-based learning opportunities, including work site visits, mentoring by
industry professionals, and paid internships. Upon graduation from the program,
students will have the skills and competencies, including "soft skills,"
necessary to successfully transition to a cybersecurity position at one of the
partnering companies. Because the P-TECH model is still relatively new, this
project will also provide an opportunity to study this holistic approach to
technician education, which brings together K-12, postsecondary, and industry
partners to collaboratively deliver a rigorous and applied course of study in
one of the country's most in-demand technical fields. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program, which focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.