* 2000140
* Collaborative Research: A Deeply Integrated Physics-Based and Data-Driven Approach for Effective Resilience Management of the Power Grid
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Roshanak Nateghi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 305,000.00

This grant will develop a novel, deeply integrated physics-based data-driven
approach to assess and enhance the resilience of power transmission systems
impacted by climatic extremes. The US electricity infrastructure is increasingly
prone to climatic risks that cause wide-spread and sustained outages, costing
billions of dollars annually. While natural hazard-induced failures in the
transmission grid lead to large-scale and costly impacts, the existing
transmission expansion planning models largely neglect resilience consideration
of the network facing natural hazards. The purely data-driven approaches
prevalent in resilience analytics of power distribution systems, however, are
not applicable to transmission systems due to relative scarcity of data. A
unilateral reliance on physics-based models is not feasible either due to their
extreme computational costs, limiting their ability to scale up to the network
level. This NSF grant seeks to address this fundamental gap via deep integration
of physics-based and data driven methods. The outcome of this research is
expected to help key decision-makers for the transmission infrastructure to
characterize resilience under various uncertain future scenarios and identify
optimal adaptation or mitigation strategies. The research program is
complemented with educating the next generation of scholars in modeling hazards
and infrastructure resilience through an interdisciplinary, research-integrated
educational program, a strong commitment to increased diversity in student
training and broad dissemination of the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research approach is grounded in the latest developments in big data analytics
as well as physics-based analysis of structural failures. The physics-guided,
data-centric and multiscale framework allows for scalable assessment of network
resilience and identification of optimal investment decisions under climate
uncertainty. Using the state-of-the-art machine learning and computer vision,
the project will generate new publicly accessible data on transmission network
topology as well as hazardsâ€™ impacts to facilitate further research in
transmission resilience planning within the scientific community. Novel limit
state functions for failure quantification of transmission networks will be
established and a scalable approach to uncertainty quantification of structural
systems will be developed. The multiscale approach to modeling uncertain
processes will effectively fuse data on transmission systems with computational
models of the infrastructure. The developed methodologies and data will shed new
lights on the vulnerability of the transmission system under future hazard
scenarios, and enable assessing the impact of investment decisions on
transmission system resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.