* 2000500
* American Political Science Association Dissertation Improvement Grants
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Kimberly Mealy, American Political Science Association
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,410,000.00

The APSA Dissertation Improvement Grant promotes the progress of science by
identifying and supporting doctoral dissertation research projects that have the
potential to advance knowledge of citizenship, government, and politics,
knowledge that will advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare. It
expands on the success of the current NSF program by drawing on APSA’s networks
and programming to promote diversity and representation throughout the
recruitment, selection, and support of awardees. Each year the program will
provide research support for up to twenty research projects, as well as
professional development and public engagement resources, to amplify the effect
of the award on the awardee’s career and on the impact of their work. Along with
its direct effects on the potential for supported research to advance knowledge,
this project will also support increased participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in political science research by recruiting diverse
applicant and reviewer pools to support doctoral students from diverse groups
and institutions. In addition, the project will support increased public
engagement with political science through ongoing attention to training and
support for public engagement to strengthen and enhance the exchange between the
public and political scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The APSA Dissertation
Improvement Grant project will support doctoral dissertation research in
political science to enhance and improve the conduct of doctoral dissertation
projects. The program will be executed by APSA staff and supervised by the APSA
Executive Director. The APSA Dissertation Improvement Grant program will award
up to twenty grants yearly of between $10,000 and $15,000 to support doctoral
dissertation research that advances knowledge and understanding of citizenship,
government, and politics. Awards will support basic research (applied research
will not be funded) which is theoretically derived and empirically oriented.
Successful proposals will focus on research costs not normally covered by the
student’s university and will be evaluated based on their intellectual merit and
broader impact. The program will also connect awardees to APSA’s extensive
professional development and public engagement networks and resources, to
amplify the effect of the award on the awardee’s career and on the impact of
their work. This project will advance knowledge through support of highly
promising doctoral dissertation research in political science. Importantly, it
will maximize impact through diversifying the applicant pool, thus identifying
and supporting dissertation research that will explore solutions to a wide range
of institutional, political, and social challenges. Through recruiting diverse
applicant and reviewer pools to support doctoral students from diverse groups
and institutions, this program will also have a broader benefit to society by
supporting increased participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
political science research and the development of a diverse, globally
competitive political science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.