* 2000483
* A Regression Discontinuity Study of the Impact of Mathematics Achievement Fund on Student Outcomes
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Zeyu Xu, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2023
* USD 939,673.00

Socioeconomic and racial gaps in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) participation can sometimes be traced back to discrepancies in
mathematics skills that emerge at kindergarten entry. Importantly, children who
exhibit early lags in mathematics development may also demonstrate lower growth
rates in mathematics skills later. Consequently, early gaps in mathematics
skills may widen over the course of schooling. How to diagnose and correct
mathematics shortcomings early is a challenge that K–12 schools must confront
systematically. Unlike reading, few states currently have a coherent statewide
program for early mathematics intervention. Kentucky’s Mathematics Achievement
Fund (MAF)—a statewide K-3 mathematics intervention program—is a prime example
of a state’s effort to intervene early on to change a student’s mathematics
development trajectory. By using a quasi-experimental design with data gathered
during the implementation of MAF, this study will provide valuable information
on how states can structure and provide resources to support early mathematics
intervention efforts. The project will connect research and practice and add
much-needed information to the existing knowledge base that states can use when
considering early-grade mathematics programs. The proposed project is a joint
effort between the American Institutes for Research and the Kentucky Department
of Education and is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing early-grade mathematics interventions
tend to be one-off, localized efforts, usually without a coherent or sustainable
strategy, and often implemented by experimenters or supported by vendors of
prepackaged interventions. Interventions that show promising results are
typically small-scale studies, whereas large-scale studies often find null
benefits. This project is designed to examine the causal effects of MAF on
student outcomes in a regression discontinuity framework. In particular, the
project will use student-level administrative data and original data collected
through surveys and interviews to examine the causal effects of MAF on students’
academic and non-academic outcomes both immediately after the intervention and
in later grades. The project will also investigate who is likely to benefit from
MAF and under what conditions and conduct a cost-effectiveness analysis of the
program. The project will contribute to the existing literature in several ways.
First, most existing studies on early mathematics interventions focus on student
outcomes at the end of the intervention. There is evidence that large, short-run
effects on student scores in early grades could dissipate over time. By tracking
some 3rd-grade students into high school, the project plans to examine the
extent to which the short-term benefits of the MAF program, if any, persist over
time. Further, the project will also explore how MAF may affect other aspects of
children’s schooling experiences such as possible spillover effects of MAF on
other subjects and non-test outcomes like middle school course-taking and
student engagement. In this way, the proposed project seeks to catalyze new
knowledge that will help inform the discussion on systematic, coherent early-
grade mathematics policies at the state level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.