* 2000444
* Modernizing Agriculture Technician Education in Appalachian Northeast Georgia
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kevin Peyton, NORTH GEORGIA TECHNICAL COLLEGE
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,795.00

This project aims to address the growing need for agricultural technicians in
Northeast Georgia. The agriculture industry is increasingly driven by precision
technologies that maximize productivity and minimize waste and environmental
hazards. These processes require advanced mechanization and global navigation
satellite systems for implementation. To prepare agricultural technicians for
work in precision technologies, the project will develop two agriculture
technology programs that are aligned to local agricultural industry needs. These
programs will be designed so that students can develop both technical and higher
order competencies and industry-supported credentials. With these skills and
credentials, the students will be able to enter the agricultural technician
workforce at middle-skilled levels. This project aims to increase the skilled
technical workforce in Northeast Georgia, thus increasing the ability of
employers to recruit skilled agricultural technicians locally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to develop two new academic programs
that can prepare students for technical work in modern agricultural industries:
Agribusiness; and Modern Diversified Agriculture. Two complementary goals will
be pursued. The first is to develop experiential, diversified curricula specific
to the needs of the local agriculture industry. The second is to recruit and
retain Appalachian students in these agricultural technician programs. The
curricula will be designed through a partnership with the agriculture industry
and local agriculture advisory committee members. The curricula will focus on
providing students with hands-on opportunities in the context of learning
laboratories. The project will engage a pool of student who are largely untapped
due to a lack of awareness of the available positions and a lack of access to
the technical education needed to fill the positions. Information in the project
annual evaluation reports will be used to measure project success, to adjust
strategies, and to inform stakeholders about project progress. The project will
also investigate how the community, through its higher education institutions,
can engage the agriculture industry and Appalachian families and students in
preparing agriculture technicians for well-paying, local jobs. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.