* 2000462
* New Pathways and Partnerships to Prepare Highly Skilled Automotive Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Harry Bennett, Victor Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The rate of technological advancement in the automotive industry increases every
year, as each automobile manufacturer releases new models that incorporate new
technology. To help keep pace with these advances, this project plans to develop
a pipeline from high school through college and into the automotive technician
workforce. Students in the pipeline will be able to earn certificates or an
Associate of Science degree in Automotive Technology. In addition, faculty will
update their knowledge about innovations in automobile design and function, so
they can improve their courses. The project includes collaborations with local
industry to expand student opportunities and meet the needs of local businesses.
By educating current and future automotive technicians, the project will provide
access to a well-paying profession. As a result, this project has the potential
to have strong, positive impacts for the rural, high poverty community in which
the project is situated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is grounded in a
professional learning exchange among students, faculty, and master automotive
dealership technicians. The project will enable participants to move as a cohort
through a curricular pathway with integrated support services to boost retention
and completion rates. Aspects of this support include a tailored First Year
Experience course, a dedicated academic counselor, and general education classes
with automotive themes. Students will earn an Associate of Science degree and/or
certificates in automotive technology that meet both industry preparation
standards and the needs of local employers. As part of their education, students
will complete eighteen months of on-the-job learning in local dealerships and
have opportunities to earn industry recognized certifications. The education
program will prepare students for the industry-recognized Automotive Service
Excellence certification test for master technicians. Local dealerships are the
leading employer of automotive technicians and the proposed project will
formalize newly created partnerships between the college and these businesses.
For example, automotive technology faculty members will perform externships
alongside dealership technicians, thus allowing faculty to increase their
knowledge of and their ability to incorporate technical advances into their
courses. Representatives of local automotive dealerships will serve on an
advisory committee and as professional experts in the college classroom. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.