* 2000568
* Developing Pathways to Engineering Technology Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Martin Mason, Mount San Antonio College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 594,293.00

To help meet an increased demand for engineering technicians in the Los Angeles,
California region, this project will create multiple academic pathways to obtain
engineering technician skills and credentials. These pathways include programs
for associate degrees or certificates in software, civil, mechanical, or
electrical and computer engineering technology. A summer bridge program will
assist high school students in making a successful transition from high school
to the new engineering technology programs. The core courses of the academic
pathways will use project-based learning to engage students in challenging
technical problems and provide opportunities for students to work on their
projects in the college’s new makerspace facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goals of this project are to: (1) to help students develop workplace-
relevant skills by integrating project-based learning into the curriculum; (2)
provide student support services to successfully orient, retain, and matriculate
students from underserved populations: (3) create multiple pathways from college
to career, via certificate and degree programs in engineering technology, and
(4) support academic transfer to four year programs. An on-campus summer bridge
program will engage incoming students in engineering projects, provide access to
real-world engineering tools and the college’s makerspace, and provide
experiential learning in laboratory activities. This project will study the
effects of student participation in project-based learning and the summer bridge
program on student retention and completion rates in the degree and certificate
programs. Disaggregation of the data will be used to understand the impacts on
underserved student populations. Lessons learned about best practices for
makerspace-facilitated project-based learning will be disseminated to other
community colleges through the American Society for Engineering Education
conference and the High Impact Technology Exchange Conference. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.