* 2000573
* Building Biobadges Into a Traditional Biology Program to Fulfill Workforce Needs and Support Program Equity
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Michal Shuldman, CHABOT-LAS POSITAS COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,990.00

This project aims to serve the national need for a well-prepared biotechnology
workforce. It will do so by developing new lab modules based on industry-
recognized skills for each course in the biology major sequence. Students will
be able to earn badges that certify their mastery of each workforce-relevant
skill. Accumulation of badges will lead to Certificates of Completion, which
will provide concise information about a student's proficiencies. This approach
incorporates technician education into a traditional biology program that has a
current focus on preparation of its graduates for transfer into four-year
institutions. By expanding the program focus to include preparation of students
for technical careers, this approach is intended to address an important
workforce need in the San Francisco Bay Area. This new pathway is expected to
open the biotechnology program to more students and to promote completion of the
entire biology major sequence as students accumulate critical workforce skills.
Because the college serves a large Latinx student population, this approach is
likely to contribute to broadening participation in the biotechnology field. The
project has the potential to provide a novel model that might be replicated by
academic biology programs interested in meeting local workforce needs for
biotechnology technicians.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goal of
embedding relevant technician education into the biology program, the project
will develop lab modules and badge requirements in collaboration with local
biotechnology industry partners. With input from the advisory board and local
industry surveys, the project has identified needed technical skills. These
skills, such as micropipetting, DNA and protein extraction and purification, and
enzyme-linked immunoassay, will be the foundation of the modules and badges. The
lab modules will become part of each course, thereby ensuring that all students
develop biotechnology skills. Although the badges will not be required, they
will be strongly recommended, especially for students considering temporary or
career-long work as technicians in the local workforce. Badging will support
many students by providing a pathway of incremental and achievable steps
embedded in course completion. Pairing badges with in-class career-development
activities and providing industry examples (through speaker series and other
events) will provide a new, clear career pathway into biotechnology within the
existing biology major. In addition to developing the labs and badges, the
project will support technician-level biotechnology education with targeted
recruiting at the college and the local high schools, and by collaborating with
employers to secure paid internships and job placements. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.