* 2000488
* CRII: CSR: GPU-Accelerated, Multi-Display Applications for Large Computer-Aide Design (CAD) Model Visualization on a Commodity Desktop
* CSE,CNS
* 08/13/2019,01/31/2020
* Chao Peng, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2020
* USD 7,965.00

This project focuses on utilizing parallel architectures within graphical
processing units (GPUs) to fill the need for real-time interaction with large
datasets in Computer-Aided Design (CAD) systems. GPU-accelerated multi-display
applications for visualizing large 3D datasets are important because new
scientific discoveries and dynamic investigations of complex digital contents
rely on visualization results, favoring with latencies measured in milliseconds
rather than seconds and the rich information displayed with high-resolution on
multiple screens. The potential of this work is an end-to-end solution for
visualizing large 3D datasets on a commodity desktop and providing high-speed
interactions and visual explorations of the datasets while having the advantage
on cost savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even more specifically, the algorithms and
visualization systems developed through this research will allow engineers and
designers to interactively create, change, and visually analyze large datasets.
By providing a parallel computational foundation on visualization further
innovation in CAD research is possible. Graduate students involved will be
trained in the principles and uses of advanced computer by designing and
implementing GPU algorithms. In addition, creating applications that make good
use of GPUs also impacts interactive learning, especially on graphics-assisted
and multi-dimensional educational applications, by providing breakthrough
technology to increase the performance of educational applications while
displaying complex graphical contents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally,
acceleration algorithms for rendering (e.g., view-dependent mesh simplification)
are implemented sequentially in visualization applications, which are not
suitable for fast processing the model, composed of large amount of geometric
primitives. The algorithms developed in this project will support primitive-
level parallelization on GPUs and enable dynamic adjustments of detail levels of
3D meshes upon the changes of camera configurations. Though multi-GPU
applications are available commercially, load-balancing issues among GPUs have
not been successfully addressed. Imbalanced workload distributions hurt overall
performance and affect the quality of mesh renderings. This research will
develop a screen-partitioning balancer to balance GPU workloads and employ a
pipelined approach to conduct GPU-to-GPU and CPU-to-GPU streaming for efficient
data management. The efficiencies of inter-device communications will be given
an in-depth evaluation.