* 2000442
* Advancing Strategies in Cybersecurity Education and Career Development
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Diego Tibaquira, Miami Dade College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 410,000.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a critical need and a major
challenge. Thus, business, industry, and government need well-prepared
technicians who can prevent, detect, and investigate cybersecurity breaches. The
growth of cyber-threats has created a need for many more workers who have the
knowledge and skills to protect digital infrastructure. This project will
provide opportunities to broaden participation in the cybersecurity workforce by
educating technicians to meet the evolving needs of the cybersecurity field and
by strengthening the pipeline from high school to college to employer. This
project will build on the results of Miami Dade College's prior NSF-funded
project (DUE-1800958), which focused on building the capacity of college faculty
in cybersecurity, developing a College Credit Certificate and a two-year
Associate of Science degree in cybersecurity, and creating a pathway to these
credentials for first-time-in-college and nontraditional students. The new
project will focus on strengthening the relationship with high schools to
improve the pipeline of students to the college's cybersecurity programs and
supporting the retention, graduation, and job placement of students in the
Associate of Science in Cybersecurity program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's objectives are to strengthen the pipeline from high school to college-
level cybersecurity degree programs and to increase students' employability by
aligning their learning with employer-informed technical and soft-skill
competencies embedded in structured, applied learning experiences. Activities
will include implementing an applied cybersecurity curriculum across partner
high schools in the Miami-Dade County Public Schools, providing professional
development for high school teachers, offering dual-enrollment courses for
partner high schools, hosting cybersecurity summer camps for high school
students, collaborating with business/industry partners to place students in
internships and jobs, developing a competency checklist and a sample internship
plan to guide employers and students, and providing academic success coaching to
help students complete the Associate of Science in Cybersecurity program. The
project evaluation will specifically examine strategies for recruiting high
school students into cybersecurity, especially students from groups that are not
yet equitably represented in STEM careers. Evaluation will also include measures
of high school teachersâ€™ preparation for teaching cybersecurity and the
preparedness of the students who move into cybersecurity positions at local
companies. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE)
program, which focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.