* 2000613
* Collaborative Research: Defining and Measuring Student Trust of Instructors in College STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Xinnian Chen, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 115,229.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by conducting basic research to
characterize key components of student trust in college STEM instructors and how
that trust contributes to desired student outcomes. The project is an EHR Core
Research (ECR) Level 1 award, focused on STEM Learning and Learning
Environments. A consensus is emerging about the benefits of student-centered
pedagogies, like active learning, for students in college classrooms. However,
less is known about how psychological and social factors in a classroom affect
student outcomes. Furthermore, psychosocial factors may be particularly
important in innovative teaching contexts where students are learning in new,
unfamiliar ways. This project targets the multidimensional psychosocial variable
of trust. Most existing educational studies on trust focus on primary/secondary
school contexts and examine trust indirectly through student-teacher
interactions or through the teacher or organization, instead of the student. The
limited previous efforts in college environments have examined whether college
students perceive their relationship with their instructor as a trusting one, as
defined by understanding, acceptance, and care. Such efforts showed that trust
predicted student buy-in to course material, course engagement, final course
grade, and intent to persist in science. Interestingly, trust was more important
in achieving these outcomes than other variables such as growth mindset.
However, this previous definition of trust does not include other key dimensions
of trust or the dynamics of trust-building. This project seeks to examine
college students’ trust in their instructor by using a more comprehensive
theoretical framework of trust. Utilizing this framework, trust building between
students and instructors in college STEM courses will be facilitated, and the
impact of trust on desired student outcomes will be assessed. It is anticipated
that this work will advance research on student trust within the college STEM
course environment, and examine how building trust positively impacts student
engagement, learning, and persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
unifies theories from the education and psychology research literatures to
define trust more fully in an undergraduate STEM course context. It seeks to
address two important research questions: 1) What are the key dimensions of
student trust of an instructor in large college STEM classrooms? and 2) How does
student trust in the instructor relate to important student outcome variables
(e.g., student commitment, engagement, intent to persist in STEM, and final
course grade), and are there differential impacts for students from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields as compared to other groups of students? This
project targets large enrollment college STEM courses, not only because these
courses are where most STEM students in the nation are taught (majors and non-
majors alike), but also because large enrollment courses such as these can make
it particularly challenging to develop “one-to-many” (i.e., “instructor-to-
students”) trust relationships. To broadly define and measure trust, this
research will be conducted in courses operating as traditional lectures as well
as those using new, evidence-based teaching practices. This project intends to
use a mixed methods approach for instructor and student data collection.
Specifically, it will proceed through a process of taxonomy development,
instrument construction, and instrument validation to create and iteratively
improve a measure of student trust for use in higher education contexts. The
expected result is the initial establishment of a comprehensive yet parsimonious
measure of college students’ trust in their instructor. This project has the
potential to serve the STEM education community’s ongoing emphasis on finding
ways to increase students’ commitment and engagement in student-centered
classrooms and in STEM majors more broadly. The proposed project is a joint
effort between researchers at Yale University and the University of Connecticut
and is supported by the ECR program, which supports work that advances
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.