* 2000372
* Rocky Mountain Mathematics Consortium Summer School on Free Probability, Random Matrices, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Zhuang Niu, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 11/30/2022
* USD 31,000.00

This award will provide support for the Rocky Mountain Mathematics Consortium
(RMMC) Summer School: Free Probability, Random Matrices, and Applications, that
will be held from July 13-17, 2020, at the University of Wyoming. This week-long
summer school will expose both graduate students and early-career researchers to
important mathematics, foster collaboration, and build ties between the
participants. Support for this summer school will provide a great opportunity
for early-career researchers, members of underrepresented groups, and
researchers lacking federal support to interact with some of the best
researchers in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Free probability, introduced by
Voiculescu, is a noncommutative probability theory based on free independence
that takes the place of classical independence. It is an extremely rich theory
with deep applications to operator algebras and random matrix theory. It has
became an essential tool for researchers working on operator algebras, random
matrix theory and related fields. At the summer school there will be several
mini-courses together as well as research talks. These lectures will bring
topics in free probability and random matrix theory to a diverse audience and
will help the participants move to the frontiers of this research field. The
website of the conference can be found at
http://zhuang.snowyrange.science/RMMC2020/index.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.