* 2000260
* Catalyst Project: Combating ESKAPE pathogens through discovery of novel antimicrobial and antibiofilm molecules
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Danielle Graham, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 179,175.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Fayetteville State University intends to look at soil microbes and identify the
chemicals they produce to kill bacteria. The identification of these microbes
and chemicals will have implications in understanding biological films.
Fayetteville State University undergraduate students will have the opportunity
to perform research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed study is to
collect soil from various environmental areas such as oceanic, mountainous, and
natural preserve regions, define the physiological cultural conditions and
identify the chemistry of small molecules bacteria produce in efforts to
understand how these organisms kill other bacteria, particularly ESKAPE
pathogens, while not harming themselves. The specific objectives of the proposed
research are 1) to identify and characterize the physical and chemical
properties of antimicrobial producing soil microbes that inhibit safe-ESKAPE
relative strains, and 2) determine the effect of soil microbes on biofilm
formation, dispersal and gene expression of safe ESKAPE relative strains. The
findings from the research outlined in this proposal will enhance our
understanding of microbe-microbe interactions and further advance the knowledge
of antibiotic discovery using a tried and true method of mining soil microbes
coupled with a metagenomic and computational approach. The implementation of the
proposed research will provide an opportunity for underrepresented groups to
gain hands-on research experience, access state of the art equipment as well as
cutting edge techniques through the collaboration with UNC Chapel Hill and
develop a collaborative network of student researchers and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.