* 2000061
* Research Initiation Award: Development and Evaluation of Biomimetics Antibiotic Surface
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Rupak Dua, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 609,699.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Hampton University has potential broader impacts in a number of areas.
The goal of this project is to develop a biomimetic surface inspired by cicada
insect wings on the 3D generated polyether ether ketone (PEEK) structure to
provide inherent antibacterial properties. The results of this research can have
wide-ranging impact in the biomedical, chemical, and food industries where
bacterial contamination is of concern. Undergraduate and high-school students
are involved in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
biomimetic surface at the nanoscale on a customized 3D PEEK structure for
providing bactericidal and bone osseointegration properties to the polymer. The
specific aims of this project are to: develop and optimize a protocol to print
customized PEEK structure with minimum artifacts; identify an economical method
to develop nano-pillars on the surface of the 3D printed PEEK and then
functionalize the generated nano-pillars with bone protein factor; and evaluate
the bactericidal and bone osseointegration properties of the newly modified
surfaces. Findings from this work will provide a better understanding of ways to
modify the surface at the nanoscale and mechanisms by which bacterial cells are
killed on contact while allowing the mammalian cells to grow on them
simultaneously. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Virginia
Commonwealth University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.