* 2000053
* Bioreactor-based Manufacturing of Glioblastoma Organoids
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Yonghyun Kim, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2024
* USD 373,293.00

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the deadliest form of brain tumor. Patients
typically survive only 12-15 months after their initial diagnosis. Therefore,
new treatments for GBM are urgently needed. However, finding new therapies for
GBM has been challenging, largely due to the lack of models that adequately
mimic the patient’s condition, which is particularly important since the disease
is highly heterogeneous. That is, tumors differ widely in their pathological
features and respond differently to treatments. To address these issues, this
project will develop "GBM organoids," which are three-dimension masses of cells
that mimic the behavior of miniature GBM tumors. These organoids will be
manufactured using GBM stem cells (specialized GBM cells that give rise to all
types of cells in a GBM tumor) derived directly from patients. Cells will be
positioned using 3D printers and cultured in bioreactors. The potential long-
term outcomes of such biomanufactured organoids are reduced reliance on animal
models for cancer research and a framework for suggesting novel treatments for
GBM patients in the future. This project will also provide research and
educational opportunities to underrepresented minority undergraduate and
graduate students. International opportunities are planned that integrate the
research results into summer study-abroad courses in order to help prepare the
next generation of more globally competent engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop GBM (glioblastoma) organoids that retain
three main features of GBM tumors: intertumoral heterogeneity (i.e., molecular
subtypes), intratumoral heterogeneity (i.e., cells in the inner/necrotic core
exhibiting very different characteristics to those at the tumor periphery), and
cancer stem cells (CSCs). The goal will be achieved by creating GBM organoids
that are homogeneous in size but retain in vivo-like intratumoral heterogeneity
by using GBM CSCs. The Research Plan, designed to demonstrate that the project’s
bioreactor-cultured GBM organoids can recapitulate the innate tumor
microenvironment, is organized under three aims, each motivated by a scientific
hypothesis. The FIRST Aim is to reproducibly biomanufacture GBM organoids in
bioreactors. Subaims are to: a) demonstrate that sublethal fluid shear improves
homogenous production of GBM organoids and b) elucidate the role of shear-
induced EpCAM (Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule)-positive EVs (extracellular
vessels) in organoid production. Results obtained will be used to test the
hypothesis that sublethal shear stress in stirred-tanks leads to GBM organoid
production via EpCAM-positive extracellular vesicles (EVs). The SECOND Aim is to
produce GBM organoids with perivascular niche-like ECM (extracellular matrix)
and microvessels. Subaims are to: a) demonstrate that GSCs in hyaluronic acid
(HA)-rich conditions generate CD31+microvessel-like cells within GBM organoids;
b) generate GBM organoids with 3D-printed HA hydrogels; c) produce GBM organoids
with co-cultured microvessels and d) demonstrate that pathological features of
PDX (Patient-derived xenograft) tissues are recapitulated in biomanufactured
organoids. Results obtained will be used to test the hypothesis that tumor
tissue-like angiogenesis by GSCs occurs when organoids are &gt;500 μm diameter.
The THIRD Aim is to profile the genetic composition and chemotherapy sensitivity
of biomanufactured GBM organoids. Subaims are to: a) profile the patient-
specific genetic subtypes (proneural (PN), neural (N), classical (C), and
mesenchymal (M)) of biomanufactured organoids and b) characterize organoids’
responses to chemotherapeutic drugs TMZ (temozolomide) and SAL(salinomycin).
Results obtained will be used to test the hypothesis that pathologically
relevant organoids recapitulate the intratumoral and intertumoral diversity
found in tumor tissues, and thus, can serve as better in vitro models for drug
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.