* 2000347
* Online Instructional Resources for Material Science Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Thomas Stoebe, Edmonds Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2023
* USD 487,565.00

Over the last one hundred years, material scientists have greatly improved
traditional materials. They have also made technological breakthroughs that
produced new nanoscale, biological, smart, and composite materials. This project
will support a national network for materials technology education. The network
will include educational institutions, industry, and professional societies. The
long-term goal of the project is to ensure that materials technology education
meets industry standards and produces technicians who are well prepared for work
across different manufacturing sectors. To achieve this goal, the project will
develop and share online resources to support the materials technological
education of students and incumbent workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
builds upon the experience and infrastructure of the National Resource Center
for Materials Technology Education at Edmonds Community College. Its goal is to
support the development of instructional resources for the materials science
education community. National network members come from community colleges,
four-year institutions, industry partners, community organizations and
professional societies. The specific aims of the project include: to improve and
expand national access to an online collection of high-quality instructional
resources including competency-based modules, presentations, labs, and
demonstrations; to implement dissemination strategies that promote increased
awareness of online resources, support partnerships, and expand strategic
opportunities for the materials science education community; and to leverage the
expertise of collaborating national partners to achieve strategic scalability of
instructional resources. During this project, technician skill gaps will be
identified, instructional modules that address the skill gaps will be developed,
and a handbook on materials technology education will be written through a joint
effort of network members. The project evaluation will provide insights on how
the instructional resources impact students in the national network of
educational institutions. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.