* 2000987
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Theory of Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Steven Kivelson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2023
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research on atomic scale models of interacting electrons and ions in so-called
"quantum materials". Some examples of quantum materials include high-temperature
superconductors, two layers of carbon atom sheets on top of each other with a
relative twist angle, and materials in which the electron-electron interaction
energies are much larger compared to their kinetic energies. These systems
typically have many scientifically interesting and technologically important
properties that emerge collectively from the complex interactions of their
constituent entities as a whole. While the specific properties of quantum
materials depend sensitively on their structure and quantum chemistry, certain
emergent properties, such as high-temperature superconductivity, can be
understood from a more general quantum statistical mechanical perspective. The
advantage of such a perspective is its generality, and ideally the promise that
it could lead to mathematically well-controlled solutions to paradigmatic models
that can serve as the framework for a qualitative understanding of the
properties of interesting materials. In this project, the principle investigator
will study an array of such atomic scale models on material systems and topics
that are at the heart of contemporary condensed matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in the theory of quantum materials
have had, and will continue to have, both practical and conceptual implications
beyond physics. The issues involved in this project are central across a broad
range of subfields of physics including the traditional study of quantum
materials in a condensed matter context, studies of strongly interacting matter
in a string theory and quantum gravity context, studies of cold atom condensates
in atomic-molecular-and-optical physics context, and as a venue for exploring
and exploiting new ideas in quantum information theory. More generally, quantum
materials play an important role in a range of more applied sciences, and hence,
increased understanding of the problems to be investigated in this project has
the potential to influence broader developments in science and technology as
well. Students and postdocs, who will be involved in this research, are likely
to develop into future leaders of the field, while those who do not continue in
physics will nonetheless develop skills which will allow them to make
contributions to society in a broader context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research on atomic
scale models of interacting electrons and ions in quantum materials on several
fronts. One focus is on the microscopic mechanisms that give rise to the various
broken symmetry phases that populate the low temperature reaches of the phase
diagrams of such materials, especially superconductivity and charge density
waves. The research will focus on the significant non-universal, but robust,
properties that determine the basic energy and temperature scales which
characterize these phases, including transition temperatures. Another focus of
interest are transport properties of strongly interacting systems in regimes of
temperature and interaction strengths in which the quasiparticle paradigm breaks
down. While the breakdown of the Fermi liquid paradigm is apparent in a variety
of experimentally interesting material systems, it is likely that not all non-
Fermi-liquid metals are the same. An important goal is to identify basic
features that allow such states to be identified more by what they are than by
what they are not, and to make progress on understanding these behaviors by
identifying solvable model problems that exhibit similar properties. Finally, an
important component of the research will be a continuation and extension of
earlier studies of the universal properties of systems near a quantum critical
point at which the nature of the ground-state order changes qualitatively, such
as in quantum critical phenomena in metallic systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in the theory of quantum materials have
had, and will continue to have, both practical and conceptual implications
beyond physics. The issues involved in this project are central across a broad
range of subfields of physics including the traditional study of quantum
materials in a condensed matter context, studies of strongly interacting matter
in a string theory and quantum gravity context, studies of cold atom condensates
in atomic-molecular-and-optical physics context, and as a venue for exploring
and exploiting new ideas in quantum information theory. More generally, quantum
materials play an important role in a range of more applied sciences, and hence,
increased understanding of the problems to be investigated in this project has
the potential to influence broader developments in science and technology as
well. Students and postdocs, who will be involved in this research, are likely
to develop into future leaders of the field, while those who do not continue in
physics will nonetheless develop skills which will allow them to make
contributions to society in a broader context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.