* 2000420
* Second Annual Data Science Workshop: Emerging Data Science Methods for Complex Biomedical and Cyber Data
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Varghese George, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 01/31/2022
* USD 13,850.00

The Second Annual Data Science Workshop entitled "Emerging Data Science Methods
for Complex Biomedical and Cyber Data" will be held on Augusta University (AU)
Riverfront campus, March 26-27, 2020. The workshop aims to foster collaborative
research among data science, statistics and other related disciplines for the
purpose of addressing the very hardest and most important data- and model-driven
scientific challenges, and for developing the much-needed skills for the next
generation STEM workforce. The Workshop participants will learn statistical and
data science methods to handle the enormously complex biomedical and cyber
science data, and help them develop analytical thinking, statistical reasoning,
communication skills and creativity. Participants will be strongly encouraged to
submit abstracts for poster sessions held during the entire workshop. This award
will support the invited speakers, around fifteen undergraduate and graduate
students to attend the event and to present research posters closely related to
the theme of the workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics of the workshop
include deep learning, statistical machine learning, differential privacy,
Bayesian data integration and cybersecurity data modeling, among others,
building on AU's unique strength and focus in medical and cyber science
research. The workshop will be in the form of specific research overviews and
lectures provided by leading experts who have done prominent work in the
respective topic areas. At the end of each of the two days, a panel discussion
will be held, led by an expert panelist and all speakers of the day, for
encapsulating the various topics presented on the day and for addressing
questions and comments from the audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.