* 2000774
* Developing a Highly Capable Biomanufacturing Technical Workforce in South Texas
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* John Hatherill, Del Mar College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 394,859.00

The growth of Texas companies that manufacture biological products on a contract
basis has created a local and regional workforce need. This project proposes to
serve this growing biopharmaceutical manufacturing industry by developing an
advanced biomanufacturing certificate and educating a skilled and diverse
biomanufacturing technical workforce. The new certificate will be designed to
incorporate interactive and inquiry-based laboratory learning and to provide
students with real world experience with biotechnical/biomanufacturing
equipment. The project will also implement new strategies for recruitment and
retention and provide educators with professional development relevant to the
new certificate. The certificate is expected to serve two-year college students
and high school students, as well as impact university faculty and industry
partners. The project aims to provide equitable access to successful
biomanufacturing careers for under-represented groups, including students who
are women, Hispanic, and/or first-generation college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a collaboration between Del
Mar College and Texas A &amp; M University. The technical merit of the project
includes building upon and incorporating hands-on, instructor-led training
modules covering bioprocess operations, upstream and downstream manufacturing of
biologics, vaccines, quality control systems, and regulatory compliance. The
goals of the project include: (1) Improving student learning with applied
industry training and laboratory rotations; (2) Institutionalizing a rigorous
and improved biomanufacturing curriculum for long-term impact at Del Mar College
and as a model for other institutions; and (3) Adding depth to the new Del Mar
College biotechnology programs through strong collaborations with Texas A&amp;M
University. The project includes assessment and evaluation of the efficacy of
project activities, thus adding to understanding of the factors necessary for
student career success in STEM. The project will be disseminated through online
media and presentations at national meetings. The project aims to benefit
society by providing students with new educational and career pathways,
particularly for students who are from groups that are not yet equitably
represented in biomanufacturing. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.