* 2000799
* Collaborative Research: Identifying and Investigating Pathways and Critical Junctures in Two-Year Information Technology Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Marcia Mardis, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 07/31/2024
* USD 643,131.00

This research and development project aims to design and test a method for
understanding the pathways students take through college and into careers in
information technology. Specifically, the project will gather data about former
students, including institutional data (such as grades) and information from
surveys and interviews. The data will include information about students who
completed the program, who did not complete the program, and who changed
programs or transferred to other institutions. These data will be analyzed to
identify potential pathways and critical junctions that may lead to student
success or other outcomes. The research team from Tallahassee Community College
and Florida State University expect that this approach will reveal opportunities
and hindrances students face as they pursue credentials in information
technology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to test the potential of
integrating institutional data with phenomenological data to model student
progression through post-secondary STEM programs, specifically information
technology. Framed by Tinto’s model of student attrition and persistence, it
will use a mixed methods sequential exploratory design with multiple layers of
data collection and analyses that merge and examine institutional data and
alumni phenomenological experiential data. It expects that this analysis will
identify and verify influencers that support or hinder student success.
Quantitative data analyses will consist of descriptive and comparative methods,
which will be verified and informed by open coding and thematic analysis of the
qualitative data. The systematic investigation of institutional and
phenomenological data has the potential to: (1) generate practical knowledge
about academic/career pathways in information technology for use by
stakeholders; (2) identify and examine relationships among these pathways,
students experiences, and psychosocial factors; and (3) add to the analytical
methods available to institutional research professionals to document,
investigate, and visualize student pathway information using data dashboards.
Four Florida community colleges that collectively serve rural and urban student
populations (Pensacola State College, Florida State College at Jacksonville,
Chipola College, and Gulf Coast State College) will pilot test the efficacy and
usefulness of the method for modeling and visualizing their students’ college
and career pathways. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.