* 2000619
* Native STEM Portraits: A Longitudinal, Mixed-Methods Study of the Intersectional Experiences of Native Learners and Professionals in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Maria Ong, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,042,225.00

Native students and professionals are severely underrepresented in all STEM
degree programs and professions in the U.S. This underrepresentation is often
overlooked in research and discussions of equity in STEM. This abstract, and
this project, uses the word "Native" as an umbrella to refer to American
Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, Pacific Islanders, First Nations, and
other indigenous peoples of North America. This project will contribute to
changing the conversation about Native individuals in STEM by conducting
critical research on the largely unexplored topic of experiences, that act
either as supports or as barriers for Native individuals to successfully
continue their paths in STEM higher education and professions, with special
emphasis on women, LGBTQIA+, and two-spirit individuals. This project will
inform future research and make recommendations for promising practices that
institutions can implement. The project will study STEM students, STEM faculty,
and STEM professionals both inside and outside academe. The three main STEM
areas covered in the study will be computer sciences and engineering, biological
sciences, and mathematics, physics, and earth sciences. This project is
supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that
advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: (1) identify and aggregate
what is known of the challenges and supports specific to Native participation in
STEM careers through a scoping review of the literature; (2) study the
experiences that support and hinder individuals to successfully continue their
paths in STEM higher education and professions across the spectrum, from
undergraduates to professionals using surveys and photo elicitation interviews;
and (3) study the experiences of administrators, support staff, and non-Native
faculty in providing supports to Native students and faculty in STEM through
focus groups and interviews. The project will extensively disseminate findings
to a broad base of constituencies, including collaborative workshops with
partner institutions; traditional academic venues such as conferences and peer
reviewed publications; and visual displays that will be made available to
libraries, museums, and institutions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.