* 2000242
* Improving the Biotechnology Internship Experience to Better Prepare Student Technicians for the Modern Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Dheeraj Verma, Valencia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 293,976.00

This project aims to serve the national need for a highly skilled technical
workforce by improving biotechnology student education. The biotechnology
industry in Florida is expanding, with growth that is more than twice the
national average. The College intends to expand its biotechnology program to
meet this growing need. Specifically, the project plans to improve biotechnology
education by updating and revitalizing the current biotechnology internship
experience. Internships offer students critical learning and workforce
experiences, helping them to develop essential employability skills. This
project plans to improve studentsâ€™ learning through internships by increasing
the number of internship opportunities, improving the biotechnology curriculum
to better align with the needs of industry partners, enhancing the internship
experience with an online interactive resource, and developing a biotechnology
network to match students with future employers. This combination of cultivating
industry partners, integrating technical skills and essential workplace skills,
and community building is expected to increase the impact of biotechnology
internships, including helping student successfully transition into a
biotechnology career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to provide
biotechnology employers with highly educated and skilled technicians, thus
enabling newly hired technicians to be rapidly productive on the job. The
objectives of the project are to: 1) expand biotechnology internship
opportunities for students by expanding the number of current internship
partners; 2) amplify biotechnology essential skills training for students by
developing an internship curriculum that includes essential workforce skills; 3)
enhance the student experience by developing online modules to deliver
internship information and develop student skills; 4) expand the biotechnology
community by creating and hosting a one-day symposium that convenes high school
students, biotechnology undergraduates, and industry partners. Additional goals
are to increase diversity in the biotechnology industry through outreach and
partnership with the local area high schools that have diverse student
populations. Resources developed by the project will be shared through the NSF
ATE network. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.