* 2000778
* Collaborative Research: Kinetic Inductance in Superconducting Nanowire Microwave Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Daniel Santavicca, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 03/31/2024
* USD 102,000.00

Proposal Title:&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Kinetic Inductance in
Superconducting Nanowire Microwave Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Superconducting nanowires can have a kinetic
inductance that is several orders of magnitude larger than their magnetic
inductance. As a result, high frequency signals on the nanowire experience
significant spatial compression as well as a significant reduction in their
velocity. The kinetic inductance also varies nonlinearly as a function of the
current, creating an opportunity for realizing nonlinear phenomena with
extremely minimal dissipation. Through a combination of theory, modeling, and
experiment, this project will study these effects in different superconducting
nanowire materials and geometries. The understanding gained from these studies
will be applied to design new types of ultra-compact microwave devices, which
will then be fabricated and characterized. Such devices can serve as important
building blocks for the development of more complex systems based on
superconducting circuits such as single-photon imagers and quantum computers.
This collaborative project brings together groups at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and the University of North Florida, an undergraduate-education
focused university, to conduct the proposed research and educational activities,
combining the best aspects of both institutions. In particular, the involvement
of the University of North Florida creates additional opportunities for
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds to participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to create a new superconducting nanowire device platform that can
serve as the basis of a monolithic superconducting nanowire microwave integrated
circuit technology. This goal will be pursued through four approaches. The first
approach is based on exploring materials and geometries that maximize the
nanowire's kinetic inductivity, which will result in extremely large
characteristic impedances (&gt; 10 kohm) along with slow signal velocities and
large spatial compression of the signal wavelengths. Such high impedances create
strong decoupling from the environment and have potential applications ranging
from the readout of superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors to the
design of quantum bits. The second approach will be to fabricate nanowires on
extremely high permittivity substrates such as strontium titanate, which has
been shown to have a relative permittivity as high as 10,000 at low temperature.
This extremely large permittivity will significantly boost the capacitance,
bringing the characteristic impedance of high-inductance nanowires close to 50
kohm while simultaneously achieving ultra-slow signal velocities and ultra-
compressed signal wavelengths. A 50 kohm impedance is critical to coupling with
conventional microwave circuitry. The third approach will focus on understanding
and exploiting the nonlinear current-dependence of kinetic inductance in order
to create new types of nanowire-based nonlinear microwave devices. Examples of
such devices include mixers, tunable couplers, switches, and parametric
amplifiers. In order to understand these devices, the project will seek to
address fundamental questions such as how quickly the nanowire's kinetic
inductance can be modulated, how much loss is associated with this modulation,
and how the nonlinearity and the loss depend on the signal power. The fourth
approach will leverage the results generated in the first three approaches to
develop more complex nanowire-based devices and
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.