* 2000475
* Experimental Characterization of Underwater Visible Light Channels for Photo-Acoustic Underwater Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Ashwin Ashok, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 01/31/2023
* USD 281,217.00

Much of underwater wireless communication, so far, has been attributed to the
use of acoustic frequencies due to the significantly low absorption than radio
frequencies (RF). Ongoing advances in using light for communication through the
concept of visible light communication (VLC) make optical wireless relevant to
advancing the state--of--the-- art in underwater wireless communication systems.
The optical spectrum presents a favorable mode for communicating underwater due
to the low signal absorption levels, particularly in the ultraviolet, violet,
blue and green wavelengths. Prior work in underwater VLC has largely been
theoretical and this research takes a radical high-risk approach to develop
empirical models for underwater VLC across real-world configurations and
settings. The research takes a transformative approach and explores photo-
acoustic hybrid communication in which acoustic and optical wireless
communication modes co-exist and complement each other. Photo-acoustic
underwater communication modalities can help advance plethora of applications
including underwater navigation, exploration, sensing and tactical
communications. This research advances the field of underwater networking by
bridging the knowledge gap in building realistic underwater photo-acoustic
systems through extensive experimentation in real-world conditions and creates a
rich open public dataset. This research maintains a strategic collaboration with
the Gwinnett County Water Innovation Center near Atlanta, Georgia, thus
expanding the outreach of this work and advancing underwater research using
advanced facilities. In addition to dissemination of research outcomes through
publications, the research involves female student groups from the university
Girls-Who-Code (GWC) chapter in underwater research data collection and
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this research are
derived along two thrusts executed over a 2-year timeline: Thrust 1 - Empirical
Modeling of Underwater VLC Channels. This thrust focuses on extensive underwater
channel modeling experimentation and data collection in lab and real-world
underwater sites. The data points are used to perform empirical modeling of
underwater VLC channels along various spatial dimensions (horizontal, vertical,
line-of-sight, non line-of-sight), along different physical parameters
(salinity, turbidity, temperature and oiliness), and in mobile scenarios. Thrust
2 - Photo-Acoustic Underwater Communication Feasibility Studies. This thrust
focuses on the feasibility of integrating the hardware and software of optical
wireless (UV and VLC), with acoustic systems. The research conducts experiments
across different use-cases for photo-acoustic communication and sensing,
particularly for navigation and tracking and device-device communication. In
summary, the key outcomes of this research include empirical models for
underwater VLC channels, insights from photo-acoustic communication feasibility
experimental studies and open datasets for underwater
VLC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.