* 2000160
* Research Initiation Award: The Characterization of IL-6 on Cystic Fibrosis Airway Epithelial Cells Membrane Integrity and Bacterial Clearance
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Devyn Gillette, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,926.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Bowie State University has potential to broaden impacts in several
areas. The proposed work will allow the researchers who understand epithelial
cell function and better comprehend bacterial viability and membrane cohesion.
undergraduate students will receive training in cell biology, biochemistry,
immunology and microbiology. This undergraduate research opportunity will allow
students to develop marketable skills which will diversify the global scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to identify the role
of IL-6 in Cystic Fibrosis (CF) airway epithelial cellsâ€™ ability to maintain
membrane integrity and effective bacterial clearance following B. cenocepacia
infection. The specific aims of this project are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
characterize the role of IL-6 on membrane integrity of B. cenocepacia infected
CF airway epithelial cells; and &lt;br/&gt;(2) investigate the role of IL-6 on
bacterial viability and growth of B. cenocepacia within CF airway epithelial
cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodologies proposed include utilization of
bacterial infection models on polarized epithelial cells, transepithelial
electronic resistance techniques, epithelial transmigration assays, fluorescence
microscopy, and IL-6R pharmacological inhibitors. Outcomes of this study will
shed light onto the first line of defense within IL-6 rich environments,
especially regarding epithelial cell biology. The effect of IL-6 on maintaining
uncompromised barriers is a key finding that will transform our breadth of
knowledge within cell biology, immunology, and microbiology, making it
interdisciplinary in its contributions to science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.