* 2000092
* Excellence in Research: Designing biodegradable bottlebrush polymers based on their structure-property relationships for strong tissue adhesion and drug delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Choogon Lee, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 763,457.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomedical adhesive polymers are
nonmetallic materials which possess the ability to join two tissue surfaces
together via bonding. Targeted tissues may include everything from hard tissues
(bone, tooth, cartilage) to soft tissues (most other organs). The most common
application of biomedical adhesives involves the replacement of conventional
wound closures such as sutures and staples. Biomedical adhesives can be also
used as hemostatic agents to stop bleeding, sealants to close large space gap
between tissues, wound dressing to enhance healing, and drug delivery matrices
to transport drugs efficiently and safely into the body. However, these existing
biomedical adhesives products have significant limitations. These limitations
include poor adhesion strength, limited tissue application, poor release over
curing rate, applied tissues stiffening, and safety concerns surrounding their
base materials, polymers. This project will develop a new, well-defined
bottlebrush polymer that has strong adhesion to tissue, drug delivery
capabilities, degradability, and biocompatibility. The proposed program will
establish synthetic principles and structure-property relationships for
multifunctional biomedical polymeric adhesives to overcome current limitations.
This funding will also be used for the educational goal of developing a new
participatory summer research program for HBCU undergraduate students. The
program will allow students to acquire knowledge on basic research methods while
studying polymeric adhesives at the PIâ€™s lab. An additional collaborative summer
research program, focused on underserved students, will provide state of the art
research opportunities with other prestigious research groups at prominent
institutes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Bottlebrush polymers contain dense polymer brush chains linked to a
backbone. The densely populated polymer brushes form a three-dimensional
cylindrical shape and can encompass an increased population of functionalities
in a unit space compared to linear polymers. Because the bottlebrush polymer
demonstrates unique bulk properties such as low entanglement, low modulus, and
other unique viscoelastic properties (e.g., supersoft elastomer), the
bottlebrush polymer has received considerable attention in the past decade.
However, previous bottlebrush polymer research has paid less attention to
adhesive properties due to synthetic challenges. These challenges include the
preparation of well-defined polymer structures and the lack of interdisciplinary
knowledge on sophisticated polymer synthesis and adhesion/viscoelastic property
characterization. In particular, integration of two or more functional groups on
a bottlebrush polymer while still maintaining strong adhesion remains a
challenging issue. In this project, a new approach is proposed by using both
controlled radical polymerization and ring opening polymerization to synthesize
the bottlebrush main structure. Then, a terminal of the dense bottlebrush chains
will be modified to form ester linkages to gallol (strong adhesion), Ertapenem
(antibiotics), 5-Fu (anticancer agent), and Oxaliplatin (anticancer agent). The
detailed structure-property relationships of the new bottlebrush biomedical
adhesive will be determined through the variation of the segmental ratio of
gallol/drug, total polymer molecular weight, and brush chain lengths. The
following comprehensive property characterizations will be performed to complete
the structure-property relationship study: adhesion tests (lap shear strength
tests and uniaxial indentation tests), viscoelastic property (rheometer),
modulus test (tensile tester), heat generation test (thermometer), drug release
test, biocompatibility test, and degradability test. The outreach and
educational goals of this proposal is to develop a new participatory educational
research program for underrepresented groups in HBCU. The participants will
conduct real-world biomaterials research with Chung research group at FAMU-FSU
college of engineering and with other collaborating research groups at other
prestigious universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.