* 2000618
* Educating Advanced Driver Assistance Systems Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Paul Soar, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 574,639.00

The most dramatic shift in recent transportation technology has been the
development of autonomous vehicles and intelligent cars. The Bosch group
estimates that more than half of all cars first registered in 2017 came with at
least one advanced driver assistance system (ADAS). Examples include rear
collision warnings, parking assist, emergency braking, adaptive cruise control,
blind spot monitoring, and lane keeping assist. The deployment of ADAS in
vehicles is expected to continue to grow over the next 10 years. This project
aims to produce workforce-ready ADAS technicians for the automotive industry by
adding instruction on ADAS systems and diagnosis to the College’s automotive
technology associate degree program and developing an ADAS technician
certificate. This project, backed by industry and academia, will be designed to
educate graduates who are skilled in ADAS methodologies and, thus, fill a gap in
the modern automotive workforce. As a result, it will contribute to the national
need for a highly capable advanced technological
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to improve student learning
in science and engineering technician education by: 1) developing up-to-date
ADAS-intelligent vehicle course content; 2) implementing an ADAS technical
certificate program tied to a relevant industry credential that was developed in
partnership with national automotive credentialing organizations; 3) acquiring
autonomous vehicle simulation and ADAS lab training equipment; and 4) obtaining
hands-on ADAS vehicle diagnostic trainers and autonomous vehicle mini-labs.
These curricular improvements and new equipment will enable students to learn
fundamentals of ADAS systems and diagnosis including sensor technology such as
Light Imaging, Detection and Ranging (LiDAR), wireless systems, radar units,
ultrasonic transmitters, and steering angle sensors, as well as to use the same
equipment that they will use in industry settings, including ADAS camera
alignment fixtures with scan tools. Project impact and success will be evaluated
through performance-based techniques, using a mixed methods quasi-experimental
design to analyze qualitative and quantitative data about project components.
This information will be used for ongoing project improvement. Materials and
learning objects developed by the project will be disseminated via the Center
for Automotive Technology, the North Florida Transportation Planning
Organization, the Florida College System, Advanced Technological Education
Central, and other channels. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.