* 2000599
* Overcoming critical skill gaps in residential and online STEM education via novel immersive, industry-aligned simulated environments
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Ashkan Negahban, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 831,276.00

Researchers at Pennsylvania State University propose to create and utilize 3D
virtual reality (VR) environments in engineering settings that immerse learners
in complex simulation models representing a real-world situation instead of
well-defined problems with existing solutions. By partnering with a simulation
software company and industry consultants, the project will generate education
modules aligned with industry needs and provide novel model-based systems for
engineering education. The proposal also intends to bring this technology to a
variety of learners (online and residentials, graduate, four- and two-year
college, and self-learners). The project goals are to address (1) the paucity of
scientific evidence regarding novel learning environments enabled by immersive
simulations in STEM education and (2) the lack of evidence regarding the
contribution of virtual reality (versus use of simulations on a 2D display) to
STEM education. The project will help to mitigate geographical barriers that
prohibit contextualized learning for students, companies’ reluctance to provide
access to their facilities and data, and logistical constraints that prohibit
in-person site visits. The project also advances the frontiers of problem-based
learning (PBL) and enables teaching and learning of relevant workforce skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design is framed by an information processing
approach to learning theory, constructivism theory, self-determination theory,
and adult learning theory. Data will be collected from students enrolled in
existing online and resident courses for graduate and professional students at
Pennsylvania State University. The assessment plan enables comparison of
traditional vs. immersive simulation in project-based learning in resident and
online delivery formats . Formative and summative assessments will be used to
test the hypotheses and investigate (1) the effectiveness of immersive
simulation PBL and how its effectiveness may vary for online vs. resident
students and across graduate, professional, four-year, and two-year college
levels; (2) whether the use of virtual reality alters the effectiveness of PBL
via simulations for learning critical skills; (3) whether learners’
demographics, personality type, prior preparation, motivation, and engineering
identity can help predict learning and workplace performance using predictive
analytics; and (4) the relationship between usage/navigation and skill
development using video analytics and analyses of recorded virtual site visits.
By developing this environment and comparing it to in-class PBL instruction in a
similar course, the researchers hope to better understand the role of virtual
and immersive environments on student outcomes. The research responds to the
need for properly trained workers to fill jobs created by emerging technologies
and to the growing need for innovative approaches to STEM education and
workforce development during crises that mandate social
distancing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the EHR Core Research
program that supports fundamental research focused on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM professional workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.