* 2000135
* Excellence in Research: Direct synthesis of water soluble iron oxide nanoparticles with high relaxivity and interaction with small molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Jie Zheng, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 475,000.00

Nontechnical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how
magnetic resonance image (MRI) signals change as iron oxide nanoparticles
interact with bioactive molecules. The understanding of such signal changes
provides a scientific foundation to monitor drug delivery and release using MRI,
which will significantly improve the treatment of diseases such as cancer as the
dosage and frequency of drugs can be adjusted based on real-time drug uptake
information. The major challenges of current approaches for monitoring drug
delivery include lack of high sensitivity and limited tissue volume to be
imaged. We overcome these challenges by synthesizing high water-soluble iron
oxide nanoparticles and using them as MRI agents. MRI is a powerful imaging
technique in clinical practice because it provides images with excellent details
in a non-invasive, whole-body, and real-time monitoring manner. The
multifunctional properties of nanoparticles provide unique advantages for the
precise delivery of therapeutic agents with the assistance of imaging. The broad
impacts of the project will be achieved by: (1) disseminating the knowledge
obtained from this research to the science community for monitoring drug
delivery where a non-invasive monitor is extremely important; (2) providing
cutting-edge research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students,
particularly those from underrepresented students at Jackson State University
(JSU); (3) promoting STEM education via exhibitions during the Mississippi
Science Maker at Mississippi Museum of Nature and
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles can improve drug efficacy and reduce
toxicity by altering pharmacokinetics. To track the delivery behavior of drugs,
fluorescent tags or radiotracers are usually attached. However, the intrinsic
drawback of fluorescent tags lies in the limitation of tissue penetration of
light. Availability is a significant challenge for radiotracer approaches. In
comparison, iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) could be used as a self-reported
drug delivery system because of their capability to change water relaxivity in
tissue and their excellent biocompatibility. Despite intensive interests, the
effect of bioactive molecules on the T1-weighted magnetic property of extrasmall
iron oxide nanoparticles (ESIONPs) has not been studied. In addition, the T1
relaxation performance of IONPs is relatively low. The partial reason is that
the monodispersal IONPs synthesized by current methods can only be dissolved in
an organic solvent. A sophisticated surface modification is required to make
them water soluble. In this project, a stepwise growth method will be explored
to directly synthesize water soluble ESIONPs with a high T1 relaxation
performance. The interaction of ESIONPs with bioactive molecules will be
investigated as self-reported nano platform for drug delivery. The project will
gain a fundamental understanding of T1 relaxivity of ESIONPs interacting with
bioactive molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.