* 2000540
* Pathway to Engineering Technology Careers Through Internships and Industry Guidance
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Bennett Howser, San Joaquin Delta College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 103,020.00

This project aims to develop a pipeline of technically skilled and well-trained
engineering technicians to meet the current labor market demand. San Joaquin
Delta College has an established engineering technology associate degree
program. Based upon economic data from the College’s region of service,
approximately 900 annual job openings are projected for students with this
degree, which could support students' economic mobility. However, enrollment in
engineering technology at the College is not sufficient to meet the demand. To
address this opportunity, the engineering technology program will partner with
local industry to provide students with internship and career opportunities.
Partners include Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, OG Packing, and Wong
Enterprises. The project will work with these partners to expand recruitment and
implement interventions designed to increase student retention. Activities will
include collaborating with other departments at the College, developing a cohort
model to build peer support, introducing work-based learning opportunities,
hosting career and academic workshops, and offering post-graduation career
services. The expected outcomes include an increase in enrollment in all
engineering technology courses, in retention of the student cohort, and in the
associate degree completion rate. The project will support five summer
internships at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and other partners each
year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will work to increase the number of
students who enter the engineering technology program and complete an associate
degree in engineering technology. This increase will help meet the growing need
in multiple economic sectors for technologists who have this degree and the
skills it confers. The project will test how strategies developed in partnership
with industry can be used successfully to recruit, educate, and support
engineering technology students. The findings and evidence generated will be
relevant to engineering technology programs in multiple disciplines and regions.
Assessment of the cohort-workshop-intern model will document the impact of peer
and faculty support on retaining students after the critical first year of
study. The internships, industry tours, and career services offered to students
will be evaluated to determine how visualization of careers may support student
retention and completion of associate degrees. Since the College serves many
Hispanic and lower-income students, the evidence gathered from this project can
also inform strategies for increasing interest and degree completion rates in
engineering technology by these student populations elsewhere. The project
results will be disseminated broadly, including to industry, thus promoting the
cohort-workshop-intern model as a potential solution to workforce needs in
multiple industries. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.