* 2000696
* Technician Training in CRISPR-based Gene Editing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* John McDowell, Delaware Technical & Community College Stanton-Newark Campus
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 574,327.00

CRISPR-based gene editing is revolutionizing biological research as a mechanism
to efficiently and precisely modify the genome of almost any organism. As a
result of the wide incorporation of CRISPER-based technologies in genetic
engineering, there is a need for a biotechnology workforce that is trained in
its use. Community colleges are adept at meeting rapidly changing workforce
needs such as this. To this end, Delaware Technical Community College proposes
to develop and incorporate CRISPR-based gene editing training into its
biotechnology curriculum. This work will be done in collaboration with the Gene
Editing Institute at ChristianaCare, a Delaware-based healthcare organization.
The project also aims to provide workshops to train community college faculty
across the nation in CRISPR-based gene editing techniques. The trained faculty
can in turn educate large numbers of students about this gene editing technique,
to better prepare students for the current biotechnology workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This partnership combines the content expertise of staff
at the Gene Editing Institute with that of faculty at Delaware Technical
Community College to develop and implement a high impact CRISPR-based gene
editing curriculum and to offer training workshops for faculty. The project
includes engagement with industry partners and national experts in bioethics.
The professional development workshops will enable participants to broaden
biotechnology instruction related to CRISPR use, as well related ethical issues.
Through these activities, the project expects to serve nearly 100 bioscience
students at Delaware Technical Community College and 90 community college
faculty. The intention is to help students gain the knowledge and skills needed
to contribute to a rapidly expanding field with a wide range of applications.
The specific aims of the project are to: (1) continue to update and provide
effective training in state-of-the-art gene editing techniques to prepare
students in a two-year biotechnology program to enter bioscience careers or
further education; (2) disseminate an advanced, current curriculum and model
high impact teaching practices to community college instructors through three
and five day gene editing workshops. The employability skills of graduates will
be strengthened and broadened with the use of classroom activities that involve
analysis and interpretation of bioinformatic data, technical oral presentations,
understanding and evaluation of scientific literature, and group work as
examples. As a result of these efforts, the project team expects to contribute
to the national need for technicians who are skilled in gene editing
technologies. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.