* 2000281
* The Micro Nano Technology Education Center (MNT-EC)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Imelda Cossette, Pasadena City College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 9,327,317.00

Micro- and nanotechnology enhances the performance of thousands of commonly used
devices. For example, micro- and nanotechnology is used to make components of
electronic devices such as computers, cell phones, wearable activity monitors,
and medical sensors. It is also used to improve products, such as making tennis
balls that last longer, cloth that repels water, and bandages that prevent
bacterial growth. As micro- and nanotechnologies are increasingly used to
improve products and create new ones, micro- and nanotechnology industries are
expected to experience double-digit growth into the foreseeable future.
Consequently, a highly skilled technical workforce is needed to keep pace with
the demands of and the changes in micro- and nanotechnology industries. To
support preparation of this workforce across the United States, this project
will establish and support the NSF Advanced Technological Education Program’s
Micro Nano Technology Education Center (MNT-EC). The MNT-EC will directly
increase the numbers of community college faculty participating in micro- and
nanotechnology technician education, thus supporting an increased number of
students who receive technical education degrees and certificates in micro- and
nanotechnology fields. As a result, this project will support preparation of a
skilled technical workforce in a field that has enormous impact on the nation’s
economy, security, and health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be led by
Pasadena City College in collaboration with Edmonds Community College, Portland
Community College, and Northwest Vista College. In addition, the MNT-EC will
connect existing micro and nano NSF ATE Resource Centers (NACK, SCME, NEATEC,
and MatEdu). As a result, MNT-EC will leverage a broad set of expertise to
prepare a nationwide skilled technical workforce for manufacture of micro and
nano products. Each member of the MNT-EC will bring resources, such as
cleanrooms, educational materials, and remote operation of lab instruments, to
support and inform the development of a common curriculum for associate degrees
and certificates in micro nano technologies. The content of this curriculum will
be informed by the needs of industry members and be updated via annual reviews
between academic and industry members. The faculty of the academic institutions
will remain current in micro- and nanotechnology innovations via periodic
workshops or webinars across the various specializations (such as safety,
fabrication, operations) provided by the academic and industry members. The MNT-
EC will map where the micro- and nanotechnology industry is greatest and where
it is growing and promote adaptation of the MNT-EC curriculum at regional two-
year institutions near these locations. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.