* 2000492
* Student Reasoning Patterns in Next Generation Science Standards Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Matthew Johnson, Educational Testing Service
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,862.00

The goal of this project, led by a team at Educational Testing Services, is to
develop automated tools by which assessments aligned with the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS) can be scored to reveal student reasoning patterns,
some of which would reflect particular weaknesses in student reasoning.
Reasoning patterns refer to various ways of student thinking when making sense
of a natural phenomenon or trying to solve a problem. The investigators will
conduct a proof of concept study to develop automated diagnostics that can
identify middle-school students’ reasoning patterns based on their written
responses to assessments of their understanding of concepts in ecology. With the
states increasingly moving towards implementing assessments aligned to the NGSS,
feedback based on individual students’ reasoning patterns would allow teachers
the ability to develop more individualized feedback and would also support the
design of automated instruction based on evidence of what students know and how
they learn, rather than instruction based simply on whether they had answered
correctly or not. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program,
which supports work that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct a proof of
concept study to identity student reasoning patterns for making sense of
ecosystems by investigating student responses to constructed test items
collected from an NGSS-aligned assessment database. In the first stage of the
study, the investigators will use a 3-dimensional (content knowledge, procedural
knowledge, and epistemic knowledge) approach to assessment that aligns with the
NGSS. They will leverage cutting-edge natural language processing (NLP)
techniques to identify student reasoning patterns, attempting to label text as
data description and system relationship description and attempting to identify
superficial integration as opposed to integrated reasoning. The investigators
will engage in an iterative process to compare the classification produced by
the automated tools with that produced by human scorers. With this
classification developed and validated, the investigators will have demonstrated
the feasibility of later attempting to develop an NLP-based automated system
that could provide immediate feedback to students, identifying weaknesses in
reasoning rather than only whether an answer was correct, and to teachers,
allowing them to tailor instruction to individual
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.