* 2000554
* CAREER:  Mechanobiology of Septins in the Cytoskeleton
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Patrick Oakes, Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/28/2023
* USD 449,041.00

Understanding the mechanisms of how cells manipulate their own material
properties will provide new ways to treat disease and a way to develop new
engineering materials. The cells and tissues that make up living organisms have
material properties just like any other substance. When exposed to mechanical
forces, such as pulling or pushing, they stretch and change shape. They can even
generate these forces themselves. The material properties of cells are
controlled by the cytoskeleton, a collection of filamentous proteins. This
network of filaments gives cells their shape, much like the skeleton defines the
human shape. In cells, however, this network is dynamic and adaptive,
reorganizing itself to help cells perform various functions or to resist outside
mechanical stresses. The cytoskeleton thus represents a new class of material
that doesn't obey the traditional models of engineering materials. It can
modulate its material properties in both space and time. This Faculty Early
Career Development Program (CAREER) project will determine how the cell is able
to spatially and temporally regulate its material properties and unearth novel
design principles that can be used to develop new engineering materials and to
understand how some diseases affect cell behavior. Sitting at the interface
between physics, biology, and engineering, this multi-disciplinary work will
inform research across a broad spectrum of fields. Most importantly, it will
create opportunities for a diverse set of students and young researchers to
develop innovative skills and perspectives, in particular learning to
communicate novel methods and ideas across disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cytoskeleton is a model system for developing insights
into non-equilibrium mechanics and network dynamics, and is known to both
generate and respond to mechanical signals. Despite the fact that the principal
molecular biochemical interactions have been well detailed, we still lack an
understanding of how macroscopic scale behaviors emerge from the collection of
many molecular interactions. Septins are the least studied filaments that make
up the cytoskeleton. They bind to both actin and the plasma membrane, and have
been shown to localize specifically to regions of actin curvature and mechanical
stress. This research project will test the hypothesis that septins help to
regulate the material properties of the cytoskeleton by altering the local
architecture. This work will measure the material properties of septin-actin
networks in both living cells and purified protein networks, and test the
response of these networks to mechanical perturbations such as micropatterning
to control cell shape, traction force microscopy, and optogenetics to induce
local contractions. In addition to potentially uncovering novel mechanisms to
regulate cell shape, this work will also generate insight into how molecular
interactions in a network are integrated into macroscopic
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.