* 2000786
* Innovations in Advanced Machining Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Mason Lefler, Bridgerland Applied Technology College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 11/30/2023
* USD 499,695.00

A critical shortage in skilled machining technicians exists across the nation,
including in Utah's Bear River region. Factors that contribute to this shortage
include retirements, low unemployment rates, and the changing skills that
workers need because of innovation in the manufacturing sector. This project
aims to increase the quality, capacity, and number of the next generation of
skilled machinists in the Bear River Region. To achieve this goal, the project
will design a new streamlined Machining Technology certificate aligned to
industry needs for more Computer Numerical Control (CNC) experience. CNC uses
computers and software to control machines, such as milling machines, lathes,
and cutters. It is a technology that is increasingly important in manufacturing.
The new Machining Technology certificate will be co-developed with industry
partners. It will focus on engaging and supporting students through real world,
problem-based machining projects. The project intends to acquire new equipment
and to provide additional faculty training to prepare new workers from high
school for the advanced manufacturing workforce, as well as to upskill local
incumbent machinists. In this way, it will contribute to the national need for a
highly skilled technological workforce for advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will align the Machining
Technology program with local industry needs by including certification in
innovative advanced manufacturing technologies, such as 5-axis CNC machines,
programmable Coordinate Measuring Machine (CMM), and robotics. By working with
area high schools, the project intends to serve as a model for how applied
technical colleges and secondary schools can collaborate to strengthen awareness
of high-paying careers in advanced manufacturing, as well as how the relevant
stackable credentials can support a pathway towards college. The project will
disseminate newly designed industry courses, recruitment strategies, and
outcomes at local and regional meetings, such as the Utah System of Technical
Colleges Presidents meeting, and at national meetings, including the Advanced
Technological Education principal investigator meeting. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.