* 2000261
* Theory of Nonlinear Elliptic Equations and Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Yanyan Li, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2023
* USD 239,999.00

Partial differential equations arise naturally in physics, engineering,
geometry, and many other fields, and they form the basis for modeling many
phenomena in the physical world. The particular class of fully nonlinear
elliptic equations and systems is especially important from this perspective.
For instance, such equations and systems play a role in the theoretical study of
composite materials. This project will contribute to a basic understanding of
fully nonlinear elliptic equations and systems, thereby providing scientists and
engineers with sharpened insight into various physical processes and ultimately
enhancing the quality of consumer products manufactured from composites. As part
of the project, the principal investigator will train Ph.D. students, many of
whom are expected to continue their careers as educators and help convey the
long-term value of mathematical research not only to science and engineering but
also, in the end, to society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At a technical level, this
project is a natural continuation of the principal investigator's earlier work,
which includes valuable contributions to this research area. One part of the
project concerns a longstanding open problem on the existence and compactness of
solutions to a fully nonlinear Yamabe problem. This is equivalent to solving, on
a Riemannian manifold, a fully nonlinear elliptic, but not uniformly elliptic,
partial differential equation of second order. The current understanding of this
type of equations is insufficient, especially compared to what is known for
fully nonlinear uniformly elliptic second order equations, where theories are
much more mature. The study of this open problem should lead to a better
understanding of these elliptic, but not uniformly elliptic, equations. It will
also lead to a better understanding of degenerate elliptic fully nonlinear
equations of second order. This project will provide new analytical tools for
the study of these and other important nonlinear partial differential equations
arising from geometry and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.