* 2000103
* HBCU-Excellence in Research: Howard University Beltsville Center for Planetary  Boundary Layer Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jose Fuentes, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 998,935.00

This award supports building a regional center for atmospheric studies at the
historical Howard University Beltsville Campus (HUBC) observation site. The
project will enhance the atmosphere observational capability in the greater
Washington-Baltimore area with a suite of measurements such as wind
speed/direction, air temperature, water vapor and aerosol concentrations from
the surface to near 10 miles above. The collected data will be used to
understand how thunderstorms develop through observational data analysis and
computer models. The project involves scientists and students from Howard
University, University of Maryland at Baltimore, and the Pennsylvania State
University. The enhanced observation capabilities through the project would
provide under-represented students the opportunity to be involved in an
international community for cutting edge atmospheric research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will update the ALVICE (Atmospheric
Lidar for Validation, Interagency Collaboration and Education) Raman Lidar
system developed by NASA. In addition to the remote sensing observation from the
ALVICE mobile laboratory, radiosondes will be launched regularly as part of
Howard University’s participation in the international Global Climate Observing
System Reference Upper-Air Network (GRUAN). The PSU high resolution WRF-EnKF
data assimilation (DA) system will also be used with the observation from the
HUBC site and field data collected from the PECAN (Plains Elevated Convection at
Night) field campaign to focus on convection initiation, particularly on
“difficult to predict” events. The project will enhance HUBCs ability to serve
as a regional center for boundary layer research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.