* 2000566
* Collaborative Research: Algebra Instruction at Community Colleges: Validating Measures of Quality Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Mary Beisiegel, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 124,492.00

This STEM Learning and Learning Environments project seeks to advance
understanding of algebra education at community colleges. It will build on prior
work to explore further the relationship between the quality of instruction in
college algebra classes and teachers’ mathematical knowledge for teaching. This
“knowledge for teaching” is the mathematical understanding that teachers need in
order to be effective teachers of mathematics. For example, this knowledge
enables teachers to explore and diagnose why students are struggling with a
mathematical concept and provide targeted help. Despite its critical role in US
higher education, instruction at community colleges is a neglected sector of
instructional capacity in the United States. To advance mathematics education
research related to the first two years of college, this project will develop
the Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching Community College Algebra assessment.
This assessment will identify the specialized knowledge that teachers need for
teaching community college algebra in a way that supports student growth in
thinking about fundamental mathematical concepts. The project will also advance
previous work by refining the Evaluating the Quality of Instruction of Post-
secondary Mathematics instrument, which assesses characteristics of high-quality
instruction in community college algebra courses. These efforts will enhance the
research tools available for studying post-secondary teaching at community
colleges, specifically in College Algebra. Since college algebra is often a
gateway course to STEM degrees, this project has the potential to improve the
recruitment into and success of students in STEM fields and, thus, support STEM
workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves four primary
institutions: University of Michigan, University of Minnesota, Maricopa
Community College District, and Oregon State University. The primary goals of
the proposed research are to: (1) develop, pilot, field test, validate, and
disseminate the Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching Community College Algebra
assessment; (2) refine items in the Evaluating the Quality of Instruction of
Post-secondary Mathematics video-coding instrument to address aspects of
instruction that support diversity, equity, and inclusion in mathematics
classrooms; and (3) theoretically and empirically explore the connection between
the constructs that underlie both instruments. The project will use a mixed
methods design that involves qualitative analysis of artifacts, item
development, and psychometric testing, with the input of community college
faculty in all the phases of the study, including integrating community college
faculty as research associates, and thus building capacity for future research
collaborations. At the conclusion of this project, two instruments will be
available to support multiple efforts to advance the quality of instruction in
postsecondary settings and the professional development of instructors. This
project is supported by the EHR Core Research program, which supports work that
advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.