* 2000933
* Expanding Remote Delivery of Information Technologies Education in a Rural Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Laura Berry, North Arkansas College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 470,059.00

Between 2019 and 2023, Information Technology (IT) jobs are expected to grow 10%
in northwest Arkansas. The demand for IT professionals in Arkansas is already
outpacing the number of graduates being produced. This project aims to address
this need by remotely delivering IT courses to rural students in a six-county
area in north-central Arkansas. The use of remote-access labs will provide state
of the art, hands-on coursework to these students, thus preparing them for
employment as IT technicians in northwest Arkansas. This project has the
potential to change the lives of students who are unable to move outside of
their local area for IT education or work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The college will
expand delivery of remote content to include the associate degree in Information
Technology, and will improve the curriculum by adding new content, including
cloud technologies, virtualization, and Internet of Things. The students will
have access to real-world problem solving and teamwork in the capstone course,
as well as internship opportunities. Such changes will build employability
skills into the program so that students are ready for immediate employment
after graduation. This program will offer year-round access with multiple entry
points, providing more flexible opportunities for program completion. The
project has the potential to help diversify the workforce and grow the economy
in rural areas by providing access to high-tech jobs for low-income students.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.