* 2000174
* Excellence in Research: Multi-Charge Ion Implantation of Ultra-Wide Bandgap beta-Ga2O3 Semiconductor Grown by Magnetron Sputtering
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Bijandra Kumar, Elizabeth City State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;This Excellence in Research (EiR) project at
a minority-serving institution will support faculty research on materials, build
the institutional research capacity, and train underrepresented and underserved
students in materials research. This research project includes developing a
reliable technique for depositing thin layers of gallium oxide, a semiconductor.
This material is interesting because it has shown promise for many special
defense and civilian electronic device applications, including high power
microelectronic devices and harsh environment sensors. Undergraduate students
with very little or no prior research experience will learn technological skills
by conducting research during the regular academic year and in the summer. Five
talented High School students from neighboring schools in rural northeastern
North Carolina will be introduced to materials research careers each year during
the summer research internship supported with this grant. Undergraduate students
from a minority-serving institution will have the opportunity to conduct
research with, and interact and learn from graduate students and faculty from
Old Dominion University, a collaborating partner on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The growth of
beta-gallium oxide epilayers by the relatively inexpensive magnetron sputtering
method on electrically insulating (iron-doped) and conducting (tin-doped)
gallium oxide substrates is being investigated. Their structures will be
characterized with various high-resolution X-ray diffraction scans. Doping of
the gallium oxide layers is attained via co-sputtering with different dopant
targets. Low energy laser Multi-Charge Ion (MCI) implantation used to heavily
dope the top layer of the material at selected spatial locations will also be
investigated. The principal investigator and student researchers will work with
the co-investigator and graduate students at Old Dominion University to study
MCI implantation and efficient dopant activation processes. The ultra-wide
energy gap of this material implies high breakdown field strength and high
tolerance for extreme conditions and harsh environments. Beta-gallium oxide
semiconductor is a good candidate for high power electronic devices, solar-blind
UV photodetectors, photocatalysts, gas sensors, and solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.