* 2000865
* Broadening Participation in STEM Through Virtual Reality Career Exploration: Introducing Underrepresented Students to High Need STEM Careers
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Kara Ieva, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 496,963.00

The project will examine the efficacy of an intervention designed to increase
self-efficacy and motivation to pursue STEM careers among rural high school
students. Researchers will use a design-based approach to partner with rural
school districts to&lt;br/&gt;introduce students to high-need STEM career fields
using virtual reality technology and career exploration modules. They will also
guide students in assessing their potential fit for these fields. The
researchers hypothesize that student career decision making self-efficacy and
career outcome expectations will statistically improve as a result of the
intervention. The project will be&lt;br/&gt;implemented in two stages:
development of the curriculum modules and then implementation of the
intervention&lt;br/&gt;with research being conducted concurrently. The project
is designed to broaden participation in the STEM workforce for those in rural
communities, particularly women and underrepresented groups, by exposing
students and school counselors to potential high-need
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by social cognitive career theory, the
researchers will employ an experimental design with randomization within
clusters to measure the effectiveness of the intervention by investigating four
research questions: (1) What is the magnitude of the&lt;br/&gt;effect of a STEM
career exploration intervention using virtual reality technology on student
career decision making self-efficacy, career outcome expectations, and knowledge
of the targeted careers? (2) How do student inputs of gender,
race/ethnicity,&lt;br/&gt;and personality impact the effects of participation in
the career intervention on outcomes of career decision making self-efficacy,
career outcome expectations, and knowledge of the targeted careers? (3) How does
student socio-economic status impact the effects of&lt;br/&gt;participation in
the career intervention on outcomes of career decision making self-efficacy,
career outcome expectations, and knowledge of the targeted careers? and (4) How
do students characterize the effectiveness of the career exploration
intervention&lt;br/&gt;in developing their understanding of, and interest in,
the target careers? Data will be collected pre- and post-intervention.
Additionally, student focus groups will be used to collect data from a
representative sample of students from the treatment&lt;br/&gt;condition at each
school. The project will produce a proof-of-concept for the efficacy of virtual
reality technology in rural educational settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program that supports
fundamental research focused on STEM learning and learning &lt;br/&gt;and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM professional
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.