* 2000177
* Bridging the Skills Gap in Smart Manufacturing through a New Technician Education Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* James White, Marion Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2023
* USD 477,868.00

As the rapidly developing field of Smart Manufacturing introduces advanced
technologies into traditional manufacturing facilities, technical education must
keep pace. Such technologies include smart machines, advanced control systems,
the industrial internet of things, and cloud services. This project aims to
address the growing gap between the skills employers need in Smart Manufacturing
and the skills students develop from traditional technical education programs.
By creating new academic pathways, this project plans to increase the number of
skilled technicians who can meet the demand from key regional employers. The
project will support professional development activities to help college and
high school instructors understand new trends in manufacturing. The new
curriculum will focus on enabling students to learn the skills needed to be
successful in a Smart Manufacturing environment. This project may also provide a
model for other colleges that want to implement a Smart Manufacturing technical
education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to
create a manufacturing industry-aligned technician education pathway in Smart
Manufacturing, with the goal of increasing the supply of qualified technicians
with proficiency in advanced technology applications. A job skills analysis will
be performed to identify the set of technical skills that are needed in Smart
Manufacturing facilities. Based on the results of the analysis, a curriculum in
Smart Manufacturing will be developed to include multiple pathways leading to
Associate of Applied Science degrees and certificates. The pathways will also
include entry points and fast track options for incumbent workers in
manufacturing and information technology fields. A Smart Manufacturing career
pathway initiative will be designed to recruit underrepresented students,
promote careers in manufacturing to high school students, and establish transfer
agreements with four-year programs. The project will also organize an annual
Smart Manufacturing Summit to bring together industry practitioners, community
college instructors, and high school instructors to promote dissemination of
best practices in technical education for Smart Manufacturing. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.