* 2000157
* Excellence in Research: Antibiotics in the rhizosphere and resistance mechanisms in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Mentewab Ayalew, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 505,619.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the relationship between metal uptake
and antibiotic resistance in plants. Plants mine the soil to extract minerals
and in so doing, may take up antibiotics produced by soil microorganisms that
adversely affect normal plant function. How plants maintain adequate nutrition
while limiting the uptake of antibiotics is unknown. We specifically investigate
metal uptake in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana and its resistance to the
antibiotic kanamycin. We propose a model in which the interplay among various
transporters explains the trade-offs between metal uptake and antibiotic
resistance. Our approach that combines mathematical modeling and experimental
validation would allow us to examine these otherwise complex interactions that
are not intuitive. Moreover the project provides an excellent opportunity for
interdisciplinary training of undergraduate students at Spelman College, a
Historically Black College for women. Overall, the project will contribute to
enhancing the educational environment through research, curriculum and student
development opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fe and Zn are among the most
abundant micronutrients found in plants. Their uptake and movement in the plant
is highly regulated. Our preliminary results showed a link between metal uptake
in plants and antibiotic resistance. Most notably, Fe uptake declined in plants
exposed to kanamycin. We propose a model that integrates what is known about Fe
and Zn homeostasis with the effects of the antibiotic kanamycin. Besides Fe, Zn
and kanamycin, other factors taken into consideration are the main chelators of
Fe and Zn, citrate and nicotianamine (NA), and their known or assumed
transporters. The model is centered on xylem loading, a critical step prior for
the long distance transport of nutrients. A corresponding dynamic mathematical
model based on a Generalized Mass Action system will be formulated and tested
both computationally and biochemically. It is expected that this model will
offer a new paradigm for understanding the link between metal nutrition and
antibiotics in Arabidopsis and possibly crop species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.