* 2000881
* A Research Collaborative to Build Employability Skills for STEM Technology Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kyra Caspary, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 07/31/2024
* USD 868,466.00

Changes in the technician workplace are increasing the demand for employees who
have skills in adaptability, collaboration, communication, workplace diversity,
lifelong learning, and understanding the business mission. This project plans to
address this need by developing and testing a professional development model
that fosters students’ employability skills. The focus will be on students who
are enrolled in a new Advanced Manufacturing Technology program/career pathway
that will prepare them for careers as advanced manufacturing technicians. The
research team will adapt the researcher-practitioner-partnership to support the
development of these students’ employability skills. The project is estimated to
directly serve at least fifty students pursuing associate degrees in the new
program, six program faculty, and 25 additional faculty in both postsecondary
and secondary technician programs. The project's research activities will
investigate: (1) the effectiveness of this approach to developing employability
skills; (2) the feasibility of rapid development and testing of new curricula;
and, (3) the effectiveness of short-term employability skills development
experiences compared to multiple development experiences over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher-practitioner-partnership method was
developed to improve the flow and implementation of research findings into
practice at the K-12 level. This method will be adapted for use in post-
secondary technician education. Using a set of research methods and assessments,
this effort will study simultaneously the teaching and learning of employability
skills while engaging technician educators as co-designers, developers, and
knowledge builders. In alignment with the researcher-practitioner-partnership
method, the process to validate assessments will identify and define
employability skills constructs and identify instructional strategies to ensure
alignment of assessments to practice. The research team will use grounded theory
and the “plan-do-study-act” approach modified for use in the researcher-
practitioner-partnership context to adapt, test, and refine employability skills
tools, resources, and methods. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.