* 2000681
* EAGER: Subtle and Harmful: Millisecond-scale Viral Denial of Service (VDoS) Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Qingyang Wang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 03/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Viral Denial of Service (VDoS) attacks are a new class of attacks that affect
the quality of service (QoS) requirements of mission critical web-facing
services. These attacks exploit milli-bottlenecks, which are resource saturation
conditions of very short duration that result in accumulated queueing delay for
resources among inter-dependent components in the n-tier applications used by
such services. The attacker can launch this attack by either increasing the rate
of submission of job requests (rate of arrival from the service provider's
perspective) or by decreasing the rate of job processing (by submitting jobs
that are resource intensive). Owing to the very short duration of VDoS attacks
(of the order of several milliseconds), they can remain below the detection
threshold of typical monitoring tools for traditional denial of service attacks
and are, consequently, subtle and stealthy. Nonetheless, they have the potential
to cause significant damage. For example, Amazon reported that every 100ms
increase in a page load time is correlated to a decrease in sales by 1%; Google
requires 99% of its queries to finish within 500ms. This project will
investigate the nature and modalities of VDoS attacks and develop mitigation
tools to help combat them. Students at both graduate as well as undergraduate
levels will be involved in the research. VDoS experimental data sets as well as
tool-sets related to conducting VDoS related experiments will be publicly
released.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will proceed along two tasks. First,
large-scale experiments will be conducted to evaluate the interactions among the
various control parameters of VDoS attacks. This part of the study will identify
how VDoS attacks occur, what their external manifestations are and how they can
be mathematically modeled such that the tradeoffs between the granularity of
attack and damage potential can be fully explored. Second, based on the
knowledge acquired through the first task, detection methods and tools will be
developed to reproduce and/or evaluate known millisecond-scale VDoS attacks on a
testbed and find new ones. This will then lead to mitigation tools for combating
VDoS attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.