* 2000036
* Research Initiation Award: Unraveling the Elemental Abundances and Dust Properties of the Interstellar Medium
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Ajay Mishra, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 04/30/2024
* USD 190,384.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Lincoln University, Missouri, has potential broader impacts in a number
of areas. The goal of this project is to study the relationship between dust
properties and the interstellar environments. The project is a collaborative
effort with faculty at the University of Missouri-Columbia, involves
undergraduate students in the research, and is developing three undergraduate
astronomy courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is well recognized that both
the Galactic interstellar extinction curves and the gas-phase abundances of
carbon, oxygen, and other metal elements exhibit considerable variations from
one sightline to another, as yet, most of the dust extinction modeling efforts
have been directed to the Galactic average extinction curve which is obtained by
averaging over many clouds of different gas and dust properties. Therefore, any
details concerning the relationship between the dust properties and the
interstellar environments are lost. By utilizing the wealth of extinction and
abundance data obtained by the International Ultraviolet Explorer, Hubble Space
Telescope, and the Far-Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer, this project explores
the dust properties of over one hundred individual sight lines by simultaneously
both fitting the observed extinction curve from the near-infrared to the far-
ultraviolet and conforming to the observed abundance constraints. Thus insight
into the physical nature of interstellar grains and how they are related to the
physical and chemical conditions of their environments will be gained. The
results of the research will greatly benefit the analysis and understanding of
the previously acquired data from various space missions, as well as of future
data obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.