* 2000603
* ECR DBER DCL: Facilitation Practices of Instructional Assistants
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Hannah Sevian, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 647,180.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by characterizing the ways in
which facilitation practices of instructional assistants contribute to the
scientific literacy of students in large enrollment introductory chemistry and
physics lectures. In this project, instructional assistants are defined as
undergraduate learning assistants and graduate teaching assistants who support
student learning during problem solving in interactive lectures. Integrating
instructional assistants into introductory gatekeeper courses contributes to
increased student achievement and a decrease in failure rates in these courses
and can be particularly beneficial for students from marginalized groups.
However, not every instructional assistant-student interaction is effective.
This foundational research will characterize interactive dynamics that are
effective for student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a
sociocultural perspective to model four dimensions of instructional assistants’
facilitation practices: the nature of instructional assistant-student
interactions, their purposes, in-the-moment learning that occurs, and the
integration of the interactions into the whole class. The research will adapt
the formative assessment enactment model that was developed to characterize K-12
teaching practices to model instructional assistant-student interactions.
Practical epistemology analysis will be used to model students’ in-the-moment
learning during interactions. The integration of interactions into the whole
class will be characterized using cultural historical activity theory to relate
instructional assistant-student interactions and whole class discussions.
Multiple strands of data will be collected and qualitatively analyzed, including
videos of instructional assistant-student interactions and interviews with
professors, instructional assistants, and students. Results from this project
will provide a theoretical basis to inform professional development for IAs and
further systematic study of their practices. This project is supported by the
EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental
research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.