* 2000324
* Collaborative Research: Excellence in Research: Interactive Effects of Dietary Fat and Gut Microbiota on Neurobehavioral Development in Gallus gallus
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Scott Harrison, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 972,936.00

Dietary fat is not only an important source of energy in human and animal diets,
but it can also result in production of metabolites that may alter specific
physiological functions in living organisms, including those associated with
behavior. Dietary fat can impact both the composition of the gut microbiome and
the generation of metabolites by the gut microbiome. Using chickens (Gallus
gallus) as a vertebrate model, this study will investigate the interactive
effects of dietary fat type and quantity on the composition of metabolites
produced by gut microbiota, and will identify consequent changes in brain
function (neurotransmitter signaling) and bird behavior. This study will utilize
cutting-edge analytical techniques including genomics, metagenomics, gene
expression, and electrophysiology to examine these interactive effects, with
this work being conducted by both faculty and student researchers at three
collaborating institutions. This study will provide mentored research
experiences to more than a dozen biological and animal science students from the
historically black institutions (HBCUs) involved in this project, as well as
training three PhD students. Results from this study are expected to lead to a
more complete understanding of how dietary fat types and the microbiota impact
animal health, with potential applications to human health and the agricultural
production of chickens. By involving undergraduate students from two HBCUs in
the research, the project will help motivate impactful scientific researchers of
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing body of evidence suggesting
that dietary fat type and concentration impact the physiological and behavioral
conditions of animals with respect to nutrient levels, brain function, and
reactivity to stress. However, the molecular mechanisms by which dietary fat and
gut microbiota interact to influence the central serotonergic system are yet to
be elucidated in birds. In this study, male and female chickens of varying ages
will serve as model vertebrate animals to understand how changes in dietary fat
type and concentration impact the activity of the central serotonergic system.
Changes in gut microbiota in response to diet and age will be evaluated through
16S rRNA sequencing and shotgun metagenomics. Resulting shifts in metabolites
produced from intestinal microbial fermentation processes will be determined by
metabolomics, and relevant metabolites will be tracked from the gut through the
blood, and to the brain. A systems-based analysis will enable the identification
of metabolites that cross the blood-brain barrier to potentially modulate brain
signaling and serotonin synthesis. Changes in bird behavior will be studied by
using video recordings and software to perform neurobehavioral analysis.
Expression levels of genes involved in production of behavior-modulating
neurotransmitters will be quantified as correlates of dietary fat and gut
microbiota interactions. The results may lead to improvements in the
agricultural production of chickens. This multifaceted project will provide
integrative STEM training experiences for undergraduate students and three PhD-
level trainees. The project represents a new cross-disciplinary research area in
the collaborating laboratories to investigate the gut-brain-microbiome axis, and
will impact the research environment at two HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.