* 2000868
* CAREER: The Measurement and Influence of Mathematics Motivation in a Digital Context
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Teomara Rutherford, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,092,262.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate fundamental knowledge in the field. This Early Faculty Career
Development project supports the generation of knowledge through the building of
a firm foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education and
research in STEM disciplines. It will examine ways to address a national concern
for strengthening students' mathematics competency by enhancing their content
knowledge in and motivation for learning mathematics. The study will focus on
student motivation for learning as an important predictor of student choice,
persistence, and achievement in STEM careers. It will advance research beyond
studies that only examine links between motivation and mathematics achievement
to lesser known aspects about how motivation functions to support students' in-
the-moment choices during learning. The project will: (1) embed experience
sampling questions and enhanced choice options within a Spatial Temporal Math
digital platform; (2) examine associations between situated student motivation,
choice, and academic outcomes; (3) develop nudge interventions based on these
associations and iteratively test nudges in a series of experiments within the
platform; and (4) assess the impact of nudges in a randomized trial. This
project will collect data from over 30K third through fifth grade students for a
period of one year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experience sampling and data mining
methods will be used to collect data about student motivation as they engage
Spatial Temporal Math on a digitized mathematics learning platform aligned with
state standards. Methods will include surveys, interviews, observations, and
other student related tests and school data. Pilot studies will provide data
essential to developing interventions that promote deeper learning drawing on
motivation theory and behavioral economics. Results from this project will
advance theoretical and analytic bases for understanding motivation and choice
situated in real-world learning contexts. These new advances will help transform
understanding about student motivation and behaviors as well as inform
improvements in the teaching and learning of mathematics. In addition to the 30K
that will be directly impacted by this study; in real time, the project will
help improve learning for more than a million existing users of the digital
platform. Thus, results will benefit society by enhancing student content
knowledge and motivational practices while simultaneously developing a
foundation for being successful in challenging mathematics
undertakings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.