* 2000224
* Travel Support for Student Participation at the 2019 ASME-IMECE Micro and Nano Technology Forum; Salt Lake City, Utah; November 10-14, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Ganesh Balasubramanian, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2020
* USD 15,050.00

The purpose of this award is to provide partial travel support for post-docs and
graduate and undergraduate students to attend the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition in Salt
Lake City, Utah, November 10-14, 2019. The students will participate in the ASME
Society-Wide Micro and Nano Technology Forum (Topic 17-15), which focuses on new
research in the field of micro and nano engineering and science. The students
will present through oral and poster sessions their latest research results to
the advanced manufacturing and broader engineering communities. Funds for the
students' travel are based on the technical quality of the poster abstracts
submitted as well as on a statement from the students' research advisors.
Priority is given to student participants who are women or who come from
underrepresented minority groups. This approach promotes diverse participation
at the conference, in the short term, and in STEM fields, in the long term. This
award benefits the nation through the education of a skilled and diverse
manufacturing and engineering workforce better prepared to provide
transformative solutions the challenges of their chosen
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to benefit
the students' professional, scientific and technical development. Attendance at
the conference gives the students a broader view of the advanced manufacturing
and engineering profession and of state-of-the-art research in their fields via
access to several technical and professional development talks by leading
domestic and international speakers. Students enhance their communication skills
through oral and poster presentations, in-depth discussions of their work with
peers in their fields during the Society-wide Poster Symposium at the Micro and
Nanotechnology Forum. This interactive experience significantly broadens student
education, increases their enthusiasm for their research topic, acquaints them
with expectations for scientific careers, and exposes them to new avenues for
innovative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.