* 2000995
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Orbital-scale Variability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet and the Formation of Bottom Water in the Ross Sea during the Pliocene-Pleistocene
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gary Acton, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 57,598.00

Part I: Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Predicting how polar ice sheets
will respond to future global warming is difficult because all the processes
that contribute to their melting are not well understood. This is important
because the more ice on land that melts, the higher sea levels will rise. The
most significant uncertainty in current estimates of sea-level rise in the
coming decades is the potential contribution from the Antarctic Ice Sheet. One
way to increase our knowledge about how large ice sheets respond to climate
change in response to natural factors is to examine the geologic past. Natural
global warming (and cooling) events in Earth’s history provide examples that we
can use to better understand processes, interactions, and responses we can’t
directly observe today. One such time period, approximately three million years
ago (known as the Pliocene), was the last time atmospheric carbon dioxide levels
were as high as they are today and, therefore, represents a time period to study
to better understand the ice sheet response to a warming climate. Specifically,
this project is interested in understanding how ocean currents near Antarctica,
which transport heat and store carbon, behaved during these past climate events.
The history of past ice sheet-ocean interactions are recorded in sediments that
were deposited, layer upon layer, in the deep sea offshore Antarctica. In
January-February 2018, a team of scientists and crew set sail to the Ross Sea,
offshore west Antarctica, on the scientific ocean drilling vessel JOIDES
Resolution to recover such sediment archives. This project focuses on a sediment
core from that expedition, which captures the relatively warm Pliocene time
interval, as well as the subsequent transition into cooler climates typical of
the past two million years. The researchers will analyze the sediment with
multiple complementary measurements, including: grain size, composition,
chemistry of organic matter, physical structures, microfossil type and
abundance, and more. These analyses will be done by the research team, including
several students, at their respective laboratories and will then integrated into
a unified record of ice sheet-ocean interactions. Ultimately, the results will
be used to improve modeled projections of how the Antarctic Ice Sheet could
respond to future climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;Geological records from the Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS)
margin demonstrate that the ice sheet oscillated in response to orbital
variations in insolation (i.e., ~400, 100, 41, and 20 kyr), and it appears to be
more sensitive to specific frequencies that regulate mean annual insolation
(i.e., 41-kyr obliquity), particularly when the ice sheet extends into marine
environments and is impacted by ocean circulation. However, the relationship
between orbital forcing and the production of Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) is
unconstrained. Thus, a knowledge gap exists in understanding how changing
insolation impacts ice marginal and Southern Ocean conditions that directly
influence ventilation of the global ocean. The researchers hypothesize that
insolation-driven changes directly affected the production and export of AABW to
the Southern Ocean from the Pliocene through the Pleistocene. For example,
obliquity amplification during the warmer Pliocene may have led to enhanced
production and export of dense waters from the shelf due to reduced AIS extent,
which, in turn, led to greater AABW outflow. To determine the relationship of
AABW production to orbital regime, they plan to reconstruct both from a single,
continuous record from the levee of Hillary Canyon, a major conduit of AABW
outflow, on the Ross Sea continental rise. To test their hypothesis, they will
analyze sediment from IODP Site U1524 (recovered in 2018 during International
Ocean Discovery Program Expedition 374) and focus on three data sets. (1) They
will use the occurrence, frequency, and character of mm-scale turbidite beds as
a proxy of dense-shelf-water cascading outflow and AABW production. They will
estimate the down-slope flux via numerical modeling of turbidity current
properties using morphology, grain size, and bed thickness as input parameters.
(2) They will use grain-size data, physical properties, XRF core scanning, CT
imaging, and hyperspectral imaging to guide lithofacies analysis to infer
processes occurring during glacial, deglacial, and interglacial periods.
Statistical techniques and optimization methods will be applied to test for
astronomical forcing of sedimentary packages in order to provide a
cyclostratigraphic framework and interpret the orbital-forcing regime. (3) They
will use bulk sedimentary carbon and nitrogen abundance and isotope data to
determine how relative contributions of terrigenous and marine organic matter
change in response to orbital forcing. All of these data will be integrated with
sedimentological records to deconvolve organic matter production from its
deposition or remobilization due to AABW outflow as a function of the
oscillating extent of the AIS. These data sets will be integrated into a unified
chronostratigraphy to determine the relationship between AABW outflow and
orbital-forcing scenarios under the varying climate regimes of the Plio-
Pleistocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.