* 2000168
* Wabash Modern Analysis Seminar and Mini-Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Hari Bercovici, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2024
* USD 33,000.00

This award supports participation in the 2020 - 2022 meetings of the Wabash
Seminar and Mini-Conference series, which consists of seminars held at Wabash
College in Crawfordsville, Indiana, and an annual weekend mini-conference held
in the fall on the Indiana University â€“ Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI)
campus. The tentative dates of the next annual mini-conference are September
19-20, 2020. The main goal of Wabash Seminar and Mini-Conference series is to
bring together the community of researchers working in modern analysis in the
Midwest region, along with established researchers from farther afield, in order
to stimulate fruitful interactions and encourage collaboration among researchers
working in different areas of modern mathematical analysis. Over the years, the
seminar and mini-conference have attracted numerous faculty members,
postdoctoral researchers, and graduate students from Indiana University, IUPUI,
Purdue University, University of Illinois, University of Cincinnati, Vanderbilt
University, and Washington University in St. Louis, among other regional
institutions. The Wabash Seminar series offers an excellent opportunity for
junior researchers to be exposed to, and informed about, the latest major
mathematical developments in the field. Additionally, the series provides an
invaluable opportunity to promote research in the Midwest region, helping junior
faculty, postdocs, and graduate students in the region to gain exposure within,
network with, and disseminate their research to the broader mathematical
community. The Wabash Seminar and Mini-Conference series also serves to promote
and mentor talented undergraduate students, preparing them for graduate school
and research careers in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wabash Seminar and
the Mini-Conference series is jointly organized by researchers from four
mathematics departments: Indiana University, IUPUI, Purdue University, and the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The research groups from these
universities have complementary expertise that spans many of the major
directions of research in operator algebras and operator theory: free
probability, von Neumann algebras, non-commutative and coarse geometry,
C*-algebras and their topological invariants, operator spaces, and non-
commutative harmonic analysis as well as connections to quantum information
theory, ergodic theory and dynamical systems, and number theory. The regular
seminars at Wabash College are scheduled on Saturday afternoons. Two one-hour
speakers are invited for each seminar with ample time for discussions among the
participants. The Mini-Conference is held over a weekend, from Saturday morning
to early afternoon Sunday. Seven plenary speakers are invited to give 50-minute
talks, and 30-minute invited and contributed talks are given by postdocs,
graduate students, undergraduate students, and
visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The website for the Wabash Seminar and Mini-
Conference series is:
https://www.math.purdue.edu/~tsincla/wabash/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.