* 2000847
* The Effect of Geographic Locale on Work-Related Experiential Learning Opportunities
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Karen Webber, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 690,027.00

The project examines how students’ work-related experiential activities (WREAs)
may be affected by their institution’s geographic proximity to major economic
and workforce hubs. WREAs include internships, co-ops, practicums, job
shadowing, and other similar opportunities that enable students to apply
knowledge in an authentic setting and that lead to successful and productive
employment. The research will fill a knowledge gap by empirically documenting
the influence of locale on internships and similar professional development
opportunities for students. The research is guided by proximity research,
constructs implicit in critical human geography that can be examined through
dimensions of socio-spatial relations, and the notion of opportunity structures,
defined as the full range of opportunities available to students that organize
their education and future trajectories. The study will offer thoughtful insight
into the employability discourse and demonstrate the importance of the
contextual nuance of geographic locale. The study is expected to produce
information about the impact of geographic locale on professional development
opportunities for students and help strengthen the STEM pipeline from education
to the workforce, particularly for students who may be less connected to major
workforce hubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by proximity research, the
researchers will employ a mixed methods design to answer the following research
questions: (1) How and to what extent does geographic locale affect STEM
students’ access to work-related experimental activities? (2) Do students,
university career officials, and/or new employees perceive access to or benefit
from WREAs differently based on their institution’s geographic locale? (3) Are
there other facets of structural opportunities that intersect with locale that
further affect students’ access to or perceptions of WREAs? (4) Does WREA
participation affect time to degree and/or time between degree completion and
job offer? (5) For recent graduates, who have not secured employment, does their
locale contribute to the reason for unemployment, and was their participation in
WREAs different from that of peers who have acquired employment? And (6) Do
employees who participate in WREAs receive higher salary offers than peers who
do not participate in WREAs? Survey data will be collected in multiple phases
from enrolled students, employers, and recently hired alumni employees who
recruit from five public universities in Georgia, and geospatial analyses will
visually situate students in the study, institutions, and WREA locations.
Geospatial analyses will consider factors such as physical and functional
distances to workplaces and overall amenities. Analysis of qualitative data will
provide nuanced information about specific WREA activities as perceived by
employers and recently hired employees, while quantitative analysis will provide
students’ attitudes and behaviors that show connections between WREA activities
and student success. The study will provide a better understanding of the
experiential activities that best position students for employment. The findings
can inform effective matching between students and subsequent employment and
enable employers to quantify their return on investment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources Core Research (ECR)program that supports fundamental research
that focuses on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM professional workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.