* 2000289
* Catalyst Project: Design, Fabrication and Testing of a Cost Effective Microwave Absorber
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Arun Saha, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,963.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Albany State University seeks to design, fabricate, and test a microwave
absorber by engineering the electrical property of materials that are
commercially available and inexpensive. It provides an opportunity for
undergraduate students to enhance their education through research experiences.
The researcher has established a strong collaboration with faculty at the
Georgia Institute of Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Operational frequency or
absorbing frequency of a microwave absorber depends on permittivity,
permeability, and thickness of the material. This research focuses on the
complex permittivity of existing materials which can be enhanced by periodic
inclusions of metal strips or patches on the material. Appropriate dimensions of
the metal strips or patches are determined by a 3D electromagnetic simulation
package (HFSS) to obtain pre-determined material permittivity required for
perfect impedance matching between the absorber and free space. Once pre-
designed metal patterns are printed on dielectric layers, stability in material
property is analyzed experimentally by varying the number of layers. Finally,
the desired absorber is fabricated by stacking up the required number of printed
layers together and the performance is evaluated with free space material
measurement equipment. The concept of tuning the material property with metal
inclusions, as adopted in this project, can be applied to design any planer
microwave devices such as resonators, filters, directional couplers, and
antennas for improved performance and to protect the human body from 5G
radiations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.