* 2000102
* Organic and Polymer Structure Engineering for Na-ion and Multivalent Metal Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mikell Paige, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2024
* USD 430,977.00

Energy storage at an affordable cost has emerged as one of the challenging
issues for the energy sector, being critical for a wide range of applications
ranging from electric vehicles to grid storage of renewable electricity. The
high cost and scarcity of lithium and transition metal (Cobalt) resources has
become a bottleneck for the development of Li-ion batteries for these larger
capacity applications of energy storage and transport propulsion. Developing
efficient lithium-free and transition metal-free battery technology with
affordable and sustainable resources is an important research topic for advanced
energy storage. This project explores battery systems beyond Li-ion batteries
with emphasis on sodium-ion batteries and other potential high energy
chemistries based upon magnesium (Mg) and aluminum (Al). A key enabling factor
of this project is the implementation of lightweight, abundant, inexpensive,
sustainable, and recyclable metal-free organic/polymer materials as promising
cathodes for Na/Mg/Al batteries. Innovative structure design and facile
fabrication approaches will be studied to enable the high energy, fast charge,
and long lifetime batteries. Research activities will involve the training of
graduate students, undergraduate researchers, and high school students, and will
promote gifted minority students into the energy science ranks. A key goal of
this project is to integrate research and education of high school,
undergraduate, M.S. and Ph.D. students. The combined research and educational
activities will provide a strong platform to train students with computational
and hands-on skills in material science, chemistry, and energy science
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to seek
fundamental understanding of the material structure -electrochemical performance
relationships in Na-ion and multivalent metal (Mg/Al) batteries at the molecular
and device levels. This project integrates multidisciplinary research,
education, and outreach for sustainable energy storage beyond Li-ion batteries.
Novel organic materials and polymers will be designed and synthesized with
multi-functional reaction centers in one molecular unit to enhance the battery
energy capacity. Extensive structural characterizations including in situ X-ray
diffractometry, solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and pair
distribution function analysis, will be performed to understand how the
structure of organic/polymer materials determines the cation
insertion/extraction mechanism and kinetics. The knowledge gained in these
studies will be used to design and fabricate new organic/polymer materials to
optimize the battery performance. These novel structures will significantly
enhance the utilization, reaction kinetics, and stability of organic/polymer
materials during charge/discharge cycles, thus improving overall energy density,
power density, and cycle life. The investigation of organic/polymer materials
will also include the investigation of ultralow temperature organic batteries to
extend the applications of these sustainable energy storage devices in extremely
cold areas such as South/North poles, and outer space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.