* 2000047
* Understanding the contribution of individual differences to domain-general and domain-specific components of false memories in both young and older adults
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Nancy Dennis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 848,492.00

The proposed project seeks to examine and understand individual differences
underlying the occurrence of false memories, which is defined as remembering an
event incorrectly or differently than how it originally occurred. The
investigation of individual differences underlying both cognitive and neural
variability in memory performance will be a critical factor in understanding the
sources of false memories across the lifespan. By understanding the mechanisms
that lead to these memory errors, we can better understand how to avoid these
errors. The project will examine the benefits of a cognitive training strategy
aimed at reducing false memories in older individuals. The research will use
both behavioral and neuroimaging (fMRI) methods to understand the basis of false
memories. Neuroimaging analyses will include univariate, functional
connectivity, and multivariate analyses to uncover the neural mechanism
underlying both true and false memories. This will expand understanding of
factors that contribute to false memories across the lifespan. The research will
train undergraduate and graduate students on cognitive neuroscience of memory
and cognitive aging and will educate the public about memory and cognitive
processes that change with age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Memory research typically
aims to identify how memories are represented in the brain. Aging research
typically aims to identify sources of age-related deficits in memory. The
current proposal combines these goals to reveal the cognitive and neural
processes underlying a significant source of error in cognitive aging, that of
false memories. The long-term goal is to identify domain-general and domain-
specific sources of variance associated with false memories across the lifespan
and identify effective, evidence-based strategies for reducing memory errors.
This project aims to identify the cognitive and neural markers of such variance
as well as individual differences factors that contribute to false memories. The
research will also examine the effects of cognitive training in older adults to
successfully reduce the incidence of false memories. To do so, the work will
utilize behavioral methods examining individual differences in false memories in
older adults, as well as advanced neuroimaging methods to investigate how neural
information is processed, and represented, throughout the brain. By
understanding both common and unique influences associated with the
susceptibility to false memories across difference sources, the project can
identify strategies for effectively reducing false memories, thereby
ameliorating age-related memory decline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.