* 2000058
* Excellence in Research: Dynamics and Controls of Nitrous Oxide Emission in Switchgrass Fields under Biochar Application and Nitrogen Fertilization
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Dafeng Hui, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,522.00

Greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrous oxide (N2O) are
important heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere, contributing to changes in
global climate. Nitrous oxide is present at a much lower concentration but is
about 300 times more powerful a greenhouse gas than CO2. Cropland soils that
receive heavy application of nitrogen fertilizer are a major source of N2O
released to the atmosphere. Efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
croplands have led to the development of a promising method to reduce N2O
emissions that involves the use of biochar as a soil amendment. However, how
biochar and nitrogen fertilization interact to influence soil N2O release
remains a mystery. This Excellence in Research (EiR) award will enable
researchers to investigate N2O emissions in switchgrass fields and to improve
prediction of soil N2O emission under biochar application and nitrogen
fertilization. The findings from this project will help reduce soil N2O
emissions in croplands, sustain the productivity of switchgrass, and potentially
slow global warming. Two graduate students and six undergraduate students will
participate directly in the project and gain hands-on research experience.
Findings from this project will be incorporated into courses for undergraduate
and graduate students. The project will also contribute to the improvement of
research capacity at an institution serving underrepresented minorities and
broaden the participation of under-represented groups in ecology and
environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil N2O emission is produced
through nitrification and denitrification processes and influenced by several
factors including soil temperature, moisture, nitrogen availability, and soil
microbial composition and activities. In this project, an integrated approach
will be used to quantify the dynamics and mechanisms of soil N2O emission using
field chamber measurement, laboratory incubation, and ecosystem modeling. The
role of soil microbial populations in N2O emission under different biochar and
nitrogen fertilization regimes will be assessed using soil enzymatic activities
as well as soil microbial composition analysis. The new findings from field and
laboratory studies will be incorporated into a biogeochemical model to improve
soil N2O emission estimation. Results of this study will lead to a predictive
and mechanistic understanding of soil N2O emission and soil microbial responses
to changes in nitrogen availability in switchgrass
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.