* 2000448
* Study of New Strategies to Combat Harassment in Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Charles Fleddermann, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,199,480.00

Researchers from New Mexico State University (NMSU) will implement an EHR Core
Research (ECR) program research project. This ECR program supports work that
advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The study will
assess whether and how bystander intervention training - a successful approach
in other contexts such as universities and the U.S. military - can be refined,
adapted, and delivered to reduce sexual harassment and change institutional
climates in engineering. The study will include two multi-method field studies.
In the field studies, the researchers will engage engineering faculty as
bystander trainers of their own students on two university campuses (NMSU and
University of New Hampshire) to assess whether their involvement fosters greater
commitment to combat harassment, as predicted by the Dobbin et al. managerial
engagement approach to organizational change (2015). The proposed research will
contribute to scientific knowledge about the components and conditions of
effective norm-based strategies to reduce harassment and encourage bystander
intervention in the engineering workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will use focus groups and surveys to explore the impact on faculty and students
of their participation in providing bystander training as engineering faculty
and receiving the training from engineering faculty as engineering students. The
research is expected to inform strategies to combat harassment against
vulnerable individuals which are typically underrepresented in engineering, such
as engineers that are women, engineers of color, and LGBTQ engineers. The two
campuses have significant enrollment of first generation and underrepresented
minority students in engineering. The field studies will illustrate how to
foster leaders' commitment to change engineering climates and how to modify the
engineering professional curriculum to increase the retention of diverse
individuals and their professional confidence. While this project is primarily
funded by the ECR program, additional support has been provided by the
Directorate for Engineering's Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.