* 2000164
* Excellence in Research: Morse theory and Algebraic Topological Methods for Q-curvature type equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Cheikh Ndiaye, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 448,003.00

In this project supported by NSF's Excellence in Research program, the principal
investigator (PI) will mathematically analyze a class of equations that arise
from geometry and physics. The applications include the existence and
characterization of optimal shapes in geometric problems that are helpful for
scientists and engineers in understanding the universe and for optimal design of
important objects and tools in the real world. The physics applications include
describing energy critical states which are important for the understanding of
the problems where an associated energy is quantized, such as, vortices of Euler
flows and condensates in some Chern-Simons-Higgs models. One particularity of
the equations under study in this project is that they verify the phenomena of
strong interaction and quantization, which are enjoyed by many partial
differential equations modeling real life problems. The aim of the research is
to develop methods that can be used to establish existence mechanisms for such
equations that verify the phenomena of quantization and strong interaction. The
PI will mentor student research and organize Senior Seminar in Geometric
Analysis project topics. The project also has a component that seeks to increase
the number of underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines. To this end, the PI
will pilot a Bridge to Ph.D. program with the main mission being to increase the
number of women and minorities with Ph.D. degrees in Mathematics at Howard
University and within the United States.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
this research deals with non-compact geometric variational problems of
Q-curvature type. They are on one hand: nonlinear partial differential equations
describing the conformal deformation of a Riemannian metric to one of prescribed
Q-curvature type quantity, and on the other hand: systems of nonlinear partial
differential equations describing the Mean Field and Toda problems from Chern-
Simons Theory. These equations arise as Euler-Lagrange equation of energy
functionals which are critical with respect to some Moser-Trudinger type
inequalities. The focus of the project is on the resonant cases which are when
accumulations points of some non-compact flow lines of a pseudo-gradient of the
associated Euler-Lagrange functional, the so-called true critical points at
infinity of the associated variation problem, occur. The project will
investigate existence mechanism using the tools of critical points at infinity
of Abbas Bahri. The PI will establish new existence results by developing Morse
and algebraic topological arguments for this type of problems. Precisely he will
establish a full Degree Theory and Morse Theory for existence for Q-curvature
type equations. Moreover, in collaboration with Howard University's Graduate
School of Arts and Sciences, the PI will organize an interactive seminar in
geometric analysis based on these topics and other related conformally invariant
variational problems to recruit and train graduate students to do research. The
educational and outreach component of this research project will allow the PI to
expose students of different levels and diverse backgrounds how mathematics can
be used to model and solve viable real-world problems, to motivate students to
use mathematics to undertake scientific challenges of importance, and to
increase their interest in pursuing career in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.