* 2000617
* Let's do science! Promoting the development of beneficial beliefs about science in early childhood
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Marjorie Rhodes, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,514,274.00

The roots of gender, racial, and ethnic disparities in science achievement take
hold in early childhood, with lifelong implications for educational outcomes.
Often, these early roots are in the form of problematic beliefs, including
beliefs that science is something in which only a select group of people can
succeed. These beliefs are particularly discouraging for children from social
groups that are underrepresented in science, including girls and children from
certain racial and ethnic minority groups. This project will reveal how these
problematic beliefs develop and how to promote more beneficial ones—in
particular, how to promote beliefs that science is something that people learn
to do rather than an identity that one needs to have. Further, this project will
test whether targeting these beliefs in early childhood creates positive
trajectories of science engagement over children’s transition from
prekindergarten into formal schooling. In doing so, this project will develop a
new approach to spreading beneficial beliefs about science and promoting science
engagement among young children from social groups that are underrepresented in
science, while addressing fundamental questions about how beliefs develop and
spread across communities. By partnering with teachers to implement this project
and using an innovative, webcam-based lab for remote developmental research,
this project will maximize the opportunities for this research to lead to rapid
changes in educational practices that will broaden participation in science in
early childhood. This project is funded by the EHR Core Research program, which
emphasizes STEM education research that will generate foundational knowledge in
the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase 1 will reveal the mechanisms by which
problematic or beneficial beliefs about science arise in early childhood via an
experimental field study with 2,000 children and 200 teachers in a large, public
prekindergarten program. This field experiment will test a model of conceptual
development and belief transmission wherein children’s beliefs are shaped by
subtle features of the language they hear about science; in particular,
teachers’ use of linguistic cues implying that scientists are a special kind of
person, including category labels (e.g., “Let’s be scientists!”) and generic
descriptions of what scientists do or are like (e.g., “Scientists discover
things about the world”). The field experiment will test the influence of
reducing these identity-focused linguistic cues, and instead encourage more
action-oriented language (e.g., “Let’s do science! Doing science leads to
discovering things about the world”) on the development of children’s science
beliefs and behavior. Phase 2 will examine the extent to which children’s
developing beliefs about whether success in science requires a special identity
have consequences for the development of social stereotypes about science and
for children’s science engagement and efficacy over the transition to
kindergarten (as social disparities in science interest and social stereotypes
about scientists begin to emerge). This phase will entail a two-year
longitudinal follow-up study of a subset of 500 children from the field
experiment, which will be conducted via an innovative webcam-based lab for
remote developmental research, which will allow for longitudinal tracking after
children transition schools. Thus, this project will advance research by
addressing fundamental questions about the nature of early conceptual and social
development, including how language shapes the development of children’s science
beliefs and behavior, how children’s beliefs change over time, and how
researchers and educators can harness developmental mechanisms to promote
positive developmental trajectories of science engagement across diverse
populations of children. Creation of a public website to share project materials
and findings will enable rapid dissemination to researchers across disciplines,
curriculum developers, prekindergarten teachers, and families of young
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.