* 2000086
* Integrating Unmanned Arial Vehicle Data Analysis Credentials into a Geospatial Science and Technology Degree Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Justin Fiene, SUNY Onondaga Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop a new standards-based and industry-validated data
analytics curriculum that integrates unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) into an
existing geospatial technology degree program. Innovations in UAV technology
have increased the types and volume of data that can be collected for use by
industries such as agriculture, law enforcement, environmental monitoring and
remediation, and utilities. However, to inform these industries, the collected
data must be analyzed and interpreted. Recent investments by New York State and
private industry in Central New York have increased the demand for UAV-related
research, development, and innovation. It has also increased the demand for
technicians skilled in UAV data analysis and interpretation. This project will
develop new stackable credentials, including a micro-credential and certificate,
that will be embedded within an associate of applied science degree in
Geospatial Science and Technology. These credentials will be designed to meet
the needs of traditional students, adult learners, and industry. The project
will also develop applied learning, outreach, and engagement activities to
broaden participation in the program, including participation of women and
economically disadvantaged individuals. In this way, the project has the
potential to increase the number and diversity of individuals entering the
UAV/geospatial technology workforce, where they can have stable careers with
compensation that is higher than the living wage level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to meet industry needs for a technical
workforce with competencies in analyzing and applying geospatial and UAV-
collected data, as well as to broaden participation in the field. The project
will develop a new UAV-data analytics curriculum that includes a 24-credit
certificate program and a three-course micro-credential, both of which will be
embedded within a Geospatial Science and Technology (GST) associate of applied
science degree program. The GST degree program includes courses in geographic
information systems, remote sensing, cartography, and quantitative analysis that
will be bolstered by and complement the new UAV curriculum. The project will
conduct a Developing a Curriculum (DACUM) analysis and use the results to
develop the stackable credentials. The DACUM results will be shared with the
National Geospatial Technology Center of Excellence and made available as an
open resource to other academic institutions. The project will also develop new
data sets and UAV-data analytics lab exercises to collect raw data using a UAV
equipped with a variety of sensors. The varied data will be used to introduce
students to the broad range of problems they will analyze in different industry
sectors, such as using UAV technology to determine the extent of apple tree
fungus or to inspect utility lines. The project will recruit new students into
GST and UAV-data analytics by developing informational materials, conducting
outreach to incumbent workers through employer partners, and expanding the
college’s partnership with a local 9-12 high school in Syracuse, New York, that
has 83% of its students qualifying for free lunch and is classified as
“economically disadvantaged” by the New York State Department of Education. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.