* 2000487
* Using Neural Networks for Automated Classification of Elementary Mathematics Instructional Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Peter Youngs, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,499,962.00

This research project is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last decade, there has been a
tremendous increase in the use of video for preparing teachers and studying
teaching quality. Prominent approaches to summative evaluation of teaching
candidates and beginning teachers feature video recordings of instructional
practices. In addition, large-scale research studies have included video of
instruction. Teacher preparation programs increasingly use video in methods
courses and for formative assessment purposes. Moreover, the growing use of
interactive simulation in pre-service preparation and in-service professional
development relies on having video recorded examples of exemplary instructional
practices. Despite the significant growth in the use of video to measure and
promote instructional quality in recent years, there remain some key challenges
to employing it at scale. First, it is very time-consuming for trained human
raters to view hundreds of hours of video recorded lessons. Second, financial
costs and time demands increase with the use of multiple human raters per video.
Third, manually cataloging, labeling, and indexing large volumes of classroom
video for later viewing is time consuming. Recent advances in computer vision,
machine learning, and deep learning may provide solutions to these challenges
and could make the process of analyzing and scoring videos more efficient. In
particular, deep learning has become the state-of-the-art choice in problems
related to analyzing the content of video. This proposed NSF Core Research study
will draw on videos of elementary mathematics instruction that were collected
for two NSF-funded studies that featured the Mathematics-Scan (M-Scan) classroom
observation tool. The research will use these videos to explore several ways
that deep neural networks can be used to classify instructional activities in
videos of math instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will advance
knowledge and understanding by examining the degree to which three types of
artificial neural networks can accurately classify (a) objects and (b)
instructional activities in videos of elementary mathematics instruction. For
example, it may be straightforward for neural networks to determine whether an
elementary teacher is engaged in lecture vs. facilitating discussion with
students. On the other hand, it may be harder for such networks to assess the
ways teachers represent math content, the nature of their questions, and whether
student gestures signify understanding. The research design concerns three
aspects of using computer vision, machine learning, and deep learning: (a) the
type of neural network, (b) the type of video label (i.e., object labels and
instructional activity labels), and (c) the subject of math instruction (e.g.,
number and operations; patterns, functions, and algebra; geometry). A few types
of neural networks have recently proven effective for video classification:
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), long short-term memory (LSTM) neural
networks, and hybrid CNN-LSTMs. Ultimately, this project is aimed at beginning
to build systematic infrastructure for classifying videos of classroom
instruction at scale in efficient and affordable ways. The findings will
potentially have key implications for (a) large-scale research studies that
feature videos of instruction and (b) pre-service teacher preparation programs,
in-service professional development activities, and efforts to evaluate teaching
candidates and practicing teachers. In particular, the results from this study
will inform decisions about the types of neural networks that can be used to
correctly classify videos of instruction and the practical limitations of using
networks for this purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.