* 2001888
* Uniting Lithographic Patterning and Topochemical Reaction for Processing of Functional Oxides for Electronic Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Steven May, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 329,056.00

This grant supports research into developing and understanding a new
nanomanufacturing process to fabricate novel patterned materials, thereby
generating fundamental innovations in advanced manufacturing and advancing the
nation’s technological capabilities. Patterned materials are essential
components in numerous societally-critical applications including electronics,
communications, data storage, and sensing. However, current approaches to
processing these structures result in patterns that are static and often limited
in their functionality. This award supports fundamental research to provide the
knowledge needed to realize new classes of patterned materials with properties
that cannot be accessed through currently available processing approaches. This
new manufacturing strategy combines industrially-relevant and scalable processes
used to pattern materials with low-temperature chemical reactions to create
oxide-based structures with tunable properties that can be reconfigured in
response to external stimuli. The dynamic nature of these structures could serve
as a platform for a new generation of adaptive devices. Therefore, the new
manufacturing insights and approaches resulting from this project benefit the
U.S. economy and society. The project provides research training to students on
a variety of experimental skills sought by industry and engages local high
school students in promoting engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topochemical transformations are solid-state
chemical reactions that alter composition but retain central features of the
material structure. When carried out on lithographically-defined areas, these
reactions enable the creation of oxide-based lateral patterns with controlled
geometries, diverse chemistries, and new functionality not afforded by existing
processing routes. However, the ability to harness the full technological
potential of this manufacturing strategy rests on developing a fundamental
scientific understanding of numerous aspects of the process. This research
addresses these knowledge gaps to better understand the relevant mechanisms and
kinetic limitations. The research team identifies the relationships between
material composition, crystal structure and processing parameters by
systematically varying the reactions on different patterned metal oxides. The
team establishes the kinetic factors that set the ultimate limit on feature
sizes in nanoscale patterns and enable the formation of non-binary structures
and elucidate the stability and reconfigurability of the structures under
applied electric fields and through sequential reaction steps. In doing so, the
research enables manufacturing of lateral structures including functional oxide
and oxyfluoride ABO3/ABO2F, e.g., SrFeO3/SrFeO2F patterns that facilitate
applications such as reconfigurable or transient electronics, diffraction
gratings, and sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.