* 2001732
* CAREER: Operation of Distribution Grids in the Context of High-Penetration Distributed Energy Resources and Flexible Loads
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/18/2019,01/31/2024
* Sumit Paudyal, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2024
* USD 383,164.00

The number of distributed energy resources (DERs) and flexible loads such as
photovoltaic (PV) panels, electric vehicles (EVs), and energy storage systems
(ESSs) are rapidly growing at the consumer end. These small distributed devices
connect to low voltage power distribution grids via power electronic interfaces
that can support bi-directional power flows. Despite being small in size, if
aggregated, these devices a provide significant portion of the energy and
ancillary services (e.g., reactive power support, frequency regulation, load
following) necessary for reliable and secure operation of electric power grids.
In future distribution grids, with numerous such small active devices, real-time
control and aggregation will entail computational challenges. The computational
challenges further increase when the aggregation requires coordination with
legacy grid control actions which involve integer decision variables, such as
load tap changers, capacitor banks, and network switches. This CAREER project
concentrates around solving operational and computational issues for
distribution grids with large penetration of DERs and flexible loads.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to develop: i) novel mixed-integer second
order cone programming (MISOCP) models of distribution optimal power flow and
aggregation, which are computationally tractable for practical-sized power grids
with thousands of aggregation nodes, ii) distributed control algorithms in
dispatching active and reactive power of DER and flexible loads in real time,
and iii) a probabilistic dispatch model of the assets at the grid level and at
the DER aggregation level that minimizes expected constraint violation of
distribution grid operations. These distributed optimization and control models
will provide dispatch solutions sufficiently fast that the aggregation at the
distribution level could easily track grid signals for applications ranging over
various time resolutions. The educational and outreach activities of this CAREER
project include: i) to design advanced curriculum on distributed control and
optimization to train on-campus and online undergraduate and graduate level
power engineering students, ii) to motivate K-12 students in pursuing science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) by providing them opportunities to
participate on several activities at Michigan Tech's Smart Grid Operations
Center (SGOC), and iii) to reach out to Hispanic students in Texas and Native
American students in South Dakota through active demonstration of fundamental
power engineering concepts by using Michigan Tech's Mobile Microgrid Laboratory.