* 2001683
* CSBR: Natural History: Development of the Catamount Biological Collections to Enhance Biodiversity Research and Education in Southern Appalachia
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Katherine Mathews, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 517,282.00

Biological collections document changes in biodiversity across space and over
time and thus are important sources of information in a rapidly changing world.
This project will support biodiversity research and education at Western
Carolina University (WCU), a regional, comprehensive university in one of the
world’s biodiversity hotspots, the Southern Appalachians, but also in a rural
and economically underserved area. The departments of Biology and Natural
Resource Conservation and Management at WCU maintain noteworthy collections of
plants, arthropods, birds and mammals, but inadequate storage and curation of
specimens have left them in disarray and in danger of degradation. Making needed
upgrades to the collections and bringing them into close proximity in a new
science building opening in 2021 will maximize their impact on research,
teaching and outreach by increasing their accessibility to scientists and the
public and training students in the care and maintenance of museum collections
as well as in collections-based research. Enhancing the biological collections
at WCU will not only serve students and faculty but also provide educational
opportunities for the local community and foster collaboration with regional
conservation agencies. By creating a state-of-the art collection facility in a
biologically rich and historically underserved area, this project supports the
primary mission of WCU in teaching, research and service to the community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create infrastructure for expanded
biological specimen storage capacity, centralizing and digitizing the
collections, developing students’ skills for future careers in the sciences, and
fostering a culture of recognizing the value of biological collections for
research and education. The project goals are to 1) curate each collection by
performing specimen organization, preparation and maintenance to reverse or
prevent degradation, 2) train students in these techniques at WCU and in
collaboration with the NC Museum of Natural Sciences in Raleigh, 3) protect the
specimens from future damage and allow for expansion through proper storage, and
4) maximize the accessibility and outreach potential of the collections through
specimen digitization, educational displays, and an integrated web presence that
allows users to easily browse, search and utilize our holdings. New, metal
cabinetry will provide protection for each collection and a space-saving mobile
carriage system for herbarium cabinets will allow for expansion through addition
of new specimens. New imaging equipment will allow for the digitization and
databasing of valuable historical and new arthropod collections, and new storage
materials will protect the arthropods from degradation. Students will be trained
to prepare bird and mammal skins from new and frozen specimens for long-term
maintenance and use in research and teaching. A collections website will be
designed and created to allow specimen accessibility and use by researchers and
others worldwide. Digitized collections data will be shared with iDigBio.org.
Finally, educational displays and teaching materials will be created to enable
school and community outreach in support of biodiversity appreciation and
conservation in the Southern Appalachians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.