* 2001443
* Digitization PEN: CryptoVert - Digitizing small-bodied cryptobenthic fishes for the oVertTCN
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* William Ludt, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 218,489.00

The Open Vertebrate thematic collections network (oVert) aims to create a
digital resource of computed tomography (CT) scans across the vertebrate Tree of
Life. This digital database allows researchers to quickly and efficiently study
morphological patterns across all vertebrate groups. One of the most apparent
differences among vertebrates is their body size, with some species obtaining
large body sizes, while others remain very small even as mature adults. This
Partner to Existing Networks (PEN) award will link the Natural History Museum of
Los Angeles County with oVert to create a digital repository of data focusing on
some of the worldâ€™s smallest vertebrates: cryptobenthic fishes. Fishes represent
approximately half of the total vertebrate diversity, yet many groups remain
understudied. Cryptobenthic fishes, which are small marine fishes that live in a
variety of habitats, are one of these understudied groups and their importance
in marine ecosystems is only beginning to be understood. This project will
complement oVert taxonomically by focusing on an understudied vertebrate group,
and methodologically by developing best practices for scanning very small
organisms for both bony and soft-tissue anatomy. In addition to their research
utility, these scans will be an excellent educational resource that will be
incorporated into public museum displays and K-12 classroom lesson plans.
Furthermore, processing of CT scans will train undergraduate students in skills
that are used in a variety of professional
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying very small organisms comes with
inherent challenges, and previous attempts to describe the internal anatomy of
small vertebrates was only possible using destructive approaches. This project
will focus on 17 different fish families that comprise the majority of
cryptobenthic fishes using traditional CT scans to document the skeletal system
and contrast-enhanced CT scans to reveal soft-tissue anatomy such as muscle,
nervous, and circulatory systems. Cryptobenthic fishes fill a variety of
functional ecosystem roles, and the bony and soft-tissue scans associated with
this project will create the raw data necessary for researchers to understand
how these minute fishes have adapted in different ways to their environment
without damaging valuable museum specimens. In combination with CT scans
completed by oVert and oVert partners, the products of this project will also be
useful for researchers to identify general trends in vertebrate anatomical
evolution associated with body size and will be a valuable resource for the
development of new questions and hypotheses in a variety of scientific
disciplines. Data will be shared with and made available through iDigBio.org and
MorphoSource.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.