* 2001418
* Number Theory Meetings in the Southeast
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Michael Filaseta, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 15,316.00

In mid-September of 2020, the first of three Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
planned for the 2020-2021 academic year will take place. Either the University
of South Carolina in Columbia, SC, or Clemson University in Clemson, SC, will
host the second meeting on the first weekend of December 2020. The third meeting
is tentatively planned for April 2021. One of the first or third meetings will
take place at Duke University; the other meeting will take place at the
Armstrong Campus of Georgia Southern University. Further information on these
meetings including the locations, dates, lists of speakers, lists of
participants, and registration information will be linked to the conference home
pages as it becomes available:
http://www.math.sc.edu/~boylan/seminars/pantshome.html and
http://www.math.clemson.edu/~kevja/SERMON. The meetings consist of participant
talks on current research in all areas of number theory, including analytic
number theory, arithmetic geometry, and automorphic and modular forms. These
topics reflect the research interests of number theorists working in the
Southeast. Each meeting features plenary talks by nationally and internationally
recognized leaders in the field, invited talks by graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, and a larger number of contributed talks by
mathematicians at all levels including undergraduate and graduate students, and
junior and senior faculty. Number theorists from outside the Southeast will give
the invited and plenary talks, while regional researchers will give most of the
contributed talks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of the Southeastern
Number Theory Meetings is to provide members of the number theory community in
the Southeast with an opportunity to learn about new and significant research in
number theory and to disseminate their own research. Students and junior
researchers in the community particularly benefit from the meetings. The
meetings strengthen their knowledge base, expose their work to a wider audience,
and give them insightful input and feedback from other participants. Funding
from the NSF allows the organizers to achieve their goals at a low cost to
individual participants. These meetings integrate regional mathematicians into
the community who may have little or no funds for professional travel such as
graduate students and faculty at institutions that do not award Ph.Ds. The
organizers will continue efforts to attract a demographically diverse
participant base including women and racial and ethnic
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.