* 2001751
* Modeling Black Hole Dynamics in Dense Star Clusters in the Era of LIGO, LISA, and LSST
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Kyle Kremer, Kremer, Kyle
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 12/31/2022
* USD 233,000.00

Kyle Kremer is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship
to conduct a program of research and education at the California Institute of
Technology and the Carnegie Observatories. Over the next few years, the list of
gravitational wave (GW) detections from merging black holes (BHs) and neutron
stars is expected to grow enormously, and interpreting the properties of these
sources requires a detailed understanding of the role of dense star clusters.
Forthcoming transient surveys will also provide new constraints on the formation
and populations of compact remnants. One important channel, and the focus of
this research, is dynamical formation in dense stellar environments like
globular clusters (GCs). The Cosmos in Concert program of multimedia shows
combining astronomy education and music performance has already successfully
presented 16 concerts in 6 states, and will be extended to the southern
California area with performances at K-12 schools and universities, and with
local symphony orchestras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a broad study of the
dynamics of BHs in dense star clusters with applications to GW and high-energy
astrophysics, covering (i) the rates of massive star collisions and tidal
disruption events in realistic GCs; (ii) the dynamical effect of massive BHs on
cluster dynamics; (iii) a side-by-side analysis of the differences between
compact binary formation in GCs and isolated binary evolution in the galactic
field; and (iv) the public release of an extensive database of realistic GC
models. The work will significantly aid the development of improved data
analysis and detection strategies for next-generation GW observatories and
transient surveys. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.