* 2001606
* Developing Functional Ferritin Nanocages for Blood Brain Barrier Traversing and Cellular Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Xiaoyang Xu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 04/30/2024
* USD 339,974.00

The blood-brain barrier stands between the central nervous system and peripheral
blood circulation, preventing entry of potential toxins into the brain but also
inhibiting the successful delivery of drugs. This prevents the effective
imaging, diagnosis and treatment of deadly brain-related diseases such as
Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s disease and brain cancer. As such, there is a
tremendous demand for delivery systems which can solve these problems and
effectively treat brain disease. Natural materials such as ferritin proteins
have been shown to self-assemble into nanocages and cross the blood-brain
barrier. However, a complete understanding of how these nanocages move across
the barrier into the brain as well as their structure-function relationships has
remained elusive. This research project will combine bioengineering and chemical
approaches to understand how these nanostructures interact with the blood-brain
barrier and to rationally design nanocages which have the capability to cross
blood-brain barriers and to achieve cellular delivery. The project will provide
a robust nanoparticle tool to study nanomaterial-biological barrier interactions
and will advance the science for the development of next generation brain drug
delivery and imaging platforms and techniques. This project brings together
several key technology areas, including nanomaterials, chemical engineering,
cell biology and biomedical engineering, providing interdisciplinary training
for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students as well as exposing
students from local high schools to cutting-edge research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the research project is to achieve a
comprehensive understanding of protein based nanocage/blood-brain barrier
interactions using ferritin as a model protein and subsequently to use this
knowledge to develop a novel family of protein nanocages as brain targeted,
modular delivery platforms with additional functionalities available on demand.
The central hypothesis is that with rational design, the engineered ferritin
protein can maintain its ability to assemble into nanocages, cross the
biological interface of the blood-brain barrier, and also be conferred with new
abilities for targeted delivery, loading of therapeutics and/or imaging agents.
The research project seeks to: 1) design and genetically introduce targeting
domains to ferritin proteins, assemble the ferritin proteins into ferritin
nanocages, 2) investigate the nanocages’ blood-brain barrier traversing and
cellular targeting capabilities using cellular models; and 3) study the nanocage
structure-biological function relationship. The scope of the project includes
probing protein nanocage interactions with biological systems to elucidate the
genetically-directed nanoscale modular design and providing theragnostic data on
the potential treatment of many brain diseases. The ultimate goal of the project
is to develop a genetically designed and chemically engineered nanoscale
delivery system which can deliver therapeutic and diagnostic agents across the
impenetrable blood-brain barrier. Overall, the experiments will probe nanoscale
transport mechanisms and explore the interactions between engineered nanocages
and biological systems, therefore laying the foundation for design and
production of a new paradigm of protein-based theranostic systems. The
educational components of this proposal will involve youth from underrepresented
groups with a goal to attract, inspire and train the next generation of STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.