* 2001191
* NSF-BSF: Categorical Methods in Representation Theory of Lie Superalgebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Vera Serganova, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2024
* USD 294,571.00

This project will explore connections between representation theory of Lie
superalgebras and tensor categories. Representation theory of groups and Lie
algebras is a mathematical language for studying symmetries of different
problems in natural sciences. In this project, the PI will study a certain
modification of Lie algebras called Lie superalgebras. The term "super" means
that in addition to the usual (even or "bosonic") symmetries we allow another
kind: "odd symmetries", which behave in a certain sense "like fermions."
Superalgebras are mathematical tools encoding the concept of supersymmetry
developed in physics in the second half of the 20th century. The theory of
symmetric monoidal (tensor) categories is an advanced framework in
representation theory. Recent developments have uncovered deep connections
between superalgebras and tensor categories. The PI will study applications of
these results that will shed new light on the theory of Lie superalgebras, and
provide new tools and techniques for investigating supersymmetries. This
research area has many open questions that are accessible accessible for
beginning researchers and this proposal includes research projects to be
undertaken by undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was submitted in response to the Dear Colleague Letter NSF 17-120:
Special Guidelines for Submitting Collaborative Proposals under National Science
Foundation (NSF) and US-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) Collaborative
Research Opportunities, and the proposed research will be pursued in
collaboration with an Israeli researcher. Three projects are proposed. In the
first project, the PIs will describe the conditions under which a natural
generalization of the Jacobson-Morozov lemma holds for supergroups (and Lie
superalgebras). This will be done using the theory of semisimplifications of
tensor categories, in the spirit of recent work of Etingof, Ostrik, Andre, and
Kahn. The PIs will then investigate the case when the condition on the
supergroup does not hold and develop an analogue of the notion of a reductive
envelope for supergroups. The second project concerns symmetric monoidal
functors between representations of different Lie superalgebras. The PIs will
study compositions of such functors and endomorphisms of such compositions. The
third project concerns the periplectic supergroup, which is an interesting
superanalogue of the orthogonal group. The PIs will answer open questions about
representations of the periplectic supergroups, such as computing dimensions and
characters of irreducible representations, as well as use Duflo-Serganova
functors to study stabilization patterns in periplectic representation
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.