* 2001465
* CDS&amp;E: Numerical Investigation of Two-Particle Response Functions of Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Emanuel Gull, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2024
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research aimed at understanding the relationship between
experimental measurements and numerical simulations of materials in which strong
electronic correlation effects are important. In particular, the team will focus
on obtaining computational data simulating the response to externally applied
fields in superconducting and magnetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials
consist of electrons and ions arranged in a crystal lattice. In some materials,
the motion of an electron is strongly interdependent on, or correlated with, the
motion of many other electrons. As a consequence, these materials may exhibit
unusual behavior including superconductivity, magnetism, or charge order. This
unusual behavior can often be investigated with experimental probes that measure
the response of a material to externally applied fields. Our standard analytical
tools for describing this response are inadequate, and numerical methods are
therefore needed. The subject of this project is the development and application
of accurate and controlled numerical methods that can describe these materials
and their response to applied fields, and compute experimentally measured
quantities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to broader impacts
by supporting the development and maintenance of sustainable open-source
community software libraries, which will accelerate the development of future
codes as well as provide reliable and state-of-the-art applications to the
science community. The software libraries currently maintained by the PI are
among the few established open-source libraries for calculations on strongly
correlated systems. As part of the project, graduate students will be trained in
modern theoretical techniques and in scientific software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at understanding the relation
between experimentally measured two-particle response functions and generalized
susceptibilities of effective low-energy lattice models in systems where strong
electronic correlations are important, and in particular systems where
superconducting or magnetic order has been established. The project will combine
newly developed numerical methods with large-scale calculations to compute
emergent fluctuations, as well as the response functions measured in
superconducting, charge ordered, and magnetic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Susceptibilities reveal important information
about collective excitations of a system and are directly measurable in
experiment. However, the strong correlation physics of generalized
susceptibilities measured by two-particle probes such as neutron scattering is
theoretically not well understood, especially in ordered phases. This project
will analyze two-particle correlation functions in fermion lattice model systems
inside and outside the superconducting phase. By providing reliable results for
the susceptibilities of fermionic lattice models and by computing response
functions, this work will facilitate the separation of true electron correlation
physics from model-dependent artifacts, which in turn will aid in the
interpretation of experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correlated electron
materials are essential for modern technological applications such as
information technology, energy technology, materials science, and nanoscience.
By clarifying the basic behavior of susceptibilities and their relation to
experimental work, this project will contribute to our understanding of
correlated materials and their characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to broader impacts by supporting the development and
maintenance of sustainable open-source community software libraries, which will
accelerate the development of future codes as well as provide reliable and
state-of-the-art applications to the science community. The software libraries
currently maintained by the PI are among the few established open-source
libraries for calculations on strongly correlated systems. As part of the
project, graduate students will be trained in modern theoretical techniques and
scientific software development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.