* 2001411
* CDS&amp;E: Systematic Exploration of the High Entropy Alloy Space through High-Dimensional Thermodynamic Modeling from High-Throughput Computations and Experimental Data
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Axel van de Walle, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2024
* USD 379,741.00

Nontechnical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of materials science has
been captivated by the discovery of a class of alloys known as "high entropy"
alloys, which are characterized by the unexpected stabilization of simple
crystal structures through the combination of a large number of different
elements in comparable amounts. The discovery and design of such alloys demand a
detailed knowledge of the thermodynamic factors governing stability in a very
high dimensional composition space with potentially many competing crystal
structures. This complexity tests the limits of current thermodynamic modeling
capabilities due to the sheer number of input data needed and of parameters
entering the model. The project addresses this by combining (i) large-scale
meta-databases of experimentally-derived thermodynamic models with (ii)
thermodynamic data from high-throughput quantum-mechanical calculations, using
formal statistical and active machine learning techniques. The end product of
this effort is an openly distributed large-scale encompassing thermodynamic
model that can be queried in a high-dimensional compositional space and that
returns structural stability information as interactive tridimensional cross-
sections, or as composition- and temperature-dependent thermodynamic properties.
As this space of possible alloys is so vast compared to the number of known
high-entropy alloys, the potential for discoveries of novel alloys through this
tool is significant and this could broadly impact numerous engineering
applications where capabilities are limited by materials
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project leverages and integrates two recent developments from the PI's group:
(i) a search engine (the Thermodynamic DataBase DataBase or TDBDB), that indexes
all available experimentally-derived thermodynamic data electronically available
in standardized format in the scientific literature; (ii) a suite of software
tools (the Alloy Theoretic Automated Toolkit or ATAT) that streamlines the
generation of thermodynamic databases from ab initio data. This hybrid approach
aims to combine the distinct advantage of state-of-the-art experimental and
computational methods, namely, the higher accuracy of the former and the high-
throughput nature of the latter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active machine learning
and statistical techniques are used to (i) target the exploration of promising
composition regions likely to form solid solutions with simple crystal
structures and (ii) develop efficient statistical mechanics models of non-
stoichiometric solids that require few ab initio inputs, thus enabling "high-
throughput" operation. Whereas existing computational high-throughput efforts
primarily focus on the properties of defect-free stoichiometric compounds at
absolute zero, this project targets, at all temperatures, the broader range of
materials including disordered alloys with possible short-range order and
ordered alloys with possible point defects. This demands efficient statistical
mechanical models of (i) short-range order, (ii) strongly anharmonic phases and
(iii) magnetic ordering, each of which requiring fewer ab initio input than
existing brute force methods, by exploiting both known and data-mined
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data and tools devised during this project are
expected to have broader impacts: virtually all engineering materials are
nonstoichiometric alloys whose properties are tuned by controlled additions of
numerous components (with high entropy alloys only representing an extreme
example). Hence, this resource could greatly facilitate materials discovery and
optimization by augmenting existing computational high-throughput efforts that
currently only target ordered compounds at absolute zero. The broad
compositional gamut covered also enables applications that could range from
identifying glass-forming metallic alloys to determining possible exoplanet core
compositions and structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.