* 2001640
* Digitization PEN: Invertebrates from the Rocky Mountains and Great Plains: University of Colorado Museum of Natural History expands taxonomic and geographic coverage of InvertEBase
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Leanne Elder, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 149,976.00

The Great Plains and Rocky Mountains ecosystems in Western North America support
unique and understudied invertebrate biodiversity. These delicate ecosystems are
being impacted by unprecedented human population increases in the region,
resulting in changes to land use such as increased infrastructure and
recreational activities. These ecosystems are also in peril from the warming and
drying trend in Western North America, which is causing a rise in wild fire
risk. To mitigate the negative impacts of these changes, awareness of
invertebrate species distributions and biodiversity is needed to help make
informed land management and conservation policies. The University of Colorado
Museum of Natural History (UCM) Invertebrate Zoology collection documents 120
years of Colorado Rocky Mountains and Great Plains changing ecosystem. This
project will allow researchers, educators and the public to freely access
specimen data from this collection, through digitization and upload of the
collection’s data to web based portals including InvertEBase and iDigBio. These
specimen data will include taxonomic and geographic coverage of North American
non-insect invertebrate species, with an emphasis on snails, crayfish, sponges,
leeches and earthworms. Undergraduate and graduate students at the University of
Colorado will be trained in data management, museum curation and best practices.
The project will develop activities for a middle school summer camp program.
Activities will be designed to promote scientific literacy, and will mainly
serve historically underrepresented groups in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
partnering with the existing Thematic Collections Network (TCN) InvertEBase,
this project will extend the available data for invertebrate species’ geographic
ranges and biodiversity in North America for researchers, land managers and the
general public. For the first time, UCM specimen records will be electronically
accessible for over 43,000 lots of invertebrates from the Colorado Rocky
Mountains and Great Plains. High resolution stacked digital images of over 1,000
exemplar specimens will be taken and shared, and will include 277 primary type
specimens. Approximately 150 historic microscope slides from the collection will
be imaged with a scanning microscope to produce research quality images of
important diagnostic features from a variety of taxa. Finally, 8,000 gastropod
snail records from the Rocky Mountains and Great Plains will be georeferenced to
allow advancement in scientific and public understanding of the distribution of
this group, and how elevation and climate influence their
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.