* 2001181
* Topological and Dynamical Phenomena in Condensed Matter Systems Detected by Quantum Entanglement
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Shinsei Ryu, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on novel properties of quantum materials and associated
phenomena. It has been long recognized that quantum mechanics is essential to
understand the basic properties of solids. Understanding the distinction between
metals and insulators are one example. With recent advances in experimental
techniques, a class of materials has emerged for which subtle quantum effects of
the system of their many constituent electrons control macroscopic properties
that are characteristic of materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One example of
quantum materials are superconductors. At sufficiently low temperature, a
quantum mechanical state forms in which electrons behave collectively leading to
conduction of electricity with zero resistance. More recently discovered, is
another class of quantum materials that are insulators in their bulk but can
support zero resistance conduction of electricity along their surfaces and
edges. The metallic surface states in these materials, known as topological
insulators, are a consequence of the mathematical structure of the wavefunction
which describes the many electron quantum state. The field of mathematics known
as topology which focuses on geometric properties of an object that are
unchanged by deformations, provides useful ways to describe the structure of the
wavefunctions of topological phases in quantum materials. It has become clear
that quantum materials can exhibit exotic and surprising properties that do not
have a counterpart in ordinary materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
materials can also host exotic quantum mechanical particles that have intrinsic
properties that are quite different from free electrons which make them
candidates for the implementation of quantum computers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel quantum phenomena can also be found in systems far
out of the tranquil state of equilibrium. For example, sufficiently complex
quantum many-body systems can "forget" their initial quantum states. In these
novel quantum condensed matter systems, quantum entanglement provides a
conceptual foundation and tools to study many-body quantum systems. When
particles are entangled quantum mechanically, they are connected in a way that
affecting one particle will affect all the others, even though they may be
separated by vast distances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI aims
to develop a deeper theoretical understanding of the properties, including
nonequilibrium properties, and phenomena associated with quantum materials,
particularly in materials with strongly interacting electrons using concepts
such as quantum entanglement together along with others that are associated with
the emerging field of quantum information theory. In particular, the PI will
examine the nature of the intricate quantum entanglement characteristic of
topological phases. He will also investigate how quantum entanglement spreads
and propagates in complex many-body quantum systems. A thorough understanding of
these problems can pave the way to the discovery of new states of quantum matter
and associated phenomena that form the foundations of the next generation of
technologies based on quantum mechanics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education with the aim to investigate
quantum many-body systems that exhibit novel phenomena, focusing on their
topological and far out-of-equilibrium properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
plans to develop a many-body framework to study topological phenomena both in
and out of equilibrium, and the structure of multiparty quantum entanglement in
topological phases of matter. In particular, the PI plans to construct many-body
diagnostics for the topological properties of periodically driven quantum
systems in the presence of time-reversal and other symmetries. The PI will seek
universal descriptions of quantum information scrambling in complex quantum
dynamics using various quantum entanglement measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
carry out the research, the PI will utilize quantum information theoretical
concepts and tools that include quantum entanglement, the channel-state duality,
and tensor-networks. The proposed research will lead to a deeper understanding
of novel phenomena in quantum many-body systems. The knowledge gained
contributes to the foundations of future technological innovations based on
quantum mechanical effects. Because of the nature of the proposed work, success
in these projects will have impact on many areas of theoretical physics, and may
connect to concrete numerical works on model Hamiltonians and experiments in
condensed matter systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students and young researchers
are closely integrated into the research activities and will receive unique
training at the frontiers of condensed matter theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.