* 2001738
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Institutional and Cultural Effects on Organized Risk Reduction Efforts
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Jill Harrison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2021
* USD 9,833.00

This project investigates the dynamic processes through which diverse social
groups (individuals, organizations, and organizational networks) come to
understand the causes and consequences of land loss and come to define the range
of options available for reducing its impacts. Additionally, this research
investigates how culture affects the transformational potential of risk
reduction actions. The setting for the research is a region with diverse
communities and large and changing industries that is also suffering land loss
that affects these communities and industries. This project analyzes efforts by
a variety of organizations, groups, and individuals to counteract and cope with
the land loss. Data for the project are being collected through ethnographic
observation, interviews, and documents. Findings will increase understanding of
collective decision-making on a large scale and on issues that have broad
effects on public well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will seek to
identify the conditions affecting the acceptance or rejection of particular risk
framings and strategies and to explore how these dynamics relate to broader
institutional forces that affect risk reduction. Data for this project are
collected from legal, scientific, and media documents, key informant interviews,
interviews of organizational actors involved in land loss risk reduction, and
ethnographic observation of public and restorative events. Analysis of the data
is through coding to ascertain patterns in use of cultural narratives by actors
along with contextual details.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.