* 2001262
* Biot-elastic and Direct Models of Shells and Strips
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/12/2019,04/30/2024
* James Hanna, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2024
* USD 305,741.00

Thin elastic structures such as shells and strips are found in engineering
applications across many scales, including aerospace components, soft robots,
flexible microelectronic devices, and programmable matter. Despite nearly a
century of research on the mechanics of thin structures, questions remain about
simple reduced models commonly employed to describe bending and stretching of
these bodies in response to pressure or other applied forces. Superficially
similar shell models make qualitatively different predictions, such as whether a
bent shell will expand or contract under the same conditions. Existing strip
models fail to capture experimentally observed shape changes during
manipulations. This work will both explain these issues and develop new simple
models that will agree with experiments and be useful in a variety of settings,
including the design of new flexible and reconfigurable devices, and origami and
kirigami structures for engineering applications. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained as part of this project. The PI and students will
develop related laboratory demonstrations and a module for a summer science
program for young women in high school. Public outreach efforts will exploit the
connections between thin structure mechanics and the behavior of toys such as
snap bracelets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work has two parts. First, an elastic
theory will be developed based on systematic expansions in stretch. When applied
to shells, this theory will preserve simple relationships between stress and
generalized strain and provide the simplest definitions of bending energies.
Second, a uniformly valid theory of elastic curves will be developed that
interpolates between rod and inextensible wide strip models. This theory will
capture bifurcation phenomena of narrow strips and allow numerical integration
of strip deformations that create inflection points. More broadly, the work will
relate direct and dimensional reduction approaches to thin structures. The new
shell theory will be compared with theoretical and numerical results on soft
shells from the literature, and the new strip theory will be validated using
prior experimental results on bifurcations from the PI?s prior work and the
literature. The issues to be addressed in this work are relevant to research
areas such as the incompatible elasticity of soft and other materials, design of
programmable elastomeric and structured sheets, and instabilities and
bifurcations of flexible components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.