* 2001580
* SHF:Small:Collaborative Research: Application-aware Energy Modeling and Power Management for Parallel and High Performance Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Yonghong Yan, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2020
* USD 23,273.00

One of the critical challenges in scaling out current and future high
performance computing (HPC) and enterprise computing systems is the requirement
that their power envelope remain comparable to that of today?s systems. This
project addresses this ?power wall? challenge from the system software aspect by
developing application-aware methodologies of energy modeling and power
management. The project optimizes system efficiency by tuning performance and
energy consumption to resonate with application runtime behavior while staying
below the system power envelope. The project develops user interfaces and new
compiler models and runtime tuning techniques to manage the tradeoffs between
performance and energy consumption. The approach enables cooperative,
application-specific control of energy consumption between hardware, system
software and applications. The investigations and solutions deepen understanding
of application power usage and guide users to customized performance and energy
consumption behavior.

This collaborative project integrates the development, education, and outreach
efforts of collaborating University partners and is well positioned to have a
substantial impact on both the HPC research community and hardware designers and
vendors. All findings are published in peer-reviewed conferences and journals
while source code and results are available through a project web site. This
work addresses the need for energy efficiency improvements in large-scale
systems in support of high-end simulations used to design pharmaceuticals,
aircraft, global warming scenarios, etc. The proposed techniques influence the
design of future directions HPC and enterprise computing systems from industry
and government. The project engages and trains graduate and undergraduate
students, including underrepresented minority students, in the area of energy
efficient computing, parallel and high performance computing, and computer
architecture and systems. The open source evaluation platforms are used in
teaching related coursework in graduate and undergraduate classes.