* 2001776
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Investigation of the Puerto Rico Subduction Zone: Structure, Seismic Hazard, and Hydration of Slow-spreading Lithosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Shuoshuo Han, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,493.00

Seismic investigation of the Puerto Rico subduction
zone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Puerto Rico Trench (PRT) poses major earthquake
and tsunami hazards. Tsunamis generated at this subduction zone may also impact
the U.S. East Coast. This project supports land and sea seismic experiments
across the PRT and Puerto Rico. The experiments will define the detailed seismic
structure of the PRT, advance our understanding of the PRT, and improve hazard
assessment. The project consists of: (1) Three wide-angle seismic
reflection/refraction profiles using ocean bottom seismometers (OBS); (2) Four
multichannel seismic (MCS) reflection profiles, two parallel to and inland from
the trench, and two parallel to the central OBS profile. (3) An array of more
than 100 short-period land seismometers deployed across the Puerto Rico island,
together with a dozen broad-band seismometers to record earthquakes for 18
months. The project will provide support for training several graduate students
and an early career scientist, as well as research opportunities for faculty and
students at a minority serving institution. The project will also support
training of science journalists and public lectures to reach Puerto Rico
residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports an active-
source seismic experiment across the Puerto Rico Trench (PRT), its outer rise,
and across the island arc, together with a land passive-source experiment. The
PRT is a highly oblique subduction zone, where old Atlantic plate subducts under
the Caribbean plate at a slow rate. The PRT is associated with anomalous and
unexplained characteristics, such as the widest trench (below 6,000 m), the
lowest gravity anomaly on Earth, and anomalous subsidence of the north coast of
Puerto Rico. This project will acquire, analyze, and interpret multiple types of
data: Three wide-angle seismic reflection/refraction profiles across the PRT
with OBSs and an additional line south of the Puerto Rico island; four MCS
reflection profiles, two each parallel and perpendicular to the PRT axis; an
array of active- and passive-source land seismic stations on the Puerto Rico
island; and multibeam bathymetry, 3.5 kHz sub-bottom profiler, gravity, and
magnetics. The experiments are designed to address three key questions: (1) What
is the shallow geometry of the subducting slab and its lateral continuity along
the 500-km section of the trench? (2) What are the degree and spatial extent of
hydration of the Atlantic lithosphere entering the Puerto Rico Trench? (3) Does
oceanic bivergent thrust system represent double-sided subduction or a crustal
retro-wedge of one-sided subduction? Results of the integrated seismic
experiments are expected to significantly advance our understanding of the above
scientific questions and assessment of the PRT seismic and tsunami
hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.