* 2001093
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (ACM CCS)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Daniel Takabi, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 06/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The annual ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (ACM CCS) is a
top-tier venue for quick and wide dissemination of cutting-edge research results
in computer and communications security. The conference achieves this by hosting
several technical sessions, in-depth tutorials poster sessions, panels and
workshops. The conference also invites leading researchers every year for
keynote talks. They present seminars on some of the most intriguing and pressing
challenges in the discipline, highlighting open avenues for further work in
these areas. The 2019 ACM CCS will consist of approximately 140 technical papers
across a wide spectrum of computer and network security and privacy domains.
Participation in the conference is a valuable opportunity to students and is an
important part of graduate education in cyber-
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides travel support to encourage
participation in the 2019 ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security
by students who would normally find it difficult to attend. Criteria for
selection include evidence of a serious interest in the field as demonstrated by
statement of research, CV showing research output, coursework and/or project
experience, etc. Organizers encourage participation of women and students from
other under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.