* 2001164
* 2020 Natural Gas Hydrate Systems GRC/GRS: Galveston, Texas - February 2020
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

Gas hydrates are a solid formed from water and methane gas. Gas hydrates occur
on every continent and large amounts of gas hydrates are found in marine
sediments. Obtaining a deeper understanding of the basic factors that control
the formation, occurrence, stability, and destruction of gas hydrates is
important for several reasons. Gas hydrates could be a valuable energy source.
Additionally, if gas hydrates decompose they could release large amounts of
methane, and the sudden release of methane could initiate submarine landslides.
To increase understanding of gas hydrates a Natural Gas Hydrate Systems Gordon
Research Conference will be held to bring together top researchers to facilitate
interaction and discussion between top researchers from academe, government, and
the private sector. This award will help cover the costs for about 10 early-
career scientists to attend the Gordon Research Conference and the Gordon
Research Seminar on Natural Gas Hydrate Systems scheduled before it. The
conference and seminar provide the opportunity for early-career scientists to
meet and share information with their peers and to interact with the more senior
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference and
the Gordon Research Seminar on Natural Gas Hydrate Systems will aid in moving
gas hydrates studies away from traditional topics and towards a more modern,
cutting-edge consideration of the nonequilibrium dynamics of natural gas hydrate
systems to make progress on a suite of geohazard, climate, energy and carbon
cycling issues. Multiple sessions will emphasize such topics as the importance
of coupled multi-phase flow (free gas and liquid water) and multicomponent
reactive transport with geological history to describe the dynamical processes
of gas hydrate formation and evolution in geological systems. This award will
help support the travel and registration of a subset of early-career scientists.
The conference is designed for senior researchers to have ample time to interact
with the early-career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.