* 2001211
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Judging Social Minority Job Candidates: An Intersectional Analysis of Employer Behavior towards Social Minorities in the U.S. Labor Force
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Emma Mishel, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 01/31/2021
* USD 15,999.00

This project examines the intersection of social identity and race on hiring
outcomes for women in the United States. Specifically, the project asks: Are
women who are perceived to be social minorities discriminated against when
applying to jobs in the United States? Does the effect of being a social
minority differ for white and black women? Does the gender composition of the
job, or the personality traits employers seek, affect whether social minorities
are disadvantaged? If so, do these patterns differ by race? And lastly, what are
some mechanisms behind disadvantaging or favoring social minorities compared to
majorities in the labor market? This research is especially pertinent because
labor market inequalities between social minority and majority men have been
well-documented both theoretically and empirically, but there is less consensus
on whether female social minorities experience workplace penalties compared to
majority women. Analyzing how workplace bias against social minorities may vary
by different contextual or demographic factors can not only help shed light on
long-term psychological effects and economic disadvantages that such employees
face, but it can also influence public policies designed to bring about greater
equality for all individuals in the U.S. labor market.

The project consists of two experiments. First, the project implements a large-
scale résumé audit study that includes job applications to over 3,000 jobs
across 6 states using 4 fictitious résumés that vary by race and social minority
status. This study will obtain an estimate of whether and to what extent social
minorities experience penalties compared to majority women, where the
applications also vary by race, at the first point of contact with an employer.
Next, the project conducts a survey experiment that recruits 1,500 hiring
managers and asks them to rate the same fictitious women’s résumés on various
traits, such as perceived competence, morality, professionalism, and
masculinity. This experiment supplements the résumé audit study data in that it
helps to illuminate the mechanisms behind disfavoring—or favoring—social
minorities compared to majority women, who also vary by race, regarding labor
market outcomes. These findings will inform sociological theories regarding the
operation of the labor market, particularly regarding the varying experiences
that women who vary by social status experience throughout the job application
process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.