* 2001059
* Interrogating the role of natural selection in the functional evolution of duplicate genes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Raquel Assis, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2021
* USD 92,656.00

Gene duplication occurs when multiple copies of the same gene are created and
retained within an organism's genome. It is believed to play a key role in the
evolutionary process by creating innovation in organism traits. Therefore,
understanding how evolution acts on duplicate genes will provide key insights
into how complex traits and novel forms have arisen. The main goal of this
project is to determine the evolutionary forces responsible for the retention of
duplicate genes in an organism's genome. The researchers will test the specific
hypothesis that the evolution of functional duplicate genes (those that have a
new function) is primarily a consequence of natural selection. Scientists have
long thought this to be the case, but have never been able to experimentally
test this hypothesis. This project uses an innovative method that allows this
hypothesis to be tested for the first time. Results will help to understand how
organism traits evolve within and among species. The award will have multiple
broader impacts on the scientific community by supporting the training of
undergraduate and graduate students, development of open source computer
software, and dissemination of research findings in open access publications.
Additionally, the researchers will design and teach courses on bioinformatics
and genomics to local K-12 students at the Science-U camp hosted by Pennsylvania
State University each summer. Curricula developed for these courses will also be
made freely available on a website for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will examine the impact of natural selection on duplicate gene
functions via both sequence- and expression-level approaches. The researchers
recently developed a phylogenetic approach for identifying duplicate genes with
novel functions by quantifying differences between their gene expression
profiles in closely related species. Application of this method to spatial gene
expression profiles in Drosophila revealed that most young duplicates possess
new functions, and that acquisition of new functions occurs rapidly. Conversely,
in mammals, most young duplicates retain their ancestral functions, and
functional divergence occurs more gradually. The contrast in functional
divergence rates between duplicate genes in these lineages is reminiscent of the
faster sequence-level evolution observed in Drosophila relative to mammals.
Researchers will test the hypothesis that natural selection also plays an
important role in acquisition of new functions by duplicate genes. Researchers
will apply a combination of traditional sequence-based, as well as innovative,
expression-based tests for natural selection on duplicate genes. The objectives
of these analyses will be to elucidate the role of natural selection in
functional divergence of duplicate genes, and to examine differences in
selective forces acting on duplicates in populations of different sizes, over
evolutionary time, and with varying levels of functional divergence.