* 2001711
* Conference on Foundations of Computational Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2020,06/30/2020
* Randall LeVeque, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2020
* USD 0.00

This award supports participation of US-based researchers in the triennial
international conference "Foundations of Computational Mathematics (FoCM 2020)"
held in Vancouver, BC, Canada on June 15-24, 2020. Computational mathematics is
increasingly important in all branches of science and engineering, and
increasing computational power has radically changed the relationship between
mathematics and computation. The Foundations of Computational Mathematics (FoCM)
Society is an international nonprofit organization that supports and promotes
research at the interface of mathematics and computation and fosters interaction
among mathematics, computer science, and other areas of computational science.
The FoCM 2020 conference is expected to attract an estimated 500 participants,
including at least 150 junior participants (graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and junior faculty), with perhaps 100 of these from the US. This award
provides partial funding for some US participants, particularly junior
participants who might otherwise not be able to attend. It will advance the
international exposure of research conducted in the US and will have lasting
effects in the form of new collaborations between US and international
participants.

The conference comprises three 3-day sessions of 7 workshops each (21 total),
combined with plenary and semi-plenary talks each day. Besides the plenary
speakers, each workshop will have two semi-plenary speakers. Workshops span a
wide range of computational mathematics topics, with ties to pure mathematics,
computer science, data science, scientific computing, and other related fields.
For more information, see http://focm-society.org/2020/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.