* 2001557
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Suicide Survival Narratives: How Social Statuses Affect Survivors' Cultural Narratives about Suicide Experiences
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Mark Pachucki, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 15,986.00

While a great deal of research has documented sociodemographic trends in suicide
risk, a more fundamental question about how people experience suicide and how
they frame those experiences across their identities remains unanswered. This
project will examine how suicide survivors construct cultural narratives to make
meaning of their suicide experiences in order to inform suicide prevention
strategies, clinical approaches to working with suicidal populations, and post-
suicide social supports. We know that variation in social statuses, such as
social class, gender and race, are related to increases in suicide risk. This
project will analyze such variations in survivors’ cultural narratives. The
identification of social mechanisms underlying suicidality will help policy
makers: 1) create and refine suicide prevention by understanding the unique
circumstances that precede survivors’ suicide experiences; 2) design policy to
help those who have suicidal experiences transition back to life and society by
identifying their unique circumstances and needs following suicide experiences;
and 3) refine clinicians’ approaches to suicidal populations by explaining
variation within the suicidal population across social identities. If, as
evidence suggests, suicide survivors’ experiences and cultural narratives vary
across social positions then these findings will have the potential to
contribute to tailored suicide prevention policy and post-suicide programming,
which could both save lives from suicide and improve survivors’ quality of life
post-suicide experience. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding how people
experience surviving suicide is critical to enhance suicide prevention efforts
as well as to proving support to suicide survivors. Using in-depth, semi-
structured interviews with 120 suicide survivors, this project will examine how
individuals’ social identities—and the salience of those identities—affect how
they make sense of their suicide experiences and how these framings relate to
their transitions back to life after periods of suicidal ideation or suicide
attempt(s). Interview data will be analyzed using a grounded theory approach
with Max QDA, a software program that allows for sorting, coding, and organizing
narrative interview data. Given the paucity of qualitative work on suicide, this
project is both methodologically and theoretically novel. The qualitative
approach will advance contemporary sociological theory about suicide and provide
information about the social mechanisms through which social categories relate
to suicide experiences. More broadly the project contributes to sociological
theories related to health disparities that vary by social
status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.