* 2001593
* Collaborative Research: A Novel Biological Valorization of Hydrothermal Liquefaction Wastewater with Marine Protist and its Granulated Phenotype
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yi Zheng, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 187,444.00

Hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) has been considered as a promising thermal
processing approach to biofuel production from a broad range of organic matter,
including agricultural waste biomass, municipal solid waste, and algae. A recent
U.S. Department of Energy report stated that as much as 5.9 billion gallons of
biocrude could be produced each year in the U.S. from the available waste
organic matter using HTL technology; this biocrude can be further refined to
liquid transportation fuels using processes similar to conventional petroleum
refining, replacing those fuels currently produced from non-renewable
feedstocks. However, current HTL processes produce a large amount of wastewater
containing high concentrations of organic compounds and nutrients; the
sustainable disposal of this wastewater is one of the most significant
bottlenecks to the scale-up and commercialization of HTL. This research will
address concerns from both environmental and energy conversion efficiency
perspectives of HTL by recovering organic carbon and nutrients from HTL
wastewater. This is a critical step to increasing the net energy yield and
enhancing the economic viability and environmental sustainability of HTL
processes. In the course of carrying out this project, the researchers will
train the next generation of scientists and engineers in biofuel production,
biotechnology/bioprocessing, and environmental stewardship, all while educating
the public about sustainable biofuel production and the impact of energy
consumption on economic, environmental and societal
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team of this proposal has
recently found that a marine protist Thraustochytrium striatum HB can survive
and grow in wastewater produced from HTL processing of municipal solid waste
without supplemental nutrients while removing approximately 80% total organic
carbon, 100% total nitrogen, and 80% phosphorus. Additionally, the microbes were
found to be tolerant of wide pH and salinity ranges (comparable to sea water) in
metabolizing organic compounds in HTL wastewater while being able to form cell
aggregates under harsh conditions. Therefore, marine protists hold promise to be
a new class of superior microorganisms for HTL wastewater treatment and
valorization. The overarching goal of this project is to establish a T. striatum
HB-facilitated platform for HTL wastewater valorization to enable sustainable
HTL for biofuel production. The specific objectives of this research are to: (1)
elucidate the correlation between biocrude yield and the HTL wastewater
composition; (2) reveal the metabolic adaptation of T. striatum HB to the new
wastewater environments to enhance overall energy return and biocrude yield; and
(3) explore the formation mechanisms of T. striatum HB biogranules and the
resulting performance impact on HTL wastewater valorization since biogranules
are more efficient in wastewater valorization compared to dispersed cells. The
marine protists could be a new class of promising microorganisms for
valorization of other types of high-strength wastewater. The interdisciplinary
nature of the proposed research will facilitate the integration of research and
educational plans to enhance the education programs of three institutes involved
in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.