* 2001906
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Relational Cultures, Inequality and Belonging: Race, Class and Teacher-Student Relationships in Two U.S. High Schools
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Allison Pugh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2021
* USD 15,994.00

Research identifies minority students’ relationships with teachers as one driver
of racial achievement gaps in American schools. Students with strong teacher
relationships perform better academically. However, minority students experience
more negative and less caring relationships with teachers than majority peers.
This project addresses the social processes producing these racial disparities
in teacher-student relationships. A growing body of research suggests the race
and class composition of schools plays a role: schools with more majority and
higher SES students have stronger teacher-student relationships overall but also
wider achievement gaps between majority and minority students while schools with
more minority and lower SES students have weaker relationships overall but also
less disparity. Current approaches cannot explain 1) how predominantly minority
and majority schools differ in developing teacher-student relationships overall
and 2) how majority and minority students’ relationships with teachers vary
within these differing environments. This project addresses these crucial
factors through a comparative ethnography of a predominantly majority high
school and a predominantly minority high school. This study will expand
knowledge of inequality by showing how relationships are formed, maintained, and
given meaning in school environments with varying outcomes for majority and
minority students. The project will inform the design and implementation of
educational reforms through identifying specific school-and classroom-level
mechanisms that either support or constrain the development of teacher-student
relationships. While focusing on relational cultures and inequality in schools,
this project also has implications for youth-adult relationships in other
organizational settings, such as in the criminal justice system and the
workplace, thus implicating policies in these settings, as well.

This project argues that schools have a relational culture, encompassing shared
expectations and practices shaping interactions between teachers and students.
The project analyzes how seemingly equivalent relationships between teachers and
students can take varying forms in different schools with important implications
for student outcomes. Through comparing across schools, this project analyzes:
1) how relational cultures are racialized and differentiated by social class, 2)
how relational cultures produce differences in majority and minority students’
relationships with teachers, and 3) how students' relationships with teachers
impact their school experience and outcomes. To address these questions, this
project utilizes eight months of daily observations and in-depth interviews with
teachers (N=40), students (N=96), and administrators (N=20) at one majority
white high school and one majority-minority high school. Data are analyzed using
Atlas.TI to derive coding and themes capturing the similarities and differences
across and within the cases. Findings from the project will inform sociological
theories regarding relational cultures, inequality regimes, and organizational
processes, particularly for organizations varying in majority-minority
concentration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.