* 2001132
* Hodge Filtration on Local Cohomology and Minimal Exponents
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mircea Mustata, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

Given a polynomial in several variables, with complex coefficients, its solution
set is a geometric object that in many interesting situations exhibits
singularities. These singularities can be measured by invariants that can be
either numerical or more involved (for example, they can form in turn suitable
subsets in the polynomial ring). Over the past few years, the PI has been
involved in the study of certain such invariants by making use of tools from
from Hodge theory and the algebraic theory of differential operators. In the
present project, the PI plans to extend this study in several directions. For
example, he plans to generalize his previous work with Popa from the case of
singularities of geometric objects defined by one equation to more general such
singularities. In a different direction, he intends to investigate one
interesting numerical invariant of singularities--the minimal exponent--and its
connections with other invariants and points of view on singularities. The PI
will train graduate students in the area of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI has been studying with Popa certain invariants of singularities, the Hodge
ideals, for hypersurfaces and, more generally, for Q-divisors. These ideals can
be defined naturally in the context of Saito's theory of mixed Hodge modules. It
turns out that the triviality of the Hodge ideals is governed by a numerical
invariant,the minimal exponent, which is closely related to an important
invariant in birational geometry, the log canonical threshold. While the minimal
exponent has been studied a lot for isolated singularities, methods related to
Hodge ideals allow treating the general case. There are two main components of
the present project. In one direction, the PI intends to further investigate,
with Popa, an extension of the theory of Hodge ideals beyond the case of
hypersurfaces, by making use of the canonical filtration on local cohomology.
There are several interesting questions in this context, concerning connections
with the multi-variable version of the V-filtration and with the Bernstein-Sato
polynomial for ideals. In a different direction, the PI plans to study general
properties of the minimal exponent and its relations to other points of view on
singularities (via divisorial valuations and resolution of singularities, or in
connection to the motivic zeta function).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.