* 2001328
* I-Corps: Accurate, Contiguous and Portable Wireless Intraocular Contact Lens Pressure Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Pai-Yen Chen, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a device to monitor high eye pressure (intraocular pressure or
IOP), the only known sign of glaucoma, which could cause vision loss and
influence patients’ quality of life. Glaucoma is a leading cause of blindness
for people over 60 years old and affects approximately 3 million people in the
USA. The incidence of glaucoma is expected to rise to 76 million by 2020 and 112
million people by 2040 worldwide. Unfortunately, glaucoma is not curable, but it
is manageable with proper treatments. Although IOP is a highly dynamic
parameter, conventional measurements fail to track it for a 24-hour period. A
compact and portable wireless contact lens sensor (CLS) system can enable
continuous, real-time monitoring of IOP and ensure clinical safety and patient
comfort. This type of system could be adapted for other pressure measurements in
other parts of the body as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of parity-time (PT) symmetry in quantum mechanics into
radio-frequency (RF) telemetric sensing systems, enabling new ways to enhance
resolution, accuracy, and sensitivity of versatile zero-power wireless pressure
sensors (e.g., intraocular, intracranial and other biological pressures).
Specifically, the team’s PT telemetry technologies employed an active loss-
compensation circuit, which not only can compensate the power dissipation in
minimally-invasive microsensors, but also allows a large shift of peak frequency
under changes in vital physiological factors (i.e., a higher sensitivity),
thanks to the eigenvalue bifurcation effect around the exceptional points found
in PT systems. This wireless readout technology will be exploited to
continuously record IOP levels from a biocompatible, monolithically
microfabricated CLS, with enhanced sensitivity and resolvability. In addition,
machine learning and signal processing algorithms will be exploited to address
the long-term stability and signal drift issues in the practical IOP
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.