* 2001222
* CAREER: Adaptation and learning processes in human locomotion
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Julia Choi, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 03/31/2024
* USD 518,630.00

Motor adaptation and learning is fundamental to the flexibility of walking. Our
movement patterns must be constantly adapted as we grow, age, or experience
changing conditions such as slippery sidewalks. Learning new motor skills
initiates a process of memory formation that generated improved and more stable
performance. Previously learned motor memories can also be used to learn another
motor task more rapidly. The goal of this project is to reveal how the human
brain creates and recalls memories in walking. This will be achieved by studying
a set of tasks inspired by research of arm control. The expected findings will
have broad implications for human walking flexibility in health and disease,
because motor learning and rehabilitation are thought to share similar
mechanisms. The advanced scientific knowledge will have broader impacts,
including the possible transformation of gait rehabilitation approaches and
enhanced understanding of learning and memory in the human brain. Further, this
work includes interdisciplinary neuroscience training of promising students with
diverse ethnic, gender, and academic backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this CAREER proposal is to understand the mechanisms for
human locomotor adaptation and learning. While motor learning has received ample
attention in studies utilizing upper limbs, there are relatively few studies of
motor learning in the context of human locomotion. These experiments will
examine the commonalities as well as task-specific distinctions across different
types of locomotor learning paradigms: sequence learning, visuomotor adaptation
and dynamic (split-belt treadmill) adaptation. Specifically, this work will
examine how consolidation leads to offline learning and resistance to
interferences between different walking patterns, and the immediate and delayed
benefits of variable practice on the generalization of learning. This research
will also examine the role of sleep in consolidation and generalization of
locomotor learning. The integrated educational plan will provide
interdisciplinary neuroscience training to undergraduate and graduate students
in order to develop and retain young scientists in the area of movement
neuroscience. The project will promote active participation from
underrepresented students in order to equip women and minorities to pursue STEM
education. The project team will engage in public outreach and the dissemination
of scientific progress to regional communities, to enhance general interest in
science and technology amongst the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.