* 2001434
* Elucidating the Hidden Steps of Replicative DNA Synthesis by Time-Resolved X-ray Crystallography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* John Chaput, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 438,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry
Division and the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences are funding Dr. John Chaput from the University of
California, Irvine to apply time-resolved X-ray crystallography methods to
capture snapshot images as the DNA polymerase enzyme copies one strand of DNA
onto another. DNA is the blueprint that directs the molecular basis of life on
our planet. However, despite decades of research, there remains an incomplete
understanding of how enzymes make new copies of DNA inside cells. The collection
of images is assembled to produce the equivalent of an animated movie showing
the precise order of each step in the reaction pathway at the atomic level. The
detailed insights into the chemical mechanism of these enzymes leads potentially
to the design of new polymerases for applications in biotechnology. In addition,
this project includes a significant educational component that is designed to
attract and maintain student interest in the chemical and biological sciences.
This includes pro-active engagement in a number of university-sponsored
programs, including the Minority Science Program, aimed at improving the
participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-resolved X-ray crystallography is a powerful method
for studying the mechanism of enzymes by capturing intermediates that cannot be
observed in the lowest energy states of static protein crystal structures. This
project investigates the mechanism of DNA synthesis by collecting time-lapsed
images of the Bacillus stearothermophilus (Bst) and the Klenow-fragment analogue
of the Thermus aquaticus (KlenTaq) DNA polymerase. The objectives are to provide
details of a tyrosine gating mechanism that prevents frame-shift mutations and a
novel push-pull mechanism during elongation. In addition, the study probes an
unusual alternative reaction catalyzed by Bst polymerase that uses non-canonical
templates (RNA, 2-fluoro-arabino nucleic acid, or alpha-L-threose nucleic acid)
for DNA elongation. The time-lapse structures are projected to identify
conformational changes as they occur in the enzyme active site. The full
collection of snapshot images is to provide unequivocal evidence for the precise
order of each intermediate in the reaction pathway and may lead to the discovery
of new intermediates not observed in previous DNA polymerase studies. Successful
completion of this project is expected to illuminate the chemistry of one of
life’s most essential processes—DNA synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is co-funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry (Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Directorate) and the Genetic
Mechanisms cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
(Biological Sciences (BIO)Directorate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.