* 2001800
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Medicalization During Adolescence:  Perspectives of Parents, Doctors and Youth
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Krista Brumley, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2022
* USD 15,810.00

Since 2010, there has been a rapid increase in children who seek medical and
psychological services related to the stress they experience regarding the
nonconformity between their assigned sex at birth (male or female) and how they
experience their gender in daily life (male, female, both, or neither), also
known as gender dysphoria. There has been significant concern about the mental
health of these youth, especially concerning the risk of adverse mental health
events, including suicide. However, research shows that when nonconforming
adolescents are well-supported, they have similar levels of depression to other
adolescents. For such adolescents who seek medical intervention, these support
systems may include parents as advocates and/or healthcare professionals who
specialize in serving them. In these cases, decisions about steps towards
intervention are made between the adolescents, their parents, as well as the
physicians. Findings from this in-depth interview study will help inform
healthcare professionals about ways in which medical services can improve for
these adolescents. This research will also provide information for families and
other stakeholders about how to advance the health and wellbeing of adolescents.
This project provides a platform for adolescents to describe their lived
experiences, which can benefit the medical field and families that need their
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying gender non-conforming adolescents
provides researchers with the opportunity to analyze the processes that
contribute to the creation of their identities. This project will explain how
non-conforming adolescents who receive medical interventions address the
complexity of their identities. Data collection involves 60 in-depth, semi-
structured face-to-face interviews with three groups: 20 non-conforming
adolescents, 20 parents of such adolescents, and 20 physicians who work with
such adolescents. Participants in this study will be identified through a
combination of personal contacts and snowball sampling. Interview questions with
physicians include exploring reasons for approving or denying medical services
to adolescents, how they help facilitate discussions between parents and
adolescents, and ways in which healthcare for these adolescents can be improved.
Interviews with the parents focus on their child’s behaviors and interactions
with doctors. Questions with the adolescents will probe for reasons behind their
decisions to seek information about medical intervention and their experiences
with this process. Interview data will be subjected to open coding to derive
themes present in the data using NVIVO to manage transcripts and data analysis.
This project addresses the gap in our knowledge on the behaviors and beliefs of
non-conforming adolescents and will provide insight into medical technologies to
support them. Findings will also inform sociological theories related to gender
and social identities, particularly for adolescents as they transition to
adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.