* 2001234
* 2020 Bioinspired Materials GRC/GRS
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Daniel Hammer, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

1. Non technical abstract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioinspired materials are
materials that are designed or assembled using the inspiration of biology as a
guide. Biological systems have developed exquisite ways of assembling functional
materials to achieve goals such as sensing, secretion, motion, and response. In
the field of Bioinspired Materials, scientists from many different backgrounds
use chemistry, biochemistry, materials science and mathematics to design new
materials that have the structure of biological systems, but which can achieve
new goals, such as motion or communication.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
work is to sponsor a meeting as part of the Gordon Reseeacrh Conferences on
Bioinspired Materials. The meeting will be held in Les Diablerets, Switzerland,
June 7-12, 2020. A significant number of the participants will be U.S.
researchers, and 2/3 of the meeting partcipants are early stage investigators
(graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and early stage professors). Gordon
Research Conferences are week-long immersive experiences in which cutting edge,
unpublished science is presented, with long question and answer periods, poster
sessions, discussion of science over meals, and social engagement between
sessions. This particular meeting will also have a Gordon Research Seminar, two
days before the main meeting, for solely graduate students and postdoctoral
associates to present their work, and a Power Hour, dedicated to discussion the
main challenges for women in science. In all, the meeting is designed to address
the important ideas and concepts in the field of Bioinspired Materials by
international leaders in the field, with significant participation by a new
generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Technical
Abstract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emerging, interdisciplinary field of
Bioinspired Materials focuses on developing a fundamental understanding of the
synthesis, directed self-assembly and hierarchical organization of natural
occurring materials, and uses this understanding to design new synthetic
materials whose structure, properties and function and response mimic those of
natural materials or living matter. The fundamental concepts behind bioinspired
design are becoming increasingly integrated into a wide range of materials and
devices intended for the industrial, biological, medical, military and energy
sectors, and represent a core focus of research activity of several programs at
NSF. Planned sessions include Protocell Engineering (both a Keynote and an Early
Career Investigator session), Novel Membrane Design, Active Matter and Motility,
Membraneless Organelles, Functional Bioinspired Assemblies, Peptide &amp;
Protein Assembly, Tissues &amp; Organoids, and Immune Engineering. These are
important current concepts in biomaterials that are at the forefront of our
discipline. The meeting will focus on the fundamental challenges of the design
of bioinspired materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to support the
registration of 37 participants in the Gordon Research Conference on Bioinspired
Materials. The format and structure of the GRC is designed for immersion of
scientists into new and emerging concepts in Biomaterials Science – with an
emphasis on breaking results and unpublished data - through long question and
answer periods, interactive discussion, significant poster sessions and social
activities between sessions. This particular meeting will also have a Gordon
Research Seminar, two days before the main meeting, for solely graduate students
and post-doctoral associates to present their work, and a Power Hour on
“Strategies for leveling the playing field for the advancement of women in
science,” dedicated to a discussion on the main challenges for women in science.
The emphasis on early stage investigators and underrepresented groups will
significantly enhance the broader impact of this
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.