* 2001156
* Synthesis and Characterization of New Zintl Phases for Thermoelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Susan Kauzlarich, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,994.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric materials
convert a temperature gradient into electricity and could impact energy
conversion from solar or current energy sources with significant waste heat
available. The conversion efficiency of a material requires that it have good
electrical conductivity like a metal and low thermal conductivity like an
insulator. The primary challenge is decoupling these interrelated properties, a
task that a type of compound known as Zintl phases are well suited for. These
compounds' unique and complex structures provide materials where thermal
conductivity is low and therefore it is possible to focus on tuning the
electrical transport properties. This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, is
focused on the synthesis of new Zintl phase compounds containing transition
metals and rare earth elements. This project identifies new and existing crystal
structures with proposed low thermal conductivity and provides a road map for
enhancing the electronic properties for efficient energy conversion. This
research impacts technology for our future energy needs and specifically the
utilization of waste heat conversion into electricity. Next generation
scientists receive fundamental training in materials synthesis and development
of structure-property correlations. Undergraduate and graduate students are
provided hands-on training and their scientific and communication skills are
developed through workshops and individualized mentoring. Undergraduate
laboratory and classroom curriculum development is also incorporated in the
project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is focused on synthesis of new thermoelectric materials
described as Zintl phases and development of structure-property correlations
toward efficient energy conversion technologies. Thermoelectricity is based on
three important transport parameters: the Seebeck coefficient, electrical
resistivity, and thermal conductivity. The efficiency of thermoelectric
materials is described by the unitless figure of merit zT, which is dependent
upon all three of these interdependent properties. Zintl phases are considered a
subgroup of intermetallics where metal cations and anions or polyanions form
complex structures and are semiconductors. The foundational idea of Zintl to
employ electron counting to understand complex solid state structure provides
insight into bonding and allows for systematic optimization of properties.
Therefore, Zintl phases are prime candidates for thermoelectric applications as
they are semiconductors with large tunability because they contain both ionic
and covalent bonding. Solid solutions of iso- and alio-valent elements provide a
means to change carrier concentration and therefore the electronic structure to
tune properties. Within this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, specific structure
types that are expected to have low thermal conductivity are targeted and the
application of Zintl counting rules is tested in order to tune the electronic
properties. Goals include both further optimization of Zintl structures and the
synthesis of new compounds with structures that are predicted to give rise to
low thermal conductivity and efficient thermoelectric energy conversion. The
project focuses on mixed cations and light element containing phases that have
not yet been investigated. New compounds are synthesized as single crystals and
high purity powders via flux and metallurgical routes and fully dense pellets
will be prepared via spark plasma sintering. Students and next generation
scientists are provided hands-on training and their scientific and communication
skills are developed through workshops and individualized mentoring. The
research will be presented at national and international meetings and the
findings published in peer-review journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.