* 2001714
* Collaborative Research: Building Geologically Informed Bed Classes to Improve Projections of Ice Sheet Change
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Atsuhiro Muto, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 174,216.00

Predictions of future changes of the Antarctic ice sheet are essential for
understanding changes in the global sea level expected for the coming centuries.
These predictions rely on models of ice-sheet flow that in turn rely on
knowledge of the physical conditions of the Antarctic continent beneath the ice.
Exploration of Antarctica by land, sea, and air has advanced our understanding
of the geological material under the Antarctic ice sheet, but this information
has not yet been fully integrated into ice-sheet models. This project will take
advantage of existing data from decades of US and international investment in
geophysical surveys to create a new understanding of the geology underlying the
Amundsen Sea and the adjacent areas of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet—a portion of
Antarctica that is considered particularly vulnerable to collapse. A series of
new datasets called “Bed Classes” will be developed that will translate the
geological properties of the Antarctic continent in ways that can be
incorporated into ice-sheet models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a new regional geologic/tectonic framework for the Amundsen Sea
Embayment and its ice catchments using extensive marine and airborne geophysical
data together with ground-based onshore geophysical and geological constraints
to delineate sedimentary basins, bedrock ridges, faults, and volcanic
structures. Using this new geologic interpretation of the region, several key
issues regarding the geologic influence on ice-sheet stability will be
addressed: whether the regional heat flow is dominated by localization along the
faults or lithology; the role of geology on the sources, sinks, and flow-paths
of subglacial water; the distribution of sediments that determine bed-character
variability; and the extent of geologic control on the current Thwaites Glacier
grounding line. The impact of improved geological knowledge on ice-sheet models
will be tested with the development of a set of “Bed Class” grids to capture
these new insights for use in the models. Bed Classes will be tested within the
Parallel Ice Sheet Model framework with initial experiments to identify the
sensitivity of model simulations to geological parameterizations. Through a
series of workshops with ice-sheet modelers, the Bed Classes will be refined and
made accessible to the broader modelling community. This work aims to ensure
that the Bed-Class concept can be applied more broadly to ice-sheet models
working in different geographic areas and on different
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.