* 2001388
* EAGER: Collaborative Research:  Positron annihilation spectroscopy of Earth materials:  A combined materials characterization approach
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Heather Watson, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 11/30/2021
* USD 55,750.00

Our knowledge of the Earth and its history strongly depends on our understanding
of the materials that make up the bulk of the planet. Laboratory measurements of
Earth materials (e.g., rocks, minerals, and magmas) are used in conjuction with
direct observations of the planet and numerical models to help build the rich
and complex view of the Earth and its inner workings that we have today. In this
project, the investigators seek to further our understanding of the atomic-scale
physical properties of several relevant Earth materials through the development
of a very high resolution materials characterization technique called positron
annihilation spectroscopy. The benefit of this technique is that it allows for
direct investigation of crystalline solids at an atomic level, which is not
routinely done with other conventional methods used in the geosciences. This
project aims to build a new positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy
apparatus, test and calibrate the instrument, and characterize the atomic scale
defect populations in several important Earth materials including metals,
oxides, and silicate minerals. The undertaking will involve interdisciplinary
collaborations between nuclear physicists and experts in the area of materials
characterization and geoscience. The project will also support two female
faculty, undergraduate curriculum development, and advanced student research at
a liberal arts college.

Understanding defects in crystalline solids is important for our general
understanding of Earth materials because of their relationship to atomic
mobility (diffusion) within crystals, nucleation of crystals and formation of
new phases as well as electrical and heat transfer properties. When a
significant population of defects are included in the crystal structure, it may
affect transport properties of the crystal significantly. Many crystals in
natural systems may have been exposed to defect creating events including
radiation damage and deformation. To accurately apply experimentally determined
diffusion parameters to natural systems, a thorough understanding of the
relationship between defects and diffusion is crucial. Direct measurements of
defect populations in natural and synthetic Earth materials is generally
lacking. Positron annihilation spectroscopy is a non-destructive technique used
to characterize defects and voids in materials at a sub nm to atomic scale. The
technique has been used extensively in the materials science and nuclear
materials communities for decades to examine defect properties and the effects
of radiation damage on synthetic and industrial materials, but has not yet
gained popularity in the Earth sciences community. The goal of this project is
to develop a methodology that will enable further investigation into the
relationship between diffusion and defect populations by direct measurement of
defects in a variety of Earth relevant materials using positron annihilation
spectroscopy. The project will also contribute to the education and research
training of undergraduate students and provide opportunities for
interdisciplinary work between mineral physics, nuclear physics, materials
science, and geochemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.