* 2001815
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Partisanship: Analyzing the Local Processes that Produce National Politics
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Elisabeth Clemens, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2022
* USD 15,999.00

How do the communities where people live shape the way they understand national
politics? Although the concepts of red and blue states are familiar to most
Americans, we have little understanding of how that patchwork emerges from the
everyday processes and interactions of the people who live within it. To
understand how local contexts produce the geography of American politics, this
project follows three communities through the 2020 presidential campaign. These
communities are similar socioeconomically, but have historically voted very
differently. The three towns are similar blue-collar, Midwestern towns located
in predominately rural counties, and yet they vote for opposing parties in
presidential elections: one is staunchly Democratic, another is devoutly
Republican, and a third has a voting history that is more mixed. What is it
about these communities that influences similar people to vote differently?
Findings from the project will be of interest to all political actors who have
an interest in understanding and predicting voting patterns in presidential
elections, as well as those interested in constructing effective political
campaigns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand why demographically similar small
towns vote differently in presidential campaigns, this project uses both
qualitative and quantitative methods. Relying on Census and voting records from
1932-2016, a hierarchical clustering algorithm was used to identify the three
cases based on their demographic similarities and their different voting
histories from 1964-2016. The qualitative portion of the study will draw on
three different types of data: in-depth interviews conducted with 90 voters
across the three towns at four different points during the 2020 U.S.
presidential election; in-depth interviews with 75 community leaders from
churches, non-profits, unions, political parties, and local government; and
ethnographic observation of key community organizations’ mobilization efforts
during the campaign. All qualitative data will be analyzed using the RQDA
qualitative analysis package. Data from the interviews and observation will
demonstrate how the meso-level of organizations and community life shape voters’
understandings of national politics. In answering this question, this study
advances the scholarship on partisanship and polarization in American politics
by re-orienting its focus away from individuals’ demographics and toward the
place-based processes of sense-making that help people understand the complex
political world. Findings from the project will inform sociological theories of
political identity and political participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.