* 2001903
* Collaborative Research: Cirrus Cloud Formation and Microphysical Properties from In-situ Observed Characteristics to Global Climate Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Xiaohong Liu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,733.00

This study will investigate the determinant factors behind cirrus cloud
formation and evolution based on in-situ observations at various geographical
locations. In addition, the global radiative forcing of observation-constrained
aerosol impacts on cirrus microphysical properties will be quantified by using a
climate model. The project will focus on three critical scientific issues: (1)
Hemispheric differences in cirrus cloud macroscopic and microphysical properties
under similar dynamical conditions; (2) Multi-scale dynamical forcings driving
ice nucleation and their impacts on cirrus simulations in a climate model; and
(3) Impacts of anthropogenic aerosol emissions on cirrus microphysical
properties and the subsequent influences on global
radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these scientific issues, The research
team will: (1) extract cirrus cloud samples from a composite in-situ dataset
covering various geographical locations, and compare the formation and evolution
of cirrus clouds between two hemispheres; (2) examine the micro- to mesoscale
(~0.1-10 km) variabilities of water vapor and temperature, and improve the NCAR
Community Atmosphere Model version 5 (CAM5) by including these observed
variabilities; (3) compare the in-situ measured cirrus microphysical properties
between polluted and pristine regions, and use CAM5 to quantify the consequent
perturbations on global radiation balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Cirrus clouds are one of the main modulators of Earth's climate
system. However, due to their large spatial heterogeneity and temporal
variability, cirrus clouds remain one of the poorly-represented components in
current general circulation models (GCMs). This project will improve our
understanding of cirrus microphysical properties in relation to dynamical
conditions and aerosol backgrounds, by analyzing in-situ aircraft data obtained
from both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, polluted and pristine regions.
Furthermore, the research team will use the observed characteristics to evaluate
the simulations of relative humidity and cirrus clouds in CAM5 in terms of their
occurrence, spatial coverage and microphysical properties. In addition, a "best-
observation-matched" ice microphysics configuration will be implemented into
CAM5. Overall, using micro- to mesoscale observations of cirrus formation and
evolution, the research will improve cirrus cloud simulations in CAM5 and
provide a new estimation on cirrus clouds' adjustments due to anthropogenic
aerosol emissions (i.e., aerosol indirect forcing through perturbations of
cirrus microphysical properties).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Both the observational dataset and the new model
parameterization will be released to the community, including a synthesized in-
situ observation dataset (a total of 8 campaigns from NSF, NASA and European
Union), and a sub-grid scale parameterization of relative humidity variability
for GCMs. The improved estimation of anthropogenic aerosol impact on cirrus
cloud radiative forcing can contribute to uncertainty reduction in the next IPCC
report. The project will greatly benefit teaching and mentoring of undergraduate
and graduate students at University of Wyoming and San Jose State University.
The project will also recruit and train undergraduate students for presenting
their research at the local K-12 schools via San Jose State University's
undergraduate Ambassador Program.