* 2001946
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Status Ideology: How is Status Information Interpreted?
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Carla Goar, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 02/28/2023
* USD 16,000.00

Racial inequality in hiring, wages, evaluations, and promotions is a continuing
issue in the contemporary United States. We know that implicit biases advantage
white job candidates over equally qualified job applicants from other racial
groups. We also know that individuals exert cognitive effort to rationalize and
justify racial disparities in ways that reproduce inequality. However, little
research has examined the interplay between unconscious and cognitive processes
in relation to decision-making outcomes related to work. This project focuses on
how individuals interpret and cognitively attend to information when evaluating
job applicants’ résumés that differ on race/ethnicity and work ability to better
understand how individuals interpret such information. Project findings will
inform workplace and governmental policies and practices to modify and improve
hiring strategies that address inequality in evaluations relevant to key aspects
of the work process. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Racial inequality at work is a
partial function of both unconscious and cognitive mechanisms that are present
in hiring recommendations. This project uses a mixed-methods experimental design
that collects evaluations, physiological measurements and qualitative
interviews. One hundred and eighty participants will review a pair of résumés
that signal race/ethnicity and work ability, i.e. work skill score, a tool used
by companies to diversify their hiring practices. Neurological and eye-tracking
methods will be used to investigate implicit and cognitive attention during
résumé evaluations and qualitative interviews will be used to observe how
decisions are rationalized. A neurological approach captures evaluators’
cognitive attention when evaluating different types of information, such as
race/ethnicity and work skill scores. Eye-tracking methods will triangulate what
information is implicitly capturing evaluators’ attention. Of the 180
participants, thirty randomly-selected evaluators will participate in
qualitative interviews to help provide insight into the interpretive frameworks
evaluators may use to justify unequal outcomes. The mixed-methods approach will
demonstrate for social psychologists key strategies for studying racial
inequality; for race and ethnicity scholars the project will demonstrate the
power of experimentation in the laboratory. Project outcomes will contribute to
sociological theories relevant to both social psychology and sociology of race
and ethnicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.