* 2001314
* Collaborative Research: Developing New Models of Oceanic Magmatism and Source Heterogeneity Using the 8 degree 20' N Seamounts as Windows into the Sub-Ridge Mantle
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Michael Perfit, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,396.00

Eruptions of lava form submarine volcanoes, known as seamounts, near mid-ocean
ridge spreading centers. These lavas can provide important information about
what Earth’s uppermost (~ 120 miles) mantle is composed of and how it melts to
form the majority of Earth’s crust. At present no studies have examined long
chains of seamounts adjacent to mid-ocean ridges to address these fundamental
questions. In this study, we plan to analyze over 400 well located lava samples
from the 8°20'N seamount chain. The chain was previously sampled and mapped in
2016 and 2018 using the submersible Alvin and autonomous vehicle Sentry. The
geochemical, mineralogical, and age data to be obtained under this project will
allow us to determine the origin of the magmas that feed the seamounts and
nearby ridge. The data will also tell us how those magmas evolve to form oceanic
lavas, and how the volcanism is related to regional tectonic processes. The
study will promote advances in the field of geochemistry, marine geology, and
geodynamics. This project will provide significant mentorship and training for
students at a variety of levels. It will fully or partially support three
graduate students at Florida and Boise State and will provide training for
several undergraduates in geochemical techniques and interpretation, and support
senior research projects. The project will also support education and diversity
by funding two female scientists, one a first-generation college graduate,
toward obtaining their PhDs in geochemistry. Both principal investigators are
heavily involved in outreach and education at the K-12 levels in Florida and
Idaho.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sparse sampling and geochemical analyses of
seamounts scattered throughout the northeastern Pacific suggest the sub-ridge
mantle associated with the East Pacific Rise (EPR) has far greater compositional
variability then is preserved in lavas erupted on-axis. While the relative
homogeneity of axial lavas has resulted in intriguing generalizations about
magma differentiation and mixing processes at mid-ocean ridges (MOR), seamount
studies have had a significant impact on our understanding of the source
compositions for oceanic basalts, the scales of mantle heterogeneity, and mantle
melting systematics at MOR. However, many of these studies have focused on
dredged lavas from individual seamounts with very few combining in situ sampling
and high-resolution mapping from a single chain oriented perpendicular to the
ridge axis. To fill this gap in knowledge about the sub-ridge mantle, two
research cruises in 2016 and 2018 investigated the 8°20’N seamount chain that
extends ~200km west of the EPR. The 8°20’N seamount chain was unexplored and
virtually unsampled before our highly successful OASIS cruises. Geophysical,
observational, and preliminary geochemical data from this nearly continuous
chain of volcanoes led us to unexpected discoveries about their construction and
revealed extreme compositional variability in the near MOR mantle that was
previously only surmised from regional seamount studies in the northeast
Pacific. The location, orientation, and preliminary data from the 8°20'N
seamount chain make it an ideal a natural laboratory to investigate source
heterogeneity and melting systematics in the near-ridge mantle. We propose to
study the petrologic processes and mantle sources feeding MOR and near-axis
volcanoes though comprehensive geochemical analyses of lavas and melt inclusions
from the 8°20’N seamounts. Site-specific sampling using HOV Alvin and extensive,
fine-scale mapping with AUV Sentry along the seamount chain, coupled with our
previous comprehensive investigations of the 8°- 10°N EPR provide an exceptional
opportunity to constrain geodynamic and geochemical models of mantle melting
near MOR and determine the extent and length scales of mantle heterogeneity. We
propose to collect a wide spectrum of petrologic and geochemical data including
Sr, Nd, Pb, and Os isotopes, melt inclusion compositions, volatile contents, and
40Ar/39Ar age dates of lavas from the extensive collection of samples we have
from the 8°20’N seamount chain. These results will be combined with numerical
models to produce a petrologic model of mantle melting and magmatic processes in
the near-ridge mantle. This extensive off-axis seamount chain provides a rare
opportunity to probe the compositions of the mantle near MOR and to understand
how magmas are spatially and temporally distributed in the shallow mantle and
crust. Results from this research have implications for the generation of the
majority of Earth’s crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.