* 2001676
* Doctoral Dissertation Dissertation Award: Status Related Resource Distribution
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Katherine Emery, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 27,271.00

The Spanish colonization of the Americas had profound impacts on indigenous
societies, but archaeological research has documented both change and continuity
in economic, social, and political structures during the 16th and 17th
centuries, implying a diversity of interactions and responses. This project uses
zooarchaeology, the study of archaeological animal remains, to evaluate the
impact of Spanish colonialism on households. Building on previous site-level
investigations, this study considers continuities and transformations in the
access to animal resources by specific community members as they adapted to the
new Colonial order. Zooarchaeology is well placed to study periods of culture
contact because animals can serve not only as basic resources, but also as
indicators of cultural identity, luxury items, and symbols of status and power
display. Thus, their material remains in the archaeological record provide a
proxy of the past economic, social, and political systems in which they were
used. In this study, the application of innovative zooarchaeological techniques
provides a refined view of animal use by householders of different social status
and political authority through the period of Spanish contact. In turn, this
offers insight into the role played by status and political standing in how
people react and adapt to times of instability. The project also incorporates
methodological advancements by (1) presenting a new method combining taphonomy
(the study of post-depositional histories of archaeological remains), skeletal
element refitting, and radiocarbon dating to resolve issues of poor
stratigraphic and chronological resolution; and (2) using a multi-isotope
approach to investigate animal trade and management practices from pre-Columbian
to Colonial times. Through museum exhibits and academic and public talks this
project will generate discussions on the retention and loss of indigenous
political economy in marginal areas. This research project will also train
undergraduate students in methods of identification and analysis of
zooarchaeological remains through hands-on lab activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To document change or persistence in cultural practices in
marginal communities under Spanish rule, zooarchaeological remains are studied
in two steps. First, taphonomic, refitting, and radiocarbon data are used to
refine the chronology of deposits from seven households. Second, differences in
the access to and control over animal resources and related activities are
identified by comparing taxonomic, skeletal, and isotopic data among contexts
(elite vs. non-elite, ruler vs. ruled) and periods (pre-Columbian vs. Colonial).
Together, these lines of evidence will allow one to determine (1) if the elite
maintained their status and power by retaining access to valued animal
resources; and (2) if non-elite community members developed new strategies of
animal exploitation to adapt to the Colonial order. Overall, these analyses will
document relations of production and distribution of animal resources in Spanish
borderlands and assess the impact of Spanish colonialism on the pursuit of these
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.