* 2001980
* Exotic Quantum Liquid Phases Due to Intrinsic Degrees of Anisotropy
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Orion Ciftja, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 240,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Human Resource Development contribute funds to this award. It
supports fundamental theoretical and computational research and education
involving the study of electrons confined to two dimensions and subject to
interactions and crystal environments that lead to a preferred
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atoms and molecules are made of elementary
particles such as electrons, protons, and neutrons. Electrons are often tightly
bound to their atoms. Materials are made of many billions of atoms, and in
metals and semiconductor materials some electrons can move relatively freely.
These electrons can behave like a liquid and can easily respond to externally
applied fields, such as electric fields, magnetic fields, and applied pressure.
For example, a copper wire conducts electricity in response to an applied
electric field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since many interesting properties of
materials are determined by the behavior of such free electrons, it is natural
to study the nature of the possible states of electronic matter that arise in
large systems of electrons and the dependence of their properties on external
parameters, such as temperature, electron density, and applied magnetic field.
The PI will study electronic states in materials where free electrons are
restricted to two-dimensions where the interaction between electrons and quantum
effects may combine leading to new phenomena and new electronic states of
matter. The electrons may be in a uniform liquid state of matter if interactions
are not very strong. The properties of such a liquid state would be isotropic -
the same in all directions. However, it is possible that effective interactions
between electrons are anisotropic or direction dependent. The presence of the
crystalline lattice of atoms makes electrons behave as though they have an
effective mass that can depend on the direction of their motion. This may lead
to electrons behaving like a liquid of elongated rods leading to electronic
states analogous to those assumed by the rod-like molecules in a liquid crystal
display. The PI will investigate electronic states that may arise as a
consequence of anisotropy. This includes externally induced anisotropy, such as
the anisotropic states that could arise under the application of a strong
magnetic field perpendicular to the 2D world of the electrons. The investigation
of new electronic states adds to the intellectual foundations that lead to new
electronic device technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities
conducted in this project will lead to research opportunities for economically
challenged students in the setting of a HBCU, will enhance research and
education in an undergraduate environment, and will improve the preparation of
undergraduate students for graduate studies. Overall, this project will help to
enhance the research and the education infrastructure at the local institution,
and lead to broader participation of underrepresented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Human Resource Development contribute funds to this award. It supports
fundamental theoretical and computational research to investigate the emergence
of novel anisotropic exotic quantum liquid phases in strongly correlated Fermi
systems. The PI will study two-dimensional systems of electrons in the quantum
Hall regime and two-dimensional Fermi liquid phases with deformed Fermi surfaces
in presence of some internal degree of anisotropy. The PI aims to understand how
anisotropic electronic ordered states arise in various quantum phases in
response to intrinsic anisotropy of the system. The PI will also investigate the
nature of novel exotic anisotropic phases such as anisotropic quantum Hall
liquid phases driven by an anisotropic interaction potential and anisotropic
Fermi liquid phases with deformed Fermi surfaces driven by a combination of
anisotropic effective mass and an anisotropic interaction potential between
electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical approaches can be applied to
experiments on two-dimensional electron systems with strong mass anisotropy
where unusual anisotropic transport in the quantum Hall regime is anticipated.
The ideas of this research can be relevant to understand experiments in two-
dimensional systems of electrons confined in aluminum arsenide quantum wells and
related systems. The electron effective mass anisotropy ratios can be almost one
order of magnitude in these systems. Of particular interest is how tuning
piezoelectric properties effects the anisotropic effective electron
interactions, and the resulting experimentally observable consequences.
Experiments may be proposed to detect signatures in transport properties
resulting from the interplay of different sources of anisotropy. The PI will
consider other physical systems as well, including ultracold atoms in
anisotropic lattice traps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team will use a
combination of theoretical and computational methods, including exact
diagonalization and quantum Monte Carlo, to carry out the research. Students
will use methods suited to their skills, such as variational or perturbation
methods from quantum theory, or computer simulations, in order to enhance their
educational experience as appropriate. The research provides a setting for
education and mentoring to enhance interest in science and leading careers in
STEM. This project will help broaden participation of minority and economically
challenged students in science and engineering through enhancing the
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.