* 2001968
* Percolated morphologies of branched-star poly(ionic liquid)s
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

PART 1. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consider a
class of complex molecularly branched ionic polymers with various chemical
compositions, morphologies and tunable physical properties in order to
understand composition-structure-property relationships and enhance ion-group
mobility. These novel ion-containing polymeric materials will be synthesized to
contain a high concentration of well-ordered charged groups. They will be
processed into continuous morphologies and investigated by various advanced
techniques. This approach will provide an organized material platform with
potentially high and controlled ionic transport, as well as liquid electrolytes
with low temperature and mechanical stability. Such organized multi-functional
polymeric materials with controlled continuous morphologies are important for
prospective novel solid polyelectrolyte media. These could offer potential for
new lightweight, robust, temperature-stable, and safe batteries to replace
current liquid-based batteries. This research will be integrated with a
multifaceted educational program for graduate and undergraduate students, as
well as outreach to high school students and the general public to cultivate
their interest in nanomaterials and more broadly STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2. TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consider newly synthesized
branched poly(ionic liquid)s with different functional cores, ion species, and
degrees of ionization. The PI's group will explore different chemical
architectures to promote various micellar morphologies and their assembly into
continuous percolated networks across multiple spatial scales starting from
individual macromolecules and extending to the formation of long-range
interconnected anisotropic core-shell morphologies. The project is focused on
understanding the role of highly asymmetric compositions of new multicomponent
branched ion-containing polymers. These will be tailored to yield continuous
domain morphologies via emergence of long-range and network organization such as
expanded interconnected cylindrical and nanotubular micelles. The general
hypothesis of the proposed research is that branched macromolecular
architectures with multiple functionalities can be leveraged to mediate the
organization of poly(ionic liquid)s and guide their assembly into predictable,
percolated morphologies of interconnected domains that are distinct from those
normally encountered in discrete nanostructures. The experimental plan will
enable a systematic and predictive understanding of component-structure-property
relationships for these complex materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.