* 2001828
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The distribution of costs and opportunities in amenity development communities
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Brian Thiede, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2022
* USD 15,960.00

This project investigates population changes in communities that shift to
economies centered around national amenities. Over the last four decades some
regions have moved from dependence on extractive industries, such as ranching,
farming, mining, or logging, to economies centered around natural amenities.
This transition is accompanied by population change, which can have widespread
effects on socioeconomic, cultural, political, and environmental aspects of a
community. This research will investigate conditions under which amenity
development fosters gentrification, the effects of amenity development and
resulting population shifts on the distribution of opportunity and influence,
and practices that lead communities down alternative paths. Findings of this
research will help communities identify opportunities and strategies to
transition to an economy centered around amenity development while minimizing
negative impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data for this project will be collected
through interviews in three locations: a long-time amenity destination, a new
amenity destination, and an emerging amenity destination. Informants will be
chosen to reflect three kinds of amenity development: bedroom communities,
tourism destinations, and retirement destinations. Data will be coded using
grounded theory coding methods.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.