* 2001022
* A fully calibrated astronomical time scale for the Cenozoic: Dating, climate forcing, and solar system chaos
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 259,841.00

To determine the ages of seafloor sediments and sedimentary rocks geologists
need a “calendar” of the past. One such calendar, called the astronomical time
scale, makes use of the fact that predictable changes in the orbits of the
planets drive cyclic changes in Earth’s climate. In this approach observed
cycles in sediment composition are matched to climate cycles. The timing of
those cycles is then calculated by computing planetary orbits backward in time.
The astronomical time scale is a valuable tool because the orbital calculations
provide accurate ages for the geologic record. Recent work by the PI provided
new astronomical calculations that stretch back to 58 million years before the
present (Myr BP). Those calculations were then compared with deep sea sediment
records. The comparisons yielded a new history of climate events during the
early Eocene (56 to 53 Myr BP). They also yielded new information about the
chaotic motions of the solar system. The proposed study will provide a fully
tested astronomical time scale and new astronomical calculations extending back
through the Paleocene (66 to 56 Myr BP). The astronomical calculations will
provide a time scale for the sediment records. At the same time the cyclic
patterns observed in the sediments will constrain calculations of the planets’
orbital variations. That new time scale will pave the way to an accurate time
scale extending back through the Cretaceous period (145 to 66 Myr BP). It will
also help improve dating methods that use radioactive elements. Finally, it will
improve our knowledge of the chaotic evolution of our solar system. The project
will also support a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of an
astronomical time scale (ATS) based on astronomical solutions has transformed
the dating of geologic archives and represents the backbone of marine
cyclostratigraphy and astrochronology to reconstruct Earth’s history. While the
stable 405-kyr cycle of Earth’s orbital eccentricity has been used to provide
floating (relative) chronologies across various time scales, one major challenge
remains: Development of an absolute, fully calibrated astronomical time scale
beyond ~50 Ma, which has hitherto been hampered by the fact that orbital
solutions disagree before that age due to solar system chaos. We have recently
made progress in providing a new astronomical solution to ~58 Ma by testing
against deep-sea sediment archives (~58-53 Ma), which also yielded critical
insight into the chronology of early Eocene hyperthermals and solar system
chaos. This project will develop and provide a fully calibrated ATS and a new
astronomical solution including the Paleocene (~66-56 Ma), which, combined with
our recent work, will then span the entire Cenozoic. The key idea of our study
is to use marine geology to constrain astronomy, and, conversely, use astronomy
to provide key applications widely used in marine geology. Reaching beyond 58 Ma
presents new challenges, which will require analyses of multiple geologic
records and significant computational resources. Cyclostratigraphic signals are
challenging to interpret in deep-sea records across the interval ~66-63 Ma, for
which we will integrate land-based marine sections in our analysis (e.g.,
Zumaia, Spain). The expression of Earth’s orbital eccentricity in the geologic
archives will then guide our search for an astronomical solution, using
numerical (ensemble) integrations of the orbital motion of the solar system.
Specifically, we will use marine deep-sea records of color reflectance and iron
intensities from ODP Sites 1262 and 1209 and cyclostratigraphy from land-based
marine sections (Zumaia) to reconstruct Earth’s orbital eccentricity across the
critical interval ~66-56 Ma. Based on the eccentricity expression observed in
the records, we will search for a new astronomical solution that will allow us
to extend the fully calibrated astronomically time scale to ~66 Ma. In summary,
our study will (1) provide a fully calibrated ATS across the Cenozoic, (2) help
gauge radiometric dating calibrations, (3) test correlations between
eccentricity amplitude modulation and Paleocene climate events, (4) model
forcing of Paleocene climate-carbon cycle feedbacks, and (5) transform our
knowledge of the chaotic evolution of our solar
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.