* 2001351
* Quantum Symmetric Pairs, Categorification, and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Weiqiang Wang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2023
* USD 345,000.00

The beauty of a physical object, such as a snowflake, is often a reflection of
its regularity or symmetry. In mathematics such a regularity is described by the
notion of groups or algebras. This research project seeks to study a certain
deformation symmetry known as i-quantum groups, which exhibit a crystal-like
discrete structure, not unlike what one sees in a snowflake. The PI plans to
uncover higher symmetries (in categorical or geometric approaches) behind the
i-quantum groups. This project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The i-quantum groups arising from
quantum symmetric pairs are a vast generalization of quantum groups. The PI
proposes a Hall algebra construction of i-quantum groups in greater generality,
and constructs braid group symmetries of i-quantum groups along the way. The PI
also proposes to provide a Drinfeld type construction of i-quantum groups of
affine type, which will pave the way to their finite-dimensional representations
and a geometric realization via classical flag varieties and more generally
quiver varieties. In addition, a theory of cells for i-quantum groups will be
developed. Finally, a Khovanov-Lauda-Rouquier type categorification of i-quantum
groups is proposed, and it will have applications to modular representations of
algebraic groups and quantum groups at roots of unity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.