* 2001038
* Nanoscale Design of Interfacial Kinematics in Composite Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sirish Namilae, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,744.00

The ubiquitous usage of polymer matrix composites in aerospace, automotive, and
other applications necessitates both a fundamental understanding of the
manufacturing process and novel design strategies to engineer their behavior.
Ply interfaces are known to play a crucial role in composite manufacturing.
Movement of ply interfaces during curing can lead to manufacturing defects that
affect the composite structure performance and have been a limiting factor in
several applications, resulting in delays and redesigns of products like
aircraft and civil infrastructure. This grant aims at understanding the
evolution and movement of composite interfaces during their manufacturing
through the development of a novel in-situ characterization approach using
digital image correlation (DIC). In addition, nanoscale interfacial components
such as zinc oxide (ZnO) nanowires will be utilized to mechanically alter the
interfacial behavior during curing. Multiscale computational modeling will
complement experimental investigations. The outcome of this research will lead
to novel diagnostics that reduce processing-induced defects and addresses the
current manufacturing needs of the commercial and defense industries. The
educational impacts of the project involve the development of a vertically
integrated pathway for engaging students in materials engineering, all the way
from K-12 to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will elucidate
the role of interfacial kinematics and energetics in the evolution of inter-ply
interfaces in composite structures during manufacturing. The research team will
develop a novel experimental method for in-situ characterization of surface and
interface deformations during composite processing, utilizing a customized
commercial composite autoclave with a digital image correlation system. The
surface strain and displacement measurements will be combined with ex-situ X-ray
tomography and thermal characterization to map the interfacial thermomechanical
response as a function of design and processing parameters. Additionally, the
interfacial behavior will be engineered through the rapid and controlled growth
of ZnO nanowires on carbon fibers to create a nanoscale interfacial component
that increases the fiber bending resistance and creates an interlocking effect
at the interfaces to mitigate defects propagation. The experimental research
will be complemented by molecular dynamics simulations of the sliding of
amorphous polymer interfaces and mesoscale simulation of flow in porous media.
This comprehensive approach of in-situ characterization, interface design, and
modeling will lead to a fundamental understanding of the ply movement during
composite manufacturing and development of methods to reduce the occurrence of
processing-induced defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.