* 2001205
* Greatest Common Divisors, Integral Points, and Diophantine Approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Aaron Levin, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2024
* USD 349,764.00

The project studies topics at the core of arithmetic and number theory. One of
the most basic objects in mathematics is the greatest common divisor of two
integers. The project will investigate generalizations and analogues of recently
developed inequalities for greatest common divisors, and their connections with
Vojta’s conjecture, a central and far-reaching conjecture. Another fundamental
and important question, going back to antiquity, concerns understanding integer
solutions to polynomial equations. The work will bring new ideas and
perspectives to this important question, including research toward methods
allowing one to algorithmically compute all integer solutions to large classes
of equations. A fundamental tool for studying such equations comes from the
subject of Diophantine approximation, which in its most basic form studies how
well a real number can be approximated by rational numbers. The project will
study various generalizations of one of the primary results in this subject,
Schmidt’s subspace theorem. This research has close connections to and
consequences for diverse areas of mathematics beyond number theory, including
complex analysis and geometry. Additionally, the project will support a wide
range of mentoring activities and research opportunities, involving the training
of undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award will
involve the study of several questions revolving around greatest common
divisors, integral points, Diophantine approximation, and their interrelations.
The first set of projects center on the investigator's recent higher-dimensional
generalization of results on greatest common divisors of polynomials evaluated
at S-units. The project will study generalizations and extensions related to
Vojta's conjecture, analogues in function fields, including applications, and a
novel approach to analogous problems for abelian varieties. A second set of
projects will focus on integral points on varieties. First, the project will
continue work on aspects of Siegel’s theorem for integral points of bounded
degree on curves. Second, the investigator will study an approach to effectively
proving Siegel’s theorem for genus two curves. Fundamental tools for studying
these problems come from the subject of Diophantine approximation, where
Schmidt's subspace theorem is a central result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.