* 2001886
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Differential Influence of Three Types of Elites
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Aaron Major, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 15,461.00

This project examines and compares the effects of influence exerted by three
different categories of elites on an important security-related area of
deliberation. The project will investigate the proposition that the usual
assumption of the preeminence of the economic elite is not valid in this area.
Data will come from a variety of compiled journals, magazines, and official
texts from 1990 to 2019. These will be analyzed using computer-assisted content
analysis and narrative analysis. Findings are likely to be relevant for other
areas of deliberation as well and will be informative for those concerned with
security decision-making.

The data come from a representative corpus of texts compiled from official
reports, journals and magazines, and different kinds of official records. The
corpus covers the three categories of elites and their discourse in this area,
with approximately one million words for each one. The dates covered are from
1990 to 2019. Data analysis will integrate multiple computer-assisted content
analysis and qualitative narrative analysis techniques. Structural Topic Model
and Concept Mover’s Distance will be used to compare and contrast the focus of
each category of elite. Qualitative narrative analysis, Concept Mover’s
Distance, and Text Network Analysis will be used on two different issues to
investigates how different elites have shaped narratives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.