* 2001989
* Broadening Participation in the 10th International Congress of Arctic Social Sciences (ICASS X)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2024
* USD 305,102.00

This award supports broadening participation in the Tenth International Congress
of Arctic Social Science (ICASS X), co-organized by the University of Northern
Iowa and Northern (Arctic) Federal University and scheduled for June 2021. Since
1992, ICASS has provided an opportunity for Arctic researchers from around the
world to share research results, develop collaborations and, increasingly,
interact with Arctic community members, including Indigenous peoples. The
Congress also provides an arena in which both established and early career U.S.
scholars and students may interact and exchange views with their counterparts
from other Arctic countries. These interactions enable the US to continue to
lead the world in advancing Arctic social science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theme of ICASS X is "Arctic Generations: Looking Back and Looking Forward,"
which promotes a long-term view of Arctic change and adaptation. A particular
focus of many IASSA scientists is resilience, sustainability and sustainable
development in the Arctic, issues of critical concern to the United States
generally and to Alaska in particular. This award supports the participation of
early career researchers, Indigenous community members, and students in a high-
profile international conference that fosters the exchange of knowledge and the
development of scholarly, social, and cultural connections that extend across
the circumpolar North.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.