* 2001664
* CAREER:Assessing impacts of enhanced climatic variability and extreme natural events on environmental sustainability of water in fostering disease resilient public health
* ENG,CBET
* 09/05/2019,02/29/2024
* Antarpreet Jutla, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 412,531.00

This CAREER project seeks to understand impacts of extreme natural events and
increased climatic variability on the spread of water-borne pathogens. Spatial
and temporal satellite data will be used extensively to create models that
predict the distribution of pathogenic cholera bacteria. The overall scientific
objective is to determine risk of disease outbreaks in regions where increased
climatic variability coincides with extreme natural events. Specific educational
and outreach objectives include: (i) developing an environmental sustainability
curriculum within West Virginia University; (ii) actively recruiting and
training minority and underrepresented group students in research; (iii)
developing an environmental visualization programming curriculum for middle/high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is targeted to provide a
quantitative baseline framework, potentially applicable on global scales, to
assess occurrence and spread of pathogens in the environment and human
population. The intent is to aid preparation of disease mitigation strategies by
policymakers, aid organizations, and governmental health agencies. The
computational infrastructure developed through this research will be made
available to a wide array of students who have interest in public health,
climate modeling, and hydroclimatology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.