* 2001913
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Causes and Effects of the Incarceration of Minority Individuals
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Michael Vuolo, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 0.00

In this project, the causes and consequences of disproportionate incarceration
are examined for a group for which these are not well known or understood. The
first component of this study is to identify the causes of overrepresentation in
the criminal justice system as compared to the general population by examining
offending patterns and arrest disparities. The second component is to identify
and document trajectories of the group through the criminal justice system, from
initial contact via arrest or detainment, through incarceration, ending with re-
entry to society. Members of this group are likely to face challenges at each
step of the process that can cause negative consequences such as poorer health,
difficulties finding employment, and housing instability. Further, they may be
more likely to re-offend following re-entry to society, posing a potentially
increased risk to themselves and their broader communities. Findings of this
project are relevant to decision making that may lead to decreased risk of
offending among this population and more successful rehabilitation and reentry
processes. They also provide information that may contribute to the improvement
of law enforcement practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, three aims
are addressed: 1) identifying the impact of state-level policies and state-level
social climates on substance abuse and criminality in the group; (2) documenting
common experiences during interactions with law enforcement; and (3) identifying
unique challenges faced by reentering members of the group. Several methods are
used. For the quantitative portion, a comprehensive dataset of state-level
policies and social climates is constructed and merged with an existing,
nationally representative dataset to test the effects of these policies and
climates on substance abuse variables. A second nationally representative
dataset expands the analyses. The qualitative portion consists of 50 interviews
with group members who have faced law enforcement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.