* 2001027
* Comparison of Thermal and Non-Thermal Protocols for Analysis of Isoprene Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Generated under Conditions of Low Nitrogen Oxides (NOx)
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Avram Gold, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 596,470.00

This project is focused on laboratory studies of the formation of secondary
organic aerosol (SOA) in the atmosphere derived from the presence of isoprene.
Isoprene is a compound produced and emitted by many species of trees and other
plant materials. Experiments will be conducted in a laboratory chamber to
investigate the formation of SOA and assess the possible presence of artifacts
related to the use of certain experimental methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study includes an in-depth, quantitative, molecular-level investigation of
isoprene-SOA composition and aging. The objectives of the research are to: (1)
synthesize standards to investigate artifact formation and to identify labile
components degraded during conventional thermal GC-ESI/MS analysis of isoprene
SOA formed under low-nitrogen oxide (NOx) conditions; (2) optimize hydrophilic
interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) protocols for separation of synthetic
targets and SOA extracts; and (3) conduct an analysis of the SOA particles and
identification of analytical artifacts/decomposition products by comparison of
results from HILIC and GC/EI-MS protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.