* 2001677
* Additive Nanomanufacturing of Scalable, Three-dimensional Nano-Architectures for Ultra-lightweighting and Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Xiaoyu Zheng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 230,640.00

Nanoscale materials such as nanotubes, nanofilms, and nanopillars, composed of
carbon, metallic or ceramic material, have been found to exhibit near
theoretical strength, damage tolerance, energy conversion and optical properties
in their pristine form. When these nanoscale elements are precisely architected
into well-defined, three-dimensional topologies, they form macroscopic
structures that can reach near-theoretical strength with only a fraction of the
mass densities of the starting materials. If such nano-architected structures
are manufacturable, many applications are possible, e.g., ultra-lightweight,
energy-absorbing materials, tissue engineering scaffolds, energy conversion and
wave manipulation devices. Current nanofabrication technologies, based on laser-
writing, are incapable of creating these nanostructures in dimensions larger
than a few millimeters. While a variety of additive manufacturing approaches are
capable of creating complex macroscopic three-dimensional objects, they have not
achieved capabilities for creating architectures with nanoscale features. This
project will advance knowledge in scalable nanomanufacturing of macroscopic
objects comprised of precisely defined, three-dimensional nano-architectures for
lightweighting and resilience. The researchers will conduct theoretical and
experimental studies to understand, predict and control the interactions between
light field, digital optics, and feedstock materials, leading to reliable
production of large area, three-dimensional nano-architectures. The research
requires understanding fundamental science and engineering disciplines,
including nanomanufacturing, optics, mechanics, mechatronics, physics, and
chemistry. The research results will be integrated into new curricula and
projects to give hands-on research and education opportunities for high school,
undergraduate, graduate and under-represented students.

The project aims to build the theoretical and experimental foundations
underpinning scalable additive nanomanufacturing, overcoming existing barrier in
3D printing, which is to achieve nano-scale precision. The research studies a
process to create three-dimensional architectures with nanoscale features under
controlled sub-wavelength light field projection onto feedstock primitives. To
achieve optimal production speed, a multi-physics based modeling and
experimental platforms are established to elucidate the kinetics governing the
speed and resolution of the new printing mechanism. The research is then
implemented with a new set of instrumentations that enable the parallel
production of large area samples with nano-architectures. Additionally, this
research establishes theoretical and experimental frameworks to predict and
prevent defect generation while scaling up to dimensions over several orders of
magnitude. This research enables a new concept of creating three-dimensional
nano-architectures. It provides a scientific and engineering basis towards
reliable upscaling of nano-architectures to components and devices for
applications including structural supports, energy storage and conversion, and
wave manipulations.