* 2001449
* Collaborative Research: CHemistry in the Arctic-Clouds, Halogens, and Aerosols (CHACHA)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* William Simpson, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 325,007.00

This project aims to improve understanding of atmospheric chemistry that impacts
ozone, particulate matter, and cloud chemical composition in the context of a
rapidly changing Arctic. The atmosphere converts pollutants by processing them
into water-soluble products that are removed through precipitation (rain or
snow) or by deposition onto Earth’s surface. This chemical conversion of
pollution happens through a sunlight-driven (photochemical) process known as
oxidation. Most of what is known about these atmospheric processes comes from
measurements made at the surface in Arctic coastal environments. The CHACHA team
plans to use two instrumented aircraft to conduct airborne measurements around
the Chukchi Sea, the Beaufort Sea, and the Alaska North Slope region. They plan
to target features that are rapidly changing - above and downwind of sea ice
"leads" (areas of open water in otherwise sea-ice-covered ocean regions), and
downwind of sources of combustion-derived pollutants. Researchers will also use
collected data to develop atmospheric models that will be openly available for
use by the broader scientific community. The team is composed of researchers at
six United States universities (in Alaska, Indiana, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and
New York) and will mentor a diverse group of students and postdoctoral scholars.
Researchers will also engage in several additional education and outreach
activities, including an “aircraft open house” and an annual three-day Science
Fair in Utqiaġvik, AK. Overall, this project will enable the United States to
better understand how rapid change in the Arctic impacts the chemical
composition of the atmosphere and to translate what was learned to other regions
- including the atmosphere above the world's oceans and in Earth's upper
atmosphere. In addition, this project is co-funded by the Arctic Natural
Sciences and Atmospheric Chemistry programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will improve understanding of atmospheric halogen chemistry in the gas, aerosol,
and cloud water phases, with a focus on how that chemistry is impacted by Arctic
sea ice loss and fossil fuel extraction. The CHACHA team plans to conduct eight
weeks of observations during the Arctic spring, when halogen chemistry is most
active, using two aircraft: the University of Wyoming King Air and the Purdue
University Airborne Laboratory for Atmospheric Research (ALAR). Aircraft will
conduct complementary sampling upwind and downwind of leads (sea ice fractures),
over snow-covered tundra, and downwind of the North Slope of Alaska oilfields.
Sampling will occur at various altitudes from the near-surface through the
boundary layer and into the free troposphere. The team will prioritize
measurement of various greenhouse gases (including O3, CO2, CH4, H2O), reactive
trace gases (including NO2, SO2, N2O5, HO2NO2, bromine- and chlorine-containing
gases), aerosol size distributions and composition, cloud residual particle
composition, and cloud particle size distributions, as well as atmospheric data.
These observations will be interpreted in part using 0-D and 1-D photochemical
models and a cloud parcel model, to evaluate and advance understanding of multi-
phase reactions and the vertical and horizontal propagation of atmospheric
halogen chemistry in the Arctic. This dataset will improve understanding of the
impact of the rapidly changing Arctic on halogen chemistry and atmospheric
composition, as well as to provide fundamental knowledge of halogen chemistry
that can be applied globally through models. The team will mentor students,
postdocs, and conduct an array of unique outreach and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.