* 2001910
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cooperation in Uncertainty during Migration
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Adrienne LeBas, American University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2023
* USD 16,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cooperation in Uncertainty during
Migration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the experiences of
migrants as they journey from one country to another. Prior research indicates
that the experience of migrants varies: some migrants describe experiences of
harshness and neglect, while others perceive protection and support. But what
account for these differences? This project will examine how migrants negotiate
the relationships with those who assist in the journeys. How do they work to
safeguard themselves, and what conditions do they observe when these safeguards
fail? How do these process self-organize when laws are unenforced? And how do
social networks facilitate migration? Governments frequently ponder how to lower
the risks for migrants. Underlying some governmental policies may also be the
assumption that if risks are high, migration will decrease, but current research
indicates that many migrants persist in their attempts despite the risks.
Identifying what conditions increase the risk of victimization for migrants will
inform governmental policies to assist in safe passage for those who choose to
migrate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand what
explains differential experiences of migrants, this project will analyze what
conditions the migrants experience and when safety is supported or violated. The
project will conduct fieldwork in locales where many migration journeys begin
and will rely on semi-structured, qualitative interviews of prospective migrants
and returnees, i.e., those migrants who return to countries of origin. The
project will stay in contact with prospective migrants through social media apps
and re-interview them within a month of their migration attempt. Interview
topics include the route migrants chose, who assisted them, the extent to which
they relied on their social networks in these decisions, and, finally, whether
they experienced support versus harshness or neglect. Returnees will provide
data on the various risks they encountered. The project will interview 50
potential migrants and 50 returnees in each of several different locales. Within
this group, the interviews will sample for diversity, especially rural versus
urban origins, but also socioeconomic, gender and ethnic diversity in order to
ensure capture a diverse range of perspectives. The project will use a snowball
sampling strategy and gain access to migration-affected communities through
partnerships with local service NGOs. The analysis of migrant journeys not only
speaks to how humans create institutions to facilitate cooperation, but also how
culture, social cleavages, and local context influence these institutional
choices. Findings from the project will contribute to sociological theories
regarding migration, the law, social networks and global
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.