* 2001036
* Rubbing-Induced Site-Selective Patterning for Two-Dimensional Dichalcogenide Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 405,869.00

This grant supports research that advances critical knowledge for manufacturing
electronic devices based on emerging nanomaterials, helping advance U.S.
industrial competitiveness and national prosperity. Two-dimensional
nanomaterials, such as transition metal dichalcogenides, could be exploited to
make a broad range of electronic and photonic devices with superior
functionalities. For example, dichalcogenides such as molybdenum disulfide, can
be used to make flexible and wearable devices, biosensors for rapid illness
diagnosis, and energy-efficient photodetectors. Although prototypes of these
dichalcogenide devices have been demonstrated in the laboratory, the device
community still lacks suitable technologies for realizing scalable
nanomanufacturing of such devices. One of the most critical challenges is the
vulnerability of dichalcogenides to the existing lithography and etching
processes for manufacturing electronic devices. This award supports fundamental
research to explore imperative knowledge supporting a new manufacturing
technology involving site-selective patterning that enables reliable production
of dichalcogenide device structures without involving processes that are
detrimental to dichalcogenides. The high-quality dichalcogenide device
structures produced by this technology are highly desirable for device
applications in electronic, sensor, energy storage, and optoelectronic
industries. This research enhances participation of underrepresented groups in
the education activities related to advanced manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new manufacturing technology, termed rubbing-induced
site-selective (RISS) patterning, involves a controllable rubbing process for
generating nano- or microscale triboelectric charge patterns on a substrate and
a subsequent two-dimensional nanomaterial chemical vapor deposition process. The
triboelectric charge patterns modulate the nucleation of material deposition
precursors on the target substrate and enables direct formation of
dichalcogenide device patterns at designated site-selective locations without
the need for additional resist-based lithography and plasma etching, which can
introduce irreversible contamination and damage to the dichalcogenide layered
structure. However, scientific questions need to be answered to make RISS
technology practical for manufacturing commercially viable dichalcogenide
devices. This research is to understand the mechanisms related to the generation
and control of triboelectric charge patterns as well as material deposition
processes modulated by electric fields. The research team plans to establish a
theoretical-experimental integrated methodology for designing rubbing templates,
which can generate high-contrast triboelectric charge patterns under designated
mechanical conditions. The research approach is to fabricate rationally designed
rubbing templates using focused ion beam and atomic force microscope lithography
techniques, experimentally identify mechanical conditions that generate high-
contrast triboelectric charge patterns, perform modeling of material diffusion
guided by triboelectric field and demonstrate production of arrays of
dichalcogenide-based memristive devices for neuromorphic
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.