* 2001223
* Support for the 7th International Forum on Sustainable Manufacturing on "Sustainable Manufacturing in the Industry 4.0 Era"
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Fazleena Badurdeen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,920.00

This grant provides funding to cover in part participant support costs for the
7th International Forum on Sustainable Manufacturing to be held during spring
2020 at the University of Kentucky premises in Lexington, KY. The theme of the
event is "Sustainable Manufacturing in the Industry 4.0 Era". The forum aims to
bring together nationally and internationally recognized academic experts,
industry practitioners, government agency representatives as well as emerging
researchers such as tenure-track assistant professors and post-doctoral scholar
and graduate students to: (1) share cutting-edge research and industry practices
in product, process and systems domains to enable total lifecycle-based
sustainable manufacturing in the Industry 4.0 era, (2) provide a platform for
different stakeholders who can contribute to advancing research and practice of
sustainable manufacturing to engage in dialogue and discussions, (3) identify
industry technology needs, research directions and workforce development needs
for advancing sustainable manufacturing capabilities, and (4) increase awareness
of sustainable manufacturing opportunities and challenges among all
stakeholders. Special features of the event include: (1) invited presentations
by experts in Industry 4.0 and Sustainable Manufacturing, (2) an "Emerging
Researcher Showcase" with presentations from early-career researchers, (3) a
panel discussion on "Opportunities and Challenges to Sustainable Manufacturing
in the Industry 4.0 Era," (4) a student poster showcase, and (5) a "Sustainable
Manufacturing Student Project Competition." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This forum
will provide an opportunity for tenure-track faculty, post-doctoral scholars and
graduate students to interact with the prominent senior researchers and industry
leaders in sustainable manufacturing and related areas facilitating a greater
dialogue on the topics. This will facilitate greater awareness of each other's
research to foster more collaboration between different organizations.
Dissemination of presentations through different channels and potential
scholarly publications will help contribute to a better understanding of
sustainable manufacturing and related issues. This event will also serves as a
feeder to the Global Conference on Sustainable Manufacturing (GSCM) to identify
topics for continued dialogue and exchange of ideas among key sustainable
manufacturing stakeholders. Local companies, who often do not have access to
information about emerging practices, will have the opportunity to learn tools
and techniques that can be used to improve the product, process and system level
sustainability in the Industry 4.0 era in their own
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.