* 2001695
* The 50th John Barrett Memorial Lecture in 2020 on Approximation, Applications, and Analysis of Nonlocal, Nonlinear Models.
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Abner Salgado, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Malgorzata Peszynska
* 03/31/2021
* USD 26,670.00

This award supports the participation of students, postdocs, early career
researchers, and under-represented groups seeking to attend the 50th anniversary
of the John Barrett Memorial Lectures which will be held on May 11-13, 2020 at
University of Tennessee, Knoxville. This three day workshop will be focused on
"Approximation, Applications, and Analysis of Nonlocal, Nonlinear Models".
Nonlocal models are a type of mathematical model of relatively recent vintage
that has proved to be very effective for describing certain challenging physical
phenomena, such as fracture in solid mechanics. The workshop will bring together
experts from the mathematical, computational scientific, and engineering
communities who are very unlikely to meet otherwise, but nevertheless all work
with nonlocal models and their applications. The meeting will provide a platform
for the exchange of ideas. The workshop encourages the inclusion and
participation of junior scientists and members of under-represented groups in
STEM. This award will present them the opportunity to interact with and learn
from leading researchers working with nonlocal models, along the way
contributing towards the development of the next generation of researchers in
nonlocal theories. The technical focuses of the workshop are on the
approximation, applications and analysis of nonlocal models, which have
presented new challenges to mathematical and numerical analysis, and their
computational implementation. Recent applications include, but are not limited
to: heat and mass diffusion, nonlocal mechanics, pattern formation, image
processing, self-organized dynamics, population dispersal, Levy fights, and jump
processes. Invited speakers and participants will bring expertise from a wide
array of related fields, including: mathematical and numerical analysis of
nonlocal and fractional model, numerical methods and discretization schemes,
multi-scale modeling and adaptivity in nonlocal models, software implementation
in nonlocal models, peridynamics models for material failure and damage,
nonlocal heat transfer and mass diffusion, anomalous transport in nature, and
other engineering and scientific applications in which nonlocal modeling is
useful.

The conference website is https://www.math.utk.edu/barrett/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.