* 2001851
* CHS:Small: Incorporating and Balancing Stakeholder Values in Algorithm Design
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Haiyi Zhu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2023
* USD 532,000.00

This project will create a general method for value-sensitive algorithm design
and develop tools and techniques to help incorporate the tacit values of
stakeholders, balance multiple stakeholders' values, and achieve collective
goals in the development of an algorithm. The research community has paid
increasing attention to the role of human values in algorithm design and
development. For example, fairness-aware machine learning research attempts to
translate fairness notions into formal algorithmic constraints and develop
algorithms subject to such constraints. Despite the mathematical rigor of these
approaches, prior research suggests a disconnect between the current
discrimination-aware machine learning research and stakeholders' realities,
context, and constraints; this disconnect is likely to undermine practical
initiatives. Furthermore, studies have suggested that there are often tensions
among a diverse set of values relevant to the design of the algorithm. A new
general method will be developed in the context of Redesigning Wikipedia's
Objective Revision Evaluation Service (ORES), a machine learning-based service
designed to generate real-time predictions on edit quality and article quality,
which will benefit vast numbers of people who consume the Wikipedia content
either directly or indirectly through other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four major goals of this research.
The first is to articulate and demonstrate a general method for creating
algorithmic systems that respect and balance stakeholders' values. The second
goal is to create techniques for generating an algorithmic system's value report
and explaining the value trade-offs. The third goal to create, deploy, and
evaluate social and technical innovations to address fundamental trade-offs
between different values. The final goal is to design and implement improvements
to ORES, which will improve a wide variety of applications that rely on ORES,
and Wikipedia's content and community as a whole. For an example of the kinds of
problems that must be solved, quality control algorithms that prioritize
efficiency in deleting low quality content incur the risk of undermining the
motivation of contributors in peer production communities, particularly new
contributors who are still learning how to contribute. To date, however, little
work has been conducted to create solutions to address tensions and trade-offs
between different values in algorithm design. The research will be performed
through multiple studies by stepping through the process for a diverse set of
tasks, each of which will allow interaction with multiple stakeholders, who have
different (and perhaps conflicting) values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.