* 2001369
* L-Functions and Geometric Methods in Langlands Duality
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Michael Harris, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 12/31/2023
* USD 213,645.00

Although the ancient Greeks saw arithmetic -- what we now call number theory --
and geometry as two distinct sciences, with very different methods, contemporary
mathematicians have understood for many years that they are really two aspects
of a single science. This science, whose ramifications extend throughout
mathematics, and whose applications are manifest in every corner of modern
physics, computer science, and even the most recent developments in statistics,
is as old as civilization, but it also takes on a completely new character at
least once per generation. The current project is a study of Langlands duality,
a synthesis of number theory and the geometry of symmetry that has been one of
the most familiar names for this science for nearly two generations. For most of
this period, the emblem of this synthesis has been the theory of L-functions, a
computable system for encoding properties in number theory and geometry that
matches the two aspects of this common science. More recently, new and
sophisticated geometric techniques promise to reframe the synthesis from above,
as part of a larger synthesis that ultimately extends to the most speculative
ideas in mathematical physics. The PI plans to revisit Langlands duality from
this new geometric standpoint, and to understand the place of L-functions in
this broader picture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a contribution to the
arithmetic theory of automorphic forms, in the setting of the Langlands program,
motivated in part by the geometric Langlands program. The specific goals of the
present project are the study of the local Langlands correspondence, using trace
formula methods, L-functions, and Galois theory to reduce the local Langlands
correspondence to a conjecture on "incorrigible" representations; the study of
derived aspects of the Langlands program, inspired by both in specific cases
arising from coherent cohomology and in the development of a unified geometric
framework for both Langlands reciprocity for cohomology of locally symmetric
spaces and Venkatesh's conjectures on the actions of derived deformation rings
on cohomology; the construction of p-adic square root L-functions in families,
using the higher Hida theory introduced by Pilloni and Boxer; the completion of
the proof of an automorphic version of Deligne's conjecture on special values of
tensor product L-functions; and the development of a character theory for mod p
representations of p-adic groups. In connection with this project, the PI is
actively collaborating with colleagues in France, Austria, Germany, England, and
Spain, as well as in the United States and Canada. The methods involved in the
present project combine techniques from arithmetic geometry and automorphic
forms, especially the trace formula, categorical representation theory, and the
new methods developed by Venkatesh, Darmon, and
Gaitsgory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.