* 2001927
* Ground-truthing lithium paleo-proxies: Experimental study on the Li incorporation and isotope fractionation during inorganic calcite and aragonite precipitation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 392,415.00

Chemical break down of continental silicate rocks (referred to as “weathering”)
consumes atmospheric CO2. During this process, lithium (Li) contained in
silicate rocks is released and eventually delivered into the ocean by rivers.
Intensity of weathering is known to influence the amount and isotopic
composition (δ7Li) of Li delivered into the ocean. Thus, changes in the
concentration of Li in seawater and its δ7Li can provide valuable information on
the history and evolution of silicate weathering and its roles in regulating
global carbon cycle and the Earth’s climate. Calcium carbonate (CaCO3) minerals
produced by certain groups of marine organisms are known to incorporate trace
amounts of Li from seawater, and thus they can be used as a recorder for those
changes. However, our current understanding on how Li is incorporated into CaCO3
and what controls the process is extremely limited. In this study, researchers
from the University of Hawaii (UH) will perform a series of laboratory
experiments to better understand the mechanism of Li incorporation into CaCO3.
This work will pave the road for further development in the use of marine CaCO3
minerals as the tracer for past changes in seawater Li and hence continental
silicate weathering. The project will enhance education and career development
in the geosciences for graduate and undergraduate students at the University of
Hawaii. This team will also talk about their findings in the annual open house
events such as “Mad About Science” and “Science Alive” at the Bishop
Museum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weathering of continental silicate rocks while
releasing and eventually delivering Li into the ocean by rivers. Changes in
seawater Li concentration and δ7Li can provide valuable information on the
history and evolution of silicate weathering and its roles in regulating global
carbon cycle and the Earth’s climate. CaCO3 minerals that incorporate Li can be
used as a recorder for those changes. This study will be based on well-
established inorganic CaCO3 precipitation experiments, where an array of
solution physicochemical parameters will be systematically varied from the same
control condition for straightforward comparisons of their impacts on δ7Li and
Li concentrations in CaCO3. Furthermore, with the use of seeds, both calcite and
aragonite samples will be synthesized under identical experimental conditions to
examine the polymorphic controls on Li incorporation. This project is expected
to provide by far the most complete experimental datasets, which will be
combined with the use of surface kinetic modelling to establish a firm inorganic
(kinetic and equilibrium) baseline for the elemental and isotopic partitioning
of Li between solution and CaCO3 minerals. The project enhances education and
career development in the geosciences for graduate and undergraduate students at
the University of Hawaii, where the student population has diverse and often
underrepresented ethnic background. This team will also talk about their
findings in the annual open house events such as “Mad About Science” and
“Science Alive” at the Bishop Museum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.