* 2001812
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Contradictory Signals on Post-Incarceration Labor Market Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Michael Vuolo, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 13,984.00

This project examines the relative effects of human capital signaled by prison
work certificates and a criminal record on labor market outcomes. It also
investigates whether these effects vary according to demographic category. The
study will advance understanding of how employers evaluate and weigh prison
certifications when making hiring decisions and the ways formerly incarcerated
men navigate the job search process with credentials that send potentially
contradictory signals to employers. Findings will be relevant to the provision
and structure of prison credentialing programs and ways decision makers and
practitioners can best prepare incarcerated men for the labor market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data for this project will be collected through: 1) an
audit study via online submission of manipulated resumés to employers and 2)
interviews with 50 employers and 50 formerly incarcerated people. In the
resumés, possession of a prison apprenticeship certificate and demographic
characteristics are manipulated. Interviews with employers inquire about
qualities they perceive help formerly incarcerated people overcome records,
precautions taken with formerly incarcerated people who possess prison
certifications, and attitudes regarding the quality of prison training.
Interviews with formerly incarcerated men ask about prior and current work
experience, job satisfaction, motivations for obtaining prison certifications,
and the usefulness of prison training in their everyday
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.