* 2001670
* Harnessing the Data Revolution in Space Physics: Topological Data Analysis and Deep Learning for Improved Solar Eruption Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* James Meiss, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 792,387.00

Eruptions generated by sunspots --- large concentrations of magnetic field on
the visible surface of the Sun --- can have a number of dire impacts on Earth-
based technological systems, crippling satellites and power grids, among many
other things. With enough advance notice, the effects of these events can be
mitigated, but predicting them is a real challenge. In current operational
practice, this is accomplished by human forecasters examining images of the Sun,
classifying each sunspot according to a taxonomy developed in the 1960s, and
then using look-up tables of historical probabilities to say whether or not it
will erupt in the next 24 hours. Recently, there has been a burst of work on
machine-learning methods to automate this task. To date, the "features" used in
these approaches have been predominately physics-based: the gradient of the
magnetic field, for instance, or the sum of its strength over high-flux regions.
The main objective of this 3-year research project is to leverage algorithms
based on the fundamental mathematics of shape --- topology and geometry --- to
improve the performance of these methods. The specific plan is to use these
powerful techniques to extend the relevant feature set to include
characteristics of the magnetic field that are based purely on the geometry and
topology of 2D magnetogram images. Although this approach ignores the 3D
structure of the full electromagnetic fields, it can enhance the predictive
skill of machine learning systems. Preliminary results show clear topological
changes emerging in magnetograms of a 2017 sunspot more than 24 hours before it
flared, as well as clear improvements in the accuracy scores of a neural-net
based flare prediction method that employs these shape-based features. Better
predictions of solar flares could allow operators of power grids, airlines,
communications satellites, and other critical infrastructure systems to mitigate
the effects of these potentially destructive events. The broader impacts of this
project also include the development of the STEM workforce through the training
of graduate students at the University of Colorado at Boulder, as well as
education and outreach, including community lectures, development of large-
scale, online courses and public lecture series. The interdisciplinary nature of
the project will deepen the contact between the fields of space weather, applied
mathematics, and computer science, bringing researchers, students, and post-docs
from both fields into productive new collaborations. The collaboration with the
Space Weather Technology, Research, and Education Center at the University of
Colorado offers unique opportunities to factor in real-world forecasting
constraints and set the stage for transitioning the results to operational
status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the first time, this 3-year research project
would provide systematic quantitative measures of the shape of 2D magnetic
structures in the Sunâ€™s photosphere for the purposes of solar flare prediction.
In a sense, this amounts to a mathematical systemization of the venerable
McIntosh and Hale classification systems. This approach differs from current
studies in the solar physics community that model the magnetic field-line
structure: it uses topology to address the structure of two-dimensional sets.
The analysis is restricted to photospheric magnetic field structures; the goal
is to extract a formal characterization of shape that can be leveraged by
machine learning to improve flare prediction. The considered addition of
geometry into these methods by the project team is essential if they are to
capture the full richness and physical relevance of the structures important in
the evolution of a sunspot. This research project will point the way forward to
a more robust set of features for machine-learning-based eruption prediction
architectures. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the
Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.