* 2001219
* NSF-BSF Application: Selective Electrosorption for Boron Removal and Recovery from Seawater
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 391,988.00

Agricultural irrigation is the largest user of water in the United States,
accounting for approximately 80 percent of the Nationâ€™s clean water consumption.
Seawater desalination is a drought-proof technology that can address growing
demands for water in agriculture and other uses. At present, seawater reverse
osmosis (SWRO) is the best available commercially available desalination
technology. However, the desalinated seawater cannot be used directly in
irrigation due to the limited ability to remove boron. This results from
limitations on the boron retention capability of commercial SWRO membranes.
Boron adversely impacts plant growth and damages apple, citrus, grapes, and
other crops when water containing more than 0.3 mg/L of boron is used in
irrigation. Thus, commercial SWRO plants must use an additional purification
step to reduce boron concentration to acceptable concentrations. This greatly
increases the energy consumption and costs of using desalinated water for
agriculture. The proposed research will address the inefficiencies associated
with boron removal through the development of a novel selective separation
technology based on electrosorption. This new technology will be chemical-free,
energy efficient, and capable of recovering a high purity boron stream for
beneficial uses. Successful completion of this project will advance the
development of the next generation of sustainable SWRO plants, with great
potential benefit to society. The project will fruther benefit society by
providing research training to graduate and undergraduate students at Yale
University. Also, the investigator will promote diversity and enhance the
involvement of under-represented groups in science and engineering through
engagement in Yale's K-12 outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical
and unresolved challenge in SWRO desalination is to produce a permeate water
stream suitable for irrigation without additional and costly purification to
remove plant-toxic elements such as boron. The overall goal of this project is
to develop an innovative flow-through electrosorption process for boron removal
and recovery in seawater desalination. To achieve this goal, the PI proposes to
carry out an integrated experimental and modeling project structured around the
following tasks: 1) fabrication of an ultra-selective positive electrode (anode)
using boron-chelating resins as building blocks; 2) performance testing of the
fabricated electrodes for selective boron removal and recovery; 3) elucidation
of the mechanisms underlying selective boron electrosorption; 4) assessment of
the impact of electrochemical reactions on the long-term stability and boron
selectivity of the electrodes; and 5) evaluation and modeling of the energy
consumption and boron selectivity of the combined SWRO-electrosorption process.
The proposed work would be the first to study boron-selective removal and
recovery from seawater using a chemical-free method. The successful completion
of this research has potential to transform desalination through the development
of a more energy efficient and sustainable boron removal and recovery process
from SWRO plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.