* 2001293
* Automorphic Forms, Arthur Packets, and Algebraic Cycles
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Kartik Prasanna, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2024
* USD 360,000.00

A classical question in number theory is to find solutions in rational numbers
or integers to systems of polynomial equations. In the twentieth century,
mathematicians realized that this question can be reformulated using geometric
objects called algebraic cycles. This realization gave rise to a vast and
beautiful conjectural framework, which now includes some of the most important
unresolved conjectures in mathematics. On the other hand, the discovery of the
law of quadratic reciprocity (due to Gauss) and its generalizations lead
ultimately to the formulation of the Langlands program, which is a separate web
of conjectures relating the symmetries of numbers to analysis and group theory.
The questions to be studied in this project lie at the interface of these two
different webs of conjectures, and thus involve objects of enormous arithmetic
richness. The specific goal of the project is to use the study of certain highly
symmetric functions to reveal information about the geometry and arithmetic of
polynomial equations. While the final goal is to reveal sophisticated
information about polynomials, many of the objects to be studied have immediate
practical applications. For example, elliptic curves, which are cubic equations
in two variables, play a prominent role in this research and also an important
role in contemporary applications such as cryptography and digital signatures,
which have extensive use in commerce. One of the broader impacts of the project
will be the development of a course on the mathematics of cryptocurrencies such
as bitcoin, popularizing mathematics through an exciting application of broad
current popular interest. The project will also provide research training
activities for graduate students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In technical terms, the
main thrust of the research is to use the fine structure of automorphic
representations, including the theory of local and global Arthur packets, to
study problems on algebraic cycles. Specific problems to be studied include: (i)
constructing Hodge cycles that represent instances of Langlands functoriality,
especially for unitary groups; (ii) Oda's conjecture on the factorization of
Hodge structures of Hilbert modular forms; (iii) relations between Abel-Jacobi
images of cohomologically trivial cycles and p-adic L-functions; (iv) integral
period relations for quaternionic modular forms, and (v) applications of the
theory of non-tempered A-packets to generalizations of Kudla-Millson theory on
locally symmetric spaces. The investigator will continue to mentor graduate
student research on topics related to the themes in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.