* 2001663
* Testing the Lambda Cold Dark Matter Model with Dwarf Galaxies around the Milky Way and beyond
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* BURCIN MUTLU-PAKDIL, MUTLU                   BURCIN
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Burcin Mutlu is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at the University of
Chicago. She will use new and existing observations to study faint small
galaxies known as "dwarf galaxies" orbiting the Milky Way and nearby galaxies.
Because the faintest dwarf galaxies contain the largest fraction of dark matter
by mass, they are excellent laboratories in which to study the influence of dark
matter on the formation and growth of galaxies. Results from this project will
allow astronomers to understand how galaxies form and grow from the smallest
structures. Along with this research, Mutlu will conduct a mentoring program to
increase the retention of underrepresented students in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our understanding of how
galaxies form at the lowest mass scales. By detecting nearly two dozen new dwarf
galaxies, it will extend the census of the faintest dwarf satellite population
of the Milky Way, as well as similar nearby galaxies, allowing an investigation
of the properties of dwarf galaxies as a function of the environment and primary
halo mass. Observational trends from this study would allow astronomers to
assess whether the Lambda Cold Dark Matter model holds at the lowest mass
scales, and whether a more detailed treatment of baryonic physics is required in
the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.