* 2001930
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Emergence of Political Careers and Parties, New York 1777-1821
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* John Levi Martin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 15,861.00

As U.S. citizens, we tend to take for granted the existence and operation of
electoral parties in the contemporary United States. While they have been the
subject of much study, we know very little regarding how modern electoral
parties emerged in our history. Focusing on the State of New York, the pivot for
the first national party system, this project provides a systematic analysis of
the social and political factors that structured the actions of those
individuals who built the first parties. The project investigates how they
formed networks of political support that spanned across space as well as
different levels of government (local, state, federal) and traces how local
political elites were pulled into the emerging federal party system. Findings
from the project will provide greater insight into the origins of political
parties in our democracy, and help to inform our understanding of contemporary
political parties through greater detail regarding their evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While political parties were a major concern of scholars
across several disciplines, answers to the question of where parties come from
are still almost entirely absent. Progress in addressing this question has been
stymied in part by the absence of systematic individual-level data. This project
approaches the question of party formation through two analyses that include
these data. First, because in America the organization of parties was
intrinsically bound up with the organization of the state and because creating a
state involves office-creation, this project will first reconstruct the
structure of the larger system of offices that political elites had to navigate.
The project will construct a novel database of all civil, judicial, and military
offices from the federal to the state and local level from 1777 to 1821 in the
state of New York. Using mobility tables, vacancy chain and sequence analysis,
the project investigates the emergence of political careers as meaningful
sequences of offices held by individuals. This forms the backdrop for the second
analysis. For a subset of 730 political elites who were active during the
crucial years between the Constitutional Convention and the election of 1800,
the project adds information on party affiliation, socio-demographic
characteristics, and the multiple social networks in which they were embedded.
Using this comprehensive dataset, the project employs a regression framework to
study the factors that determined which political elites affiliated with which
party. Findings from this project will inform theories of democracy and its
evolution, as well as provide an important historical portrait of individual
political careers at a critical time in the development of our
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.