* 2001559
* Collaborative Research: The Nonlinear Stochastic Dynamics of Micro and Nanomechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Mark Paul, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2024
* USD 321,831.00

Technology continues to make great strides at the nanoscale, resulting in
unprecedented capabilities. Currently, thermal fluctuations have not driven nano
systems outside their linear regime where their dynamics are well understood.
However, as mechanical systems are made smaller for next-generation
technologies, their performance is becoming limited by the random thermal
movements of the molecules that make up the device and surrounding medium as the
thermal fluctuations are becoming sufficient to drive the mechanical system into
a nonlinear regime. Developing an understanding of the fluctuations of nano
mechanical systems in this nonlinear regime is the focus of this work. Three-
dimensional nanoprinting will be employed to create structures designed to study
nonlinear behavior when driven by the temperature alone. A theoretical
understanding of the nonlinear behavior will be created by utilizing the
fundamental relationship between the fluctuations and the dissipation present in
the system. Our findings will provide the insights necessary to realize the next
generation of nanotechnology where performance is anticipated to be well beyond
the current state-of-the art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stochastic dynamics of
nanoscale systems are at the heart of many important phenomena. Currently, there
is a good understanding of stochastic dynamics when a mechanical system remains
in the linear regime. However, many important challenges remain in understanding
nonlinear fluctuations of nanomechanical systems. In order to build this
understanding, state-of-the-art nanofabrication and measurement approaches,
coupled with the development of analytical and numerical methods to describe and
predict these dynamics, will be utilized. A direct laser write system will be
used to fabricate structures tailored to exhibit highly nonlinear stochastic
dynamics when driven by temperature alone. The nonlinear stochastic dynamics of
structures constructed from soft polymeric materials will be experimentally
studied using measurements from a heterodyne interferometer. A physical
understanding of the system dynamics will be built using the powerful
fluctuation-dissipation theorem. The dynamics will be probed perturbatively and
a factorization approach will be used to create a deterministic approach to
describe the dynamics of strongly nonlinear systems. After developing an
understanding of the nonlinear fluctuations of a single mode of oscillation, the
coupling between the different modes of oscillation of a complex structure will
be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.