* 2001973
* Conference Proposal: Support Student and Early Professional Attendance to the 2020 North American Ornithological Conference, San Juan, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Thomas Sherry, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The study of birds (Ornithology) tends to be divided among many scientific
societies that each focus on birds of one or two countries. This is a problem
because birds are found almost everywhere and move great distances in migration.
They ignore national borders. Scientists from different countries who study
birds (ornithologists) would thus benefit from working more together. This is
hard to achieve because travel to distant meetings to form new partnerships can
be financially prohibitive, especially for young ornithologists, who are the
future of the field. This project will support travel by students and early
career professionals to the 7th North American Ornithological Conference (NAOC)
in San Juan, Puerto Rico, 10-15 August, 2020. The conference theme, "Flight
Paths Addressing Global Challenges", and its Caribbean location will bring
together ornithologists from across North, Central and South America. They will
meet to talk about many topics, including migration, conservation, ecology and
evolution. Scientific highlights will include a keynote address by a famous
ornithologist, plenary talks, and four days of presentations on a wide variety
of topics. The conference will attract many participants from Puerto Rico, who
are often unable to afford meetings in the continental United States. There will
be five mentoring activities, about 20 workshops targeted at young participants,
and involvement of the public in multiple activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will help fund travel of more than 60 participants. Funds from NSF will
augment funds already provided by the convening societies, to leverage an
extraordinary level of participation by ornithologists from Latin America and
the Caribbean. Many of them will be joining participants from North American
ornithological societies for the first time. More than 1,300 attendees are
expected, representing academia, non-profit organizations, and diverse
government agencies, and including eight ornithological societies from North
America, Mexico, the Caribbean, and the New World Tropics. Several initiatives
in this conference build on lessons from previous ornithological conferences to
instill trust and develop infrastructure necessary to coordinate understanding
and protection of birds, and the environments on which they depend, throughout
the Western Hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.