* 2001645
* Asymptotic growth of symbolic powers, mixed multiplicities, and convex bodies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Jonathan Montano, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 11/30/2022
* USD 139,794.00

This project is in commutative algebra which is the area of mathematics that
studies properties of polynomial equations in several variables. Various
phenomena across science and engineering can be modeled by systems of polynomial
equations, which leads to natural interactions with other fields such as applied
mathematics, biology, computer science, and mathematical physics. For systems of
polynomial equations, one studies its sets of solutions, called varieties, and
the corresponding shapes they describe in high-dimensional spaces. As the number
of equations and variables grow larger, one useful approach to understand these
shapes is to study the algebraic functions defined on them. Using this approach,
many properties such as smoothness and degrees of varieties can be translated
into algebraic terms. One such strategy is to study properties of varieties by
analyzing the asymptotic behavior of sequences of algebraic objects called
ideals. This project contributes to this line of research with problems
originating from two directions that involve the study of these properties of
ideals. The PI will also be involved in mentoring students and in organizing
academic events, focusing on benefiting graduate students and underrepresented
groups in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symbolic powers of an ideal
encode important algebraic and geometric information of the ideal and the
variety it defines. The PI will investigate the asymptotic behavior of
homological invariants of symbolic powers such as, the number of generators, the
Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity, and the projective dimension. For the sequence
of numbers of generators, the PI intends to investigate if it always has
polynomial complexity, building of previous results by the PI and his
collaborators. A general result in this direction would have important
consequences on the arithmetic rank, Frobenius complexity, and Kodaira dimension
of divisors. For the other two sequences, regularities and projective
dimensions, the PI will focus on regular rings of positive characteristic. In
such rings, a new class of ideals is defined for which it has been previously
shown the limit of these sequences exist; this class includes several types of
determinantal ideals, as well as the square-free monomial ideals. The PI will
investigate the existence of these limits for more general classes of ideals.
The relation between multiplicities and convex bodies is an important research
topic lying in the interaction of Commutative Algebra, Algebraic Geometry, and
Combinatorics. In recent years, this line of research has gained much activity
due to the introduction of Newton-Okounkov bodies and mixed multiplicities of
filtrations of ideals. The PI and his collaborators intend to find conditions
for the non-vanishing of mixed multiplicities of multigraded algebras. The PI
will also investigate a notion of mixed multiplicities for filtrations of not
necessarily zero dimensional ideals and the relation of these new multiplicities
with the mixed volumes of certain Newton-Okounkov bodies.&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.