* 2001286
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Documenting marine biodiversity through Digitization of Invertebrate collections (DigIn)
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Holly Bolick, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 31,114.00

For two centuries, America has amassed an unparalleled collection of specimens
from exploring the world's oceans. They were pulled up with nets, scooped up
from seabeds with grabs, and hand-collected by divers, all contributing to a
library of biodiversity that captures the state of life in the ocean - year
after year, decade after decade. The broadest evolutionary scope of those
collections is in the marine invertebrates, animals without backbones - sea
stars, corals, worms, jellyfish, crabs, and thousands of other animals. That
library of preserved marine invertebrates is our essential guide to the
diversity of ocean life across the globe. And because they encapsulate data from
the moment they were picked up, these institutional collections also act as a
time machine, letting us use the past to understand how our present will become
the future. But there is a problem - vast numbers of these specimens are
essentially invisible outside of a tiny community of museum specialists. The
only record of these specimens' existence is on labels enclosed in the jars with
the preserved animals or in paper logbooks on a shelf. These specimens will
remain nearly undiscoverable on museum shelves until their core descriptive
information is made digitally available. Therefore, this project will create
public digital records for over 7.5 million specimens from our nation's legacy
of marine exploration, thereby making the immense investment in the specimens'
acquisition available to 21st Century biodiversity and ecosystems research.
Because these specimens provide a visible and tangible window into our oceans'
enchanting biodiversity, this project will involve STEM educators and student
educators in the digitization effort, so that they will be able to reflect their
science experiences directly back to the classroom. The public will be involved
virtually, by contributing transcription of specimen label data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digitization of alcohol-preserved marine specimens has
never been carried out on this scale. A major challenge lies in the location of
the data: written, typed, or printed on labels in the jars with the specimens.
In many cases, that will require opening the jar, extracting the label, and
either transcribing it directly or photographing it for later transcription -
for hundreds of thousands of jars. The immediate participants in this program
will digitize most or all of the marine invertebrate collections at nineteen
institutions across the country, more than doubling the number of digital
records for marine invertebrates in the U.S. All data will be publicly available
through existing data portals, including iDigBio.org, using standardized data
formats, thereby dramatically enhancing the accessibility of biodiversity data
for comprehensive, systems-based analysis of ocean
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.