* 2001720
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Households and the Future of Work: The Rise of Industrious Households After the Decline of the Family Wage, 1970-2008.
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Greta Krippner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 15,999.00

As jobs become increasingly flexible, contingent, and automated, social research
and governmental concern has centered on the future of work. Responding to these
changes in the labor market since the 1970s, a growing number of American
families pursued money outside of labor markets. In this project, three case
studies will follow the rise of direct selling (Avon, Amway, Herbalife), leasing
of accessory dwelling units within homes, and the rise of home equity
extraction. Direct sellers in the 1980s and 1990s carefully balanced attempts to
marketize kinship and social ties, without severing them irreparably, that
provided housewives an avenue to pursue secondary incomes without fully
abandoning the ideal of the breadwinner-homemaker model. Families who began
leasing spare bedrooms and garages in the 1990s sought to avoid the stigma of
immigrant informality by leasing “granny flats” and “in-law units,” portraying
their marketization of the single-family home as a natural extension of the
nuclear family. Extractions of home-equity in the early 2000s tapped into long-
time associations between property ownership and landed independence, allowing
homeowners to interpret equity loans as tapping into their wealth, rather than
as taking on risky loans. These cases illustrate household strategies to
generate resources outside standard wages—providing a lens into a rearrangement
of household economic life since the 1970s. Findings will inform governmental
policies, particularly those governing dwelling leasing and home equity
extraction, to maximize their appropriate use balanced against risk.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As American households faced uncertain returns to waged
labor, its members grew likely to embrace three strategies of industriousness:
(1) labor-intensive industriousness characterized by increases in the number of
wage earners or the time devoted to wage work by a household; (2) distributive
industriousness, characterized by entrepreneurial turns toward kinship and
social networks in attempts to siphon small but regular access to cash
resources; and (3) rentier industriousness, characterized by attempts at
securing incomes from claims on household goods or assets. Because most social
research on labor restructuring focuses on labor-intensive industriousness, the
core of this project are case studies of the distributive and rentier household
activity. Leveraging administrative and archival data from municipalities,
federal regulators, congressional records, newspapers, and industry
publications, each of the three case studies analyzes: (1) the motivations
driving early industrious activity; (2) regulatory challenges and incorporation;
and (3) trajectories of socio-economic, racial, and gendered diffusion across
groups of households. This project suggests that at the root of recent
expansions in economic informality are not new technology platforms, but rather
changes in labor market organization dating back to the 1980s. The findings of
this research illuminate sociological theories regarding the family and its
intersection with the U.S. economy in the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
Findings will also provide insight into related changes as work continues to
evolve in the United States and the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.