* 2001605
* Zero-Cycles over Arithmetic Fields and Reciprocity Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Evangelia Gazaki, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 05/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

A central question in almost every science is the classification of objects that
feature similar characteristics. In algebraic geometry, mathematicians are
interested in the classification of algebraic varieties, that is, sets of
solutions to polynomial equations. This classification is carried out by
determining and computing certain invariants of the variety. Such invariants can
be numerical, or more often, sets that have a specific algebraic or geometric
structure. The more geometric approach focuses on algebraic varieties over the
complex numbers, which themselves have a rich geometry. In number theory, on the
other hand, mathematicians are interested in finding integer or rational
solutions to polynomial equations; a famous example in this area is Fermat's
last theorem. The set of rational numbers is very scarce within the set of
complex numbers, which is what makes such solutions so hard to detect. This
project aims to study a geometric invariant, called the Chow group of zero-
cycles, that relates both to the classification problem and to the arithmetic of
rational solutions. The main goal of the project is to investigate conjectures
that deal with the structure of this group when we work over the rational
numbers or over the arithmetic analog of the real numbers, namely the p-adic
numbers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods in this project will involve
techniques from arithmetic and algebraic geometry as well as K-theory. The
project focuses on the study of abelian varieties, a class of varieties that has
some extra structure. The project involves "local questions" for varieties over
the p-adic numbers, where the use of p-adic Hodge theory will be the key. Among
the main goals of the local program is to establish a conjecture of Colliot-
Thélène. Second, the project involves also "global questions" for varieties over
the rational numbers. The goal of the global program will be to prove a
conjecture of Beilinson. Lastly, the project will investigate a "local-to-
global" program related to obstruction questions. The goal is to prove a
conjecture of Kato and Saito, which could potentially lead to the construction
of a new type of Euler system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.