* 2001042
* Quantitative, Computational, and Stochastic Aspects of Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Fedor Manin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,244.00

Topology is the study of global properties of geometric objects which are
preserved under deformation; it has recently found applications in areas such as
protein folding and analysis of high-dimensional data. A particularly successful
approach, which has produced innumerable results since the 1950's, is computing
algebraic invariants which are then studied through algebraic means. However, in
many situations this way of transforming the problem hides some inherent
geometric complexity -- for example, one can deform one object to another, but
only by making it very complicated somewhere in the middle. In such a case, the
existence of a deformation may not be particularly meaningful from a physical,
application-oriented point of view. In other cases, in contrast, one can always
find a reasonably straightforward deformation, validating the use of algebraic
methods for applications. The purpose of this project is to investigate these
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enrich our understanding of the
ideas of geometric topology by proving results of three types: quantitative
results, measuring the size and complexity, in various senses, of objects whose
existence is known via algebra; algorithmic results, showing that certain
problems can be resolved algorithmically while others cannot; and stochastic
results, describing the properties of random objects. One can think of many such
results as answering questions about the geometry of function and moduli spaces.
Closely related questions are studied in geometric group theory, knot theory,
the combinatorics of expander graphs, and the theory of topological data
analysis. However, the study of high-dimensional and simply connected manifolds
and complexes requires a different set of tools which have only begun to be
developed. Since function spaces are found all over mathematics, this project
offers connections to a number of mathematical fields ranging from theoretical
computer science to fluid dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.