* 2001184
* MSB-ECA:  Tropical biomes: how agriculture intensification and climate may alter fire regimes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/16/2019,07/31/2021
* Paulo Brando, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 197,744.00

Forests and savannas are largest and diverse ecosystems. They house some of the
largest agricultural frontiers. The rapid expansion of agriculture in such
regions is responsible for the production and export of agricultural commodities
as well as releasing enormous amounts of carbon to Earth's atmosphere. Many of
these agricultural achievements have come at a high environmental cost:
deforestation and vegetation degradation. Over the next few decades,
agricultural pathways will determine the distribution of forests and savannas
and whether they retain the capacity to sustain key global ecosystem services or
enter a downward spiral with accelerating disturbances that severely degrade
native ecosystems, with global consequences. This study will quantify how
disturbance regimes may shift as agriculture intensifies and the environment
changes. The hypotheses are that (1) fire suppression associated with ongoing
agricultural intensification will change the likelihood of catastrophic
wildfires, and (2) projected changes in climate may results in more frequent,
high-intensity fires. The project outcomes could inform regional land and fire
management, particularly the development of new strategies to avoid catastrophic
wildfires that can damage infrastructure; negatively impact human health and
well-being; and release large amounts of carbon to the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will apply remote sensing
imagery, statistical analyses, and numerical modeling to build a clearer
understanding of the spatially varying synergies between climate, land use, and
fire regimes in forests and savannas at a global scale. It will evaluate how
burned area and fire frequency change as a function of environmental change and
agricultural intensification, as well as how fire suppression and future
environmental changes may alter the probability of widespread wildfires. Through
remote sensing analyses, this project will advance understanding of fire
disturbance regimes in forests and savannas worldwide, providing new insights
into the unquantified thresholds that may lead to large-scale ecosystem change
under future climate and land-use changes. To do so, the study focuses on four
key components. First, reconstructing fire histories in forests and savannas
using standard remote sensing products (e.g. Landsat, MODIS). Second,
quantifying uncertainties inherent to the existing maps of land-use transitions
in the agricultural frontier. Third, building a statistical model of changes in
fire regime metrics as a function of land-use change, agriculture
intensification, and climatic extremes. Fourth, improving the spatially explicit
fire model (FISC) that will be used to simulate potential trajectories of fire
regimes, and will also be applicable to forest-savanna areas in the rest of the
globe, under scenarios of land-use and environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.