* 2001799
* Lianas as a Keystone Guild in Tropical Forests: An Experimental Test
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Stefan Schnitzer, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 06/30/2025
* USD 915,000.00

Why is species diversity so remarkably high in tropical forests? Why don’t
dominant competitors displace subordinate competitors, and thus, lower species
diversity? These seemingly simple questions are critical for understanding how
ecosystems function. Despite being core questions in the field of ecology, they
remain unresolved. One promising explanation for the maintenance of tropical
forest diversity is that there are guilds of important “keystone” species that
maintain diversity by preventing the best competitor species from displacing
subordinate competitor species. However, the keystone guild hypothesis has never
been tested in tropical forests. In this study, the PI and collaborators will
evaluate the keystone guild hypothesis as an explanation for the maintenance of
the extraordinary tree species diversity in tropical forests. They will test the
prediction that lianas (woody vines), which have a particularly strong negative
effect on dominant tree species, prevent those dominant trees from displacing
subordinate ones. They will utilize an ongoing, large-scale, long-term liana-
exclusion experiment that the PI began in 2008. Species diversity affects
ecosystem function, and therefore human and global health. Thus, this research
will inform management decisions and ecosystem function in a highly diverse
tropical forest. This study will also allow the PI to actively mentor promising
students from groups that are underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Keystone Species Concept (KSC) is a
foundational theory to explain the maintenance of species diversity. The KSC has
been tested primarily for predators in simplified marine communities; few
studies have extended this concept beyond a single keystone species and beyond
relatively simple communities. By expanding the KSC to include guilds, or groups
of organisms with convergent life-history strategies, the KSC may be a powerful
explanation for the maintenance of species diversity in many ecosystems. The PI
will test the hypothesis that lianas are a keystone guild for the tropical tree
community. Lianas compete intensely with trees, and recent evidence suggests
that they suppress shade-tolerant tree populations more than shade-intolerant
tree populations. By removing lianas, the established competitive balance among
tree species (when lianas are present) may be altered, allowing the competitive
dominant species to displace subordinate species and ultimately reducing tree
community diversity. By comparing the change in tree species richness,
diversity, and composition in the liana-removal and control plots (where lianas
are present), the PI can, for the first time, determine whether lianas are a
keystone guild that maintains tree species diversity in tropical
forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.