* 2001330
* Violent Non-State Rivalry and Organizational Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Justin Conrad, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2021
* USD 88,179.00

General Abstract This project examines how competition between violent non-state
actors such as insurgent groups, terrorist organizations and pro-government
militias influences their behavior. Despite a wealth of literature on
competition in psychology, economics and political science, relatively little
attention has been paid to the role of competition between such organizations.
One would expect that sustained rivalries between groups can, in turn, lead to
more general forms of violence against the population more broadly. These
expectations are counterintuitive given the amount of work - both academic and
policy-based - that contends competition among non-state organizations can serve
to reduce violence. Conclusions of this sort have led political actors to adopt
policies that might lead them to support one group in the hopes that it will
destroy or distract a rival group.

Technical Abstract The project addresses two remaining issues with respect to
competitive dynamics among violent non-state actors in the field of
international relations. First, there is currently no large-scale dataset that
provides detailed information on the competitive relationships between specific
organizations. In this project, the authors develop a typology of rivalry along
with a dyadic dataset that captures detailed information about the nature and
intensity of intergroup rivalries over time. Second, existing research overlooks
the impact of multiple intergroup relationships on group behavior. To address
this omission, the research team utilizes both dyadic and social network
analysis techniques to identify the effect of multiple simultaneous
relationships. This approach also allows them to examine to the "co-evolution"
of violent behavior and the formation of rivalries.