* 2001983
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Congregational Participation Shapes Higher Education Pathways in a Subpopulation
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Esmeralda Salazar, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 02/28/2022
* USD 14,116.00

This project provides information on how students from a growing subpopulation
and their parents understand the connection between religiosity and higher
education attainment. This is a subpopulation with high levels of religious
adherence and low levels of higher education attainment. The role of these
students’ religious perspectives in influencing their higher education
achievement has been largely overlooked yet may be a vitally important piece of
understanding educational stratification in this
subpopulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses existing national and
local administrative data and further conducts semi-structured interviews to
investigate behaviors and attitudes toward education, the relationship between
religious affiliation and college pathways, and the influence of faith leaders.
The administrative data will be used to examine the association between
religious affiliation and advanced course-taking patterns, college applications,
enrollment and college choice. The interviews, with clergy, parents and young
adults from three congregations, will explore the extent to which congregational
dynamics have an impact on youths’ decisions about
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.