* 2001081
* Seamless Additive Manufacturing of Electrical Circuits Inside Polymers for Multifunctional 3D Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Rajiv Malhotra, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2024
* USD 617,999.00

Additive Manufacturing (AM) of polymers uses layer-by-layer material deposition
to create complex three-dimensional (3D) objects. Combining AM with printing of
metallic electrical circuits inside the 3D object can drastically enhance the
functional capabilities of 3D parts. While many such fabrication approaches have
been suggested, they impose a tradeoff between electronic performance, material
capability, and material cost. This project will create new knowledge on a novel
process that breaks this tradeoff. Multifunctional 3D parts are in increasing
demand for aerospace, robotics, healthcare, defense, and Internet-of-Things
applications. Thus, the new manufacturing capabilities enabled by this project
will have multiple transformative socio-economic benefits and stimulate a new
generation of product innovations in the additive manufacturing industry. This
research will combine several disciplines including manufacturing, thermal,
mechanics, optics, and materials science. This project will create multiple
outreach testbeds for engaging women and underrepresented minorities across high
school, middle school, and undergraduate levels. This team will engage industry
by organizing additive manufacturing symposia, and perform public outreach via
the creation of video articles. This integration of research and education will
encourage diversity in engineering and manufacturing across multiple educational
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s goal is to enable concurrent 3D
printing of polymer parts and electrically conductive metal circuits inside the
part while achieving high electrical conductivity and low material cost. This
research will test the hypothesis that flash light fusion of core-shell
nanowires and physics-informed tuning of the process parameters can achieve
those goals. Coupled optical, thermal, mass transfer and mechanical models over
multiple length scales will be created and experimentally validated. This
research will fill key knowledge gaps on the dynamics of optically-driven fusion
in core-shell nanowires, thermomechanically-driven changes in circuit
conductivity during polymer printing, and the relationship between the process
parameters and performance. The outcome will be a scientific foundation for
systemic realization of a performance-cost-material window that is not
achievable with existing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.