* 2001124
* CAREER: Rethinking HPC Resilience in the Exascale Era
* CSE,CNS
* 08/12/2019,12/31/2023
* Changhee Jung, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 12/31/2023
* USD 406,744.00

Resilience is one of the key exascale research challenges in high-
performance&lt;br/&gt;computing (HPC). Due to much high error rates, exascale
supercomputers could&lt;br/&gt;make little progress in computations, or might
generate incorrect results due to&lt;br/&gt;failures, rendering the exascale
performance useless. The&lt;br/&gt;challenge is how to achieve a complete HPC
resilience at exascale in a way that&lt;br/&gt;does not increase the performance
overhead, the power consumption, and the&lt;br/&gt;complexity of underlying
hardware. To this end, this research project designs&lt;br/&gt;and develops low-
cost hardware/software cooperative techniques for HPC&lt;br/&gt;resilience in
the exascale era. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves four research
goals: (1) low-cost soft error resilience&lt;br/&gt;for CPUs; intelligent
compiler-architecture interaction can validate the lack of&lt;br/&gt;errors and
performs fine-grained recovery, thus eliminating SDC. (2)&lt;br/&gt;compiler-
directed soft error resilience for commodity GPUs; it can remove
the&lt;br/&gt;power-hungry error-correcting code (ECC) logic from the GPU
register files&lt;br/&gt;without compromising their resilience. (3) lightweight
nonvolatile memory (NVM)&lt;br/&gt;persistence; it can mitigate the overhead of
traditional heavyweight HPC&lt;br/&gt;checkpointing and support whole-system
persistence for applications without&lt;br/&gt;irrevocable operations. (4) low-
cost timing error resilience for aggressive&lt;br/&gt;voltage scaling to
maximize the energy-efficiency with program
correctness&lt;br/&gt;guarantee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting artifacts
and technologies are expected to contribute to the&lt;br/&gt;nation's
competitiveness by addressing the challenge of building reliable
HPC&lt;br/&gt;systems. The research outcome impacts a broad range of any
disciplines that&lt;br/&gt;need correct computation results thus requiring
reliable computing systems&lt;br/&gt;covering from embedded systems to HPC
cloud. Consequently, use of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;techniques will make the
execution of current and emerging applications much&lt;br/&gt;more reliable, and
therefore directly affect our way of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be
three types of data generated from this research project:
(1)&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and models, (2) software prototype, (3) testing
infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;including simulators and evaluation benchmarks and
their traces, (4) educational&lt;br/&gt;materials. All of our software tools
will be open source and made available to&lt;br/&gt;the public, laboratories and
industry.