* 2001078
* Collaborative Research: Using molecular functionalization to tune nanoscale interfacial energy and momentum transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Jarrod Schiffbauer, Colorado Mesa University
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 03/31/2023
* USD 357,101.00

Engineering surfaces at the nanometer scale will play a crucial role in a wide
range of future technologies, including water desalination/purification for
drinking and agriculture, efficient heating/cooling, waste heat recovery,
advanced energy generation and storage, as well as biomedical applications such
as advanced diagnostics and therapeutics. The investigators seek demonstrate
nanometer-scale and molecular-level tuning of material properties to create
nano-engineered surfaces, or so-called “super-surfaces”. The project will also
train diverse scientists and engineers through interdisciplinary science,
technology, engineering, and math education. A pilot undergraduate nanoscience
program will be created for undergraduates, including rural, first-generation,
non-traditional, and Hispanic students. This will provide students, including
underrepresented groups, an opportunity to research and network with faculty and
students at a major research university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to demonstrate a novel technique for molecular-level tuning of
interfacial thermal conductance, surface charge, capillary properties, and
biological interaction of solid-liquid interfaces using a model gold-
alkanethiol-water system. By employing a highly synergistic, integrated
experimental and theoretical approach (to design, synthesize, and then re-design
microscale surfaces), the study will advance the fundamental understanding of
mixed monolayer structure, dynamics, and interfacial interactions. These studies
will extend to a systematic investigation of cooling rate and substrate
curvature on functionalized thiol domain formation on both flat substrates and
nanoparticles. By demonstrating a commercially scalable technique for tuning
solid-liquid interfacial transport properties and biomolecular sensitivity of
surfaces with nanometer precision, the project addresses significant applied
research needs in the field. This work is anticipated to lead to the development
of a new nanoscale manufacturing paradigm for the rational engineering of solid-
fluid interfaces that can be applied to a broad range of functional molecules
and substrates. Additionally, it will explore possible means to control
interfacial transport and biological interactions with functionalized and
nanostructured materials. Thus, these studies will provide considerable cross-
cutting scientific and technological benefits, which will improve the overall
quality of human life and health. Because the project will also establish a
pilot collaborative nanoscience program including students from two primarily
undergraduate institutions (Colorado Mesa University and Central Washington
University), which serve large Hispanic, rural, first generation, and non-
traditional student populations, with students and researchers at University of
Notre Dame, this project will contribute to the diversity of the scientific
workforce. Specifically, the integrated research and education design of the
studies will aid in student engagement, retention, and success. Because of the
COVID pandemic, the PIs at all three institutions are actively engaged in
developing a plan for inter- and intra- institutional collaborative research
during the pandemic, planning for increased laboratory safety and utilizing
information technology solutions for communications to mitigate the disruptive
effects of the pandemic on the project activities while assuring researcher
safety. Lastly, through community outreach and education activities via Colorado
Mesa University’s Eureka Science Museum and Maverick Innovation Center, the PIs
will contribute to regional educational development and economic development
through entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.