* 2001207
* CAREER: Understanding the Thermal and Optical Behaviors of the Near Infrared (NIR)-Selective Dynamic Glazing Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Julian Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to understand the thermal and optical behaviors of windows consisting of multi-
layer functions and near infrared (NIR)-selective effects. An ideal window
should seasonally respond to the solar heat, while transmitting the visible
light. However, current window technologies are challenged to modulate solar
heat independent of visible light. Recent advances in nanomaterials have
demonstrated the ability to independently manipulate NIR light. This project
will integrate the nanoscale physical relations and effects of nanomaterials on
the thermal and optical behaviors of multi-layer glazing structures. The
societal impacts of the project will constitute a new class of building windows
that can greatly reduce the total building energy consumption in the nation. The
educational impacts will include courses concentrating on building windows and
envelopes, which bridge the knowledge and ignite collaborative interest between
the architecture and engineering communities for cultivating future
professionals in the sustainable building industry. Furthermore, experimental
modules will be created to teach high school students to build their own sensors
for window measurements and to raise community and public awareness of energy-
efficient window technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the objective, the
research approach includes: (1) decomposing global solar irradiance into its
spectral band components to achieve a time-dependent NIR model; (2) deriving and
experimentally validating the fundamental thermal and optical behaviors of NIR-
selective glazing structures; and (3) integrating the thermo-optical model and
NIR model for the evaluation and optimization of dynamic NIR-selective glazing
structures. This research will form the foundation to understand the combined
effects of nanoscale phenomenon (i.e., photoexcitation) and micro-to-macroscale
glazing structure properties (i.e., glazing properties, spectral emissivity,
central-layer insulating abilities, layer placements). Such knowledge will
significantly improve our ability to incorporate NIR-selective materials into
building windows. New analytical models that take the nanoscale NIR absorption
and scattering features into account will be developed and experimentally
validated. By coupling the developed solar spectral decomposition model and
computational method to quantify glazing performance, this research will provide
an understanding of the salient characteristics and patterns of the optimal
time-dependent thermo-optical properties of NIR-selective glazing structures to
achieve a minimum level of energy use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.