* 2001546
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Mobilizing Millions of Marine Mollusks of the Eastern Seaboard
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Timothy Pearce, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 58,762.00

The Eastern Seaboard of the United States (ESB, U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone)
stretches from the Canadian border on the Atlantic along nearly 6,000 km of
eastern coastline, around the Floridian Peninsula, and along the Gulf of Mexico
to the south end of the Texan coast, including 18 U.S. states. The ESB region is
densely populated, with 47% of the U.S. population expected to inhabit the
counties adjacent to the shoreline by 2021. Habitat loss, pollution,
overfishing, and climate change threaten commercially and ecologically important
marine species all along the ESB. This project will make occurrence data with
map coordinates available for over 3,000 species of mollusks that find their
habitat along the ESB, including mussels, clams, conchs, snails, and squid. Data
from these ecologically and commercially important species (over 4.5 million
individual specimens) will be made available through public online data portals.
While the geographic ranges for many species of mollusks are well-known, the
extent of their distribution within the seafloor habitats they occupy is
unknown. Adding map coordinates to occurrence records for live-collected
mollusks in natural history collections will provide detailed knowledge of
distributions. Because natural history collections have specimens collected from
the mid-1800s to present, these occurrence records can help track distributional
changes over time and lead to better fisheries and conservation management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One hundred million mollusk specimens have been documented
in natural history collections across North America, and the breadth, depth, and
growth of these collections is exceptionally well-known compared to other
invertebrate taxa. Mollusks are among the best sampled group of animals, with
some species having over 2,000 digital records available in natural history
collections making them extremely well-suited for environmental and
biogeographical studies that track faunal change over time and space. However,
already-digitized mollusk lots are missing essential data such as collecting
date (30% of records) and reliable georeferences (85% of records). This project
will generate reliable geo-coordinate data for all covered specimen lots using a
collaborative georeferencing project in GeoLocate. GeoLocate will add layers for
bathymetric data, benthic habitat, and marine conservation areas. Incorporating
bathymetry into GeoLocate to determine the extent of locations will also provide
that capability for complex elevational data for terrestrial species. Important
trait data will also be incorporated. For the first time, molluscan occurrence
data will distinguish between live- and dead-collected specimens, with a defined
vocabulary for traits added to each record. Due to the long persistence of
molluscan shells, the live/dead- collected distinction is crucial for all
studies of biotic change using mollusks. Information on collecting dates will be
refined where possible to increase resolution for detecting biotic changes. The
data will be shared through public data repositories, including iDigBio, GBIF,
OBIS, and the InvertEBase Symbiota portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.