* 2001344
* Center for Turbulence Research Summer Program
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Parviz Moin, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 90,000.00

The project will partially cover travel expenses of invited speakers and student
participants and organizing expenses related to the workshop entitled "The
Center for Turbulence Research Summer Program," to be held at Stanford
University. A competitive process is used to select the participants, based on
the merits of their research proposals and their research credentials. Partial
funding will support the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth biennial CTR
Summer Programs. The 2020 Program is tentatively scheduled to be held at
Stanford from July 19 to August 14, 2020. The other government agencies that
support the CTR Summer Programs are ONR, AFOSR, NASA, and DOE. For 2020 we plan
to limit the number of participants to no more than 60. In every edition, the
CTR Summer Programs have typically engaged up to 70 participants from outside of
Stanford, who join about 30 Stanford participants for a one-month period of
intense research on projects related to turbulent flow physics and modeling.
Stanford participants include faculty, graduate students, and a cadre of 10-20
CTR postdocs that participate assisting full-time the visitors in order to
warrant successful outcomes in every research project. In 2018 Summer Program,
CTR hosted 74 participants from 8 countries, including 26 U.S. institutions.
Thirty-eight CTR staff members, worked alongside the participants and
contributed to 36 research projects spearheaded during the Summer Program. The
participants included experimentalists, theoreticians, and computational
scientists. A competitive process is used to select the participants. They are
selected based on their research credentials, the merits of their research
proposals and the relevance to areas of interest to CTR. Graduate students are
accepted to accompany their research advisors. Financial support in the form of
stipends is provided to the participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main
goals of the workshop is to frame the challenges in turbulence modeling for the
next few years. The findings of the program will be collected and published as a
comprehensive technical report. It is expected that the report will consist of
forty to fifty technical papers (about 500 pages) which will be delivered to NSF
and to other sponsors of the program, in addition to worldwide dissemination at
the end of the calendar year. The report, like the reports from the prior
workshops, will be available on the worldwide web
(http://www.stanford.edu/group/ctr/). Many of the papers in the report will be
eventually published in high quality technical journals. The bulk of the CTR
Summer Programs involves hands-on interrogation of numerical simulation
databases for testing models and hypotheses proposed by the participants.
Additional calculations to generate new databases may be performed during the
summer. The participants are divided into focus groups based on their proposed
areas of research. In the 2018 Summer Program, the focus groups consisted of
Multi-phase Flows, Numerical Methods, Multi-physics and Data-driven Studies,
Wall Turbulence, and Combustion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.