* 2001080
* CAREER: Integrative Approaches to Uncovering Complex Genotype-Phenotype Relationships in High Dimensional Genomics Data
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Xinghua Shi, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 578,471.00

The unprecedented accumulation of genomic data offers a unique opportunity to
dive deep into the understanding of biology given appropriate tools to mine such
data. This research will enable and accelerate the capabilities needed to
realize the promise envisioned for big data genomics, and establish a new
paradigm for genomics by fully exploiting the gamut of genomic datasets to
better understand basis biology. Specifically, this project will combine robust
statistical modeling and rigorous computational approaches toward predictive
modeling of genomics data. Successful completion of the project will result in
new knowledge, new tools, and most importantly long-lasting transformative
enhancement of the usability and significance of genomic data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have impact on education in genomics and
bioinformatics at undergraduate and graduate levels and will outreach to K-12
students and underrepresented groups. To capitalize on the gamut of genomic data
toward better understanding of biological systems, the community is in dire need
of accurate, robust, scalable, and efficient methods to interpret such data
toward predictive modeling of various phenotypes. Echoing the PI's overarching
career goal of providing easy-to-use data analytics and software tools to
computational and experimental scientists in life sciences, this research will
result in a suite of tools that allow biologists to conduct novel scientific
research in elucidating the landscape of genotype-phenotype relationships. The
project will advance science through 1) novel Bayesian hierarchical models that
incorporate domain knowledge to predict phenotypes from genotypes; 2) iterative
pipelines to capitalize on the new models for uncovering the complex
relationships between genotypes and phenotypes; and 3) new software modules
integrated with existing data science infrastructure for scalable modeling and
visualization of large-scale and high-dimensional genomic data. Further
information may be found at https://shilab.uncc.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.