* 2001135
* Collaborative Research: SpecEES:  Towards Energy and Spectrally Efficient Millimeter Wave MIMO Platforms - A Unified System, Circuits, and Machine Learning Framework
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Jeyanandh Paramesh, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 02/28/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Wireless networks have played a transformative societal role since their
inception. The development of the next generation of wireless networks is a
national priority for the United States and other countries around the world. As
of 2019, 5G wireless networks are in early stages of deployment, and have the
goals of being able to support rapidly increasing mobile data traffic with low
latency across billions of devices, while reducing overall network energy
consumption and cost. The deployment of 5G networks in their most advanced form
is expected to take several years lasting well into the 2020's. However,
consumer demands that drive wireless network capacity is projected to continue
unabated, especially as new application scenarios such as autonomous
transportation and delivery networks mature. In anticipation of such needs, this
project seeks to investigate hardware and physical layer needs of "beyond 5G"
networks by taking a unified approach that encompasses circuits, systems and
artificial intelligence. The proposed theories, algorithms, and hardware
implementation are expected to have impacts in a number of areas that include
technology transfer to industry, development of undergraduate and graduate
course materials, graduate student training, undergraduate research experiences
and community outreach via wireless testbed development, and public release of
all simulation frameworks and machine learning datasets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to develop a set of
analysis and design tools for mm-wave MIMO systems including specific circuits-
aware signal processing techniques, and novel algorithms-aware circuit designs.
Fundamental algorithmic contributions will be made to solve key mm-wave MIMO
system challenges such as enhancing the spectral efficiency and energy
efficiency in highly-mobile applications and dense mm-wave deployments.
Fundamental circuit contributions will include solutions to designing energy-
efficient MIMO transmitters, designing energy- and area-efficient RF precoders
and combiners, and designing platforms to support machine learning algorithms.
The project has several inter-related thrusts: (1) Investigate joint
system/circuit analysis and design approaches for hybrid architectures; (2)
Develop novel circuits (including high-efficiency transmitters and bi-
directional signal paths) to enable high energy-efficiency, reconfigurability
and concurrent multi-band operation in hybrid MIMO architectures (3) Adopt
machine learning tools to design circuits- and deployment-aware beamforming
codebooks, and leverage machine learning techniques to design mm-wave
interference-aware beamforming; (5) Integrate into MIMO platforms with
appropriate sensors and actuators to enable hardware implementation of the
aforementioned machine learning techniques&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.