* 2001225
* Icy landscapes from the Brooks Range to the Beaufort Sea: Quantifying the mobilization, transport and deposition of sediment and carbon in Arctic Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,306,498.00

Arctic landscapes are rapidly changing because of ongoing warming. One effect of
this warming is that permafrost, which is ground that remains frozen even in
summer, is now thawing. Permafrost thaw exposes previously frozen organic soil
material to decomposition, a process that releases carbon dioxide to the world’s
atmosphere and can contribute to the greenhouse effect. Thaw also brings new
amounts of soil and carbon material into Arctic rivers, which then gets
deposited in floodplains and coasts. How the transport of this soil and carbon
through river corridors and the burial of this material on the coasts, affect
carbon decomposition is unclear. This project collects data that will monitor
changes in water and carbon chemistry for the Canning River in Alaska. These
measurements from the land surface, floodplain and river banks, will allow us to
develop new theories about the carbon cycle. These new insights will be used to
develop computer models that predict future landscape change and carbon release.
The project will help build the future workforce through training of four
students and a postdoctoral fellow in integrated data collection and computer
modeling. We will share our insights with the public through a short film. We
will also work with regional decision makers through close collaboration with
the US Geological Survey, Fish and Wildlife Service, and at the National Park
Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limited understanding of the mechanisms of
sediment production in seasonally frozen landscapes, of transport, storage, and
transformation of sediment and carbon along river corridors, and deposition at
the coasts, prevents us from predicting Arctic carbon cycles into the future.
This project addresses the geomorphic transport system and its connection to
organic carbon liberation and sequestration. The study tracks sediment and
carbon geochemical characteristics through the conveyor system of the Canning
River on Alaska’s North Slope, from its glacial headwaters in the Brooks Range
to its delta in the Beaufort Sea. We will develop new theory and quantitative
numerical models. Field efforts, which include the establishment of time-lapse
cameras along the Canning River, high resolution morphological change mapping
using drones and the new Arctic Digital Elevation Model, deployment of
temperature and sediment transport sensors, and the collection of water,
sediment and carbon samples, will shed light on the magnitudes of sediment and
carbon fluxes from the terrestrial domain to the coastal Arctic Ocean. These
measurements will provide a baseline data set against which future change can be
assessed. The study will address hillslope sediment transport by solifluction,
thaw-controlled fluvial sediment transport, sediment comminution by frost
cracking, thermal riverbank erosion, and deltaic deposition in a sea-ice-covered
ocean. The numerical schemes developed in this project will improve existing
open-source model frameworks for simulating high latitude, hydrology,
biogeochemistry, and morpho-dynamics. This project will train graduate and
undergraduate students in Arctic system science, geomorphology, and sedimentary
processes, within the integrated context of field, laboratory, numerical
modeling methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Arctic
Natural Sciences Program and the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.