* 2001650
* Laser-Cooling-Driven Opto-Thermophoretic Tweezers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yuebing Zheng, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 411,585.00

Optical tweezers won the 2018 Nobel Prize in physics for their applications in
biological systems. The tweezers use a highly focused laser beam to trap and
manipulate small objects, including cells, particles, bacteria, and virus.
Despite the huge success of optical tweezers, the requirement of sophisticated
optical setups and high working power prevent their non-invasive manipulation of
fragile objects. Tremendous efforts have been made to develop new techniques for
optical trapping. However, a universal strategy to safely manipulate different
particles and cells in various liquid environments is still elusive. This
proposal aims to develop a new optical tweezing platform based on laser cooling
and thermal migration of particles in a temperature gradient. Laser cooling can
create a localized cold spot on a substrate where various particles can be
trapped by thermophoresis. The cooling-induced trapping is expected to
effectively avoid the thermal damages due to optical heating in conventional
optical tweezer, and the general thermophoretic migration behavior allows this
strategy to be used for a wide range of biological cells and nanoparticles to
advance life sciences and biomedical applications, including tissue engineering,
cellular biology, early disease diagnosis, and drug delivery. The proposed
research at the interfaces of physics, photonics, thermo-fluidics, colloidal
sciences, and biology will provide interdisciplinary research opportunities for
graduate students, undergraduate students, and K-12 students. The outreach
efforts will be integrated into two existing Women in Engineering Program
initiatives on campus to increase recruiting women and underrepresented
minorities into engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Opto-thermophoretic tweezers
were recently developed as an alternative strategy to manipulate particles and
cells in a light-controlled temperature gradient with simple optics and low
operation power. However, the current laser-heating-based opto-thermophoretic
tweezers suffer from limited applicability to special solvent conditions and
potential optothermal damages. The objective of this proposal is to develop and
apply new opto-thermophoretic tweezers based on laser cooling of the substrates.
Due to the common thermophobia in colloidal species, a variety of biological
cells and particles can be trapped at the laser beams via thermophoresis in
their native environments. In addition, this design can avoid thermal damages
due to the temperature increase in optical tweezers and the heating-based opto-
thermophoretic tweezers. The proposed research will provide a novel platform for
versatile and non-invasive optical manipulation for nanoparticles and biological
cells. The intellectual merit is that the proposed research will improve
fundamental understanding of laser cooling and thermophoresis, establish safe
optical manipulation techniques for cells in biological media, and advance
biological applications of optical tweezers, including studies of cell-cell
interactions and thermal cues in cellular behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.