* 2001832
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Algorithmic Pretrial Risk Assessments in the Courtroom
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Simone Zhang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 15,999.00

Across the United States, there are ongoing efforts to improve policies and
practices that govern whether a defendant may be released from custody while his
or her criminal case is pending. As part of these reforms, communities are
increasingly adopting pretrial risk assessments, tools intended to help judges
make fairer, more informed decisions by summarizing an arrestee’s risk of
missing a future court date or committing a crime if released. This project will
examine how a popular algorithmic risk assessment influences discussions among
judges, prosecutors, and defense attorneys in hearings in which decisions about
bail and pretrial release are made. It will investigate how access to risk
assessment reports shapes the questions judges ask and the rationales they offer
for their decisions, the arguments prosecutors and defense attorneys advance,
and the tone of hearings. By shedding light on how risk assessment tools are
used in practice, this project will help courts weighing whether to adopt these
tools to better understand what impact they may have in their
communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project leverages a randomized
controlled trial (RCT) running in select counties that randomizes whether the
judge, prosecutor, and defense attorney in a given case receive a copy of the
arrestee’s risk score report. Transcripts of initial appearances will be
collected for a random sample of cases in the RCT. Through qualitative coding
and computational text analysis, the study will compare 1) hearings before and
after the adoption of the pretrial risk assessment, and 2) following adoption,
hearings where risk score reports are provided and hearings where they are not.
This analysis will be further enriched with in-person courtroom observation and
semi-structured interviews. Findings from this project will contribute to
sociological and criminological theory on risk scoring, legal decision-making,
and how algorithmic decision aids shape professional
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.