* 2001869
* Galactic Archaeology Using Luminous Red Giant Asteroseismology with TESS and Gaia
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Joel Zinn, Zinn, Joel Coyle
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 01/31/2023
* USD 230,887.00

Joel Zinn is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to conduct a
program of research and education at the American Museum of Natural History.
Using high quality observations from the Gaia satellite and Transiting Exoplanet
Survey Satellite, Zinn will build a large catalog of masses and ages of luminous
red giant stars in the distant reaches of the Milky Way. Information from the
catalog will allow astronomers to understand the processes that shaped the Milky
Way over billions of years. Along with this research, Zinn will use connections
between art and astronomy to develop a science enrichment course for high school
students, and a planetarium show at the Museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
developing a catalog of masses, metallicities, and ages of 100,000 luminous red
giants out to 10 kiloparsecs, Zinn will demonstrate the efficacy of
asteroseismology in a regime that has remained largely unexplored. The catalog
will serve as an invaluable resource which will enable astronomers to address
open questions in Galactic dynamics: Has the Milky Way had an unusual merger
history compared to other galaxies? What has been the contribution from proposed
dynamical heating mechanisms on the evolution of stellar dynamics in the
Galactic disk? Using this large data set, Zinn will be able to determine the
ages of ancient merger remnants in the Galactic halo and constrain models of
heating in the outer disk, which has been inaccessible due to the lack of
reliable distant stellar clocks older than 8 billion
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.