* 2001742
* Workshop On Embodied Human-Building Interactions; University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California; April 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Burcin Becerik-Gerber, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 05/31/2022
* USD 49,999.00

Everyday interactions with our physical environment are increasingly becoming
"smarter", as we live and work in smart homes, smart offices, or other smart
infrastructure. We are also increasingly surrounded by smart furniture, smart
appliances and smart building materials. This award will support an
interdisciplinary workshop and related activities that will begin to shape the
new field of Human-Building Interaction (HBI), which studies the dynamic
physical interplay between embodied human and building intelligences. Related
activities include an innovative, educational "hack-a-thon" event that will
engage a diverse cohort of students in the development of prototype HBI systems.
The project serves the national interest by promoting scientific progress
related to dynamic human/machine interactions within the context of intelligent
buildings and the smart objects that will populate them. The proposed HBI field
promises to change the way people interact with and adopt smart building
technology by informing the development of the next generation of cognitive
buildings that will realize a myriad of benefits for human users, including
improved productivity, cognition, convenience, comfort, health and energy use -
all of which are essential to societal well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will bring together engineers, architects, interaction designers,
computer scientists, cognitive and social scientists from academic institutions
and from industry to catalyze growth in the field of Human-Building Interaction
(HBI). A goal of the workshop is to set the groundwork for developing working
models of human behavior in built environments, models that can be incorporated
into building intelligence systems to optimize human-building interactions.
Another goal is to set a framework for how intelligent buildings might
beneficially shape the future of work, by bridging gaps that currently divide
current communities of researchers working on separate parts of the problem.
Potential discussion themes include: Human-Building Collaboration; HBI and
Trust; Design, Engineering and Operation of Cognitive Buildings; Virtual and
Deliberate Sensing; and Security and Privacy Challenges. An educational goal is
to host a two-day hack-a-thon where teams of students will design prototype HBI
systems. A final objective is to publish output from the workshop and hack-a-
thon in a HBI white paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.