* 2001025
* Sleep and Selective Emotional Memory Consolidation from Young Adulthood through Middle Age
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Kensinger, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 899,876.00

People spend nearly one-third of their lives sleeping, and growing evidence
suggests that one purpose of sleep is to strengthen memories formed during the
day, particularly if these memories are emotionally salient. However, the
majority of this evidence stems from data on college-age research participants
that are not representative of the broader population. Little is known about
sleep and memory function in middle age. This research will examine how sleep
contributes to selectivity effects in memory in middle-aged people. One example
of memory selectivity is the tendency to remember emotional information
extremely well, often at the expense of neutral information. This research
builds on prior findings, of the role of sleep in selective consolidation of
emotional memories in young adults. This project combines EEG, fMRI, and
behavioral approaches to examine how different phases and features of sleep can
re-wire neural circuits used to retrieve emotional memories; how such re-wiring
may be influenced by the way an emotional event is first experienced; and
whether such processes differ as a function of age. The research will provide
educational and training opportunities at two universities, and will promote
healthy aging through regional and national outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sleep
promotes memory for emotional components of complex scenes while conferring no
benefit to memory for neutral, contextual elements. Moreover, sleep
preferentially consolidates information that attracts overt attention and
provokes a physiological arousal response during encoding. During retrieval,
these effects of sleep-based consolidation are reflected in enhanced activity
and connectivity within limbic circuitry. This project investigates whether
sleep continues to aide in the selective consolidation of emotional information
in adults over the age of 35. If so, do correlations between emotion, brain
connectivity, sleep, and memory stay stable with age? If age disrupts selective
consolidation, what changes in sleep architecture and/or encoding-related
processing are most predictive of that disruption, and at what age do those
changes begin to occur? This project further characterizes downstream
consequences of sleep-dependent memory consolidation by examining neural
circuitry involved during retrieval, fMRI will reveal whether age influences the
sleep-related enhancement in limbic activity and connectivity during memory
retrieval. This research will develop a foundational, basic-science
understanding of sleep and emotional memory consolidation in middle age, and
will inform development of sleep-based interventions to improve mnemonic and
affective function as adults age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.