* 2001385
* Elements: The ThYme database and identifying representative amino acid sequences that originate thioester-active enzyme families
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Tin Nguyen, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,999.00

The ThYme database includes most enzymes involved in the formation of fatty
acids and polyketides. These are ultimately converted into valuable products.
Such products include cosmetics, detergents, insecticides, fungicides,
antibiotics, and other medicinal compounds. The updated ThYme database will
provide vital support to research related to these products. Metabolic
engineers, plant biologists, natural products and medicinal chemists will all
benefit from improved access to enzyme structure and function. High school
students from underrepresented populations will be recruited and trained in
various aspects of coding. They will then have the opportunity to work with
graduate students and postdocs to contribute to the improvement of the platform.
This should ultimately strengthen the STEM workforce in Nevada, and
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ThYme database contains most known
sequences and structures of enzymes that act on thioesters, classified by
sequence similarity into families. The advantage of classifying enzymes by
sequence similarity is that one can infer that all enzymes in a family will have
very similar structures and nearly identical catalytic residues and mechanisms.
The goal of this project is to launch a new and updated ThYme database by
identifying the current families of thioester active enzymes, developing a new
approach to identify representative sequences, improving the database management
scheme, and modernizing the online user interface. We will develop an efficient
method, using submodular functions, to select the representative sequence(s) of
an enzyme family among sequences experimentally verified to have a particular
enzymatic activity. The database will be disseminated by a website, where every
enzyme family will have its own webpage including relevant knowledge and an open
query field where users will be able to search by organism, sequence accession
code, function, name, sequence, or crystal structure. With input from the user
community, the new website will have features to make the content more
interactive and allow automated data querying. The user community will be
engaged and supported with a forum page to pose questions and begin discussions
to which both developers and users can contribute, as well as with tutorials of
useful website functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the ivision of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems within the NSF
Directorate of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.