* 2001954
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Latinidad in Precision Medicine: Emergence of Imagined Genetic Communities
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Rebecca Jordan-Young, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2023
* USD 15,970.00

Precision medicine efforts aim to tailor healthcare to individuals by devising
the most effective treatments based on genetic profiles. But how are these
efforts implemented within genetically diverse populations who nonetheless share
perceived common ethnicities? This project investigates these issues within the
context of the Latinx population, which is very diverse genetically, but is one
that the medical community often mischaracterizes as they provide research
reports, recruit medical study participants and devise public educational
materials. The project analyzes how precision medicine investigators think about
and act upon attributes of the Latinx population as a target community. It will
analyze the approaches, logics, and frameworks used to make sense of group
identity. It will also investigate how these factors may contribute to
racialized concepts of human difference among and within populations. More
broadly, the project considers how the concepts of biology and race might affect
broader political understandings and processes pertaining to Latinx people, and
thus provides input to policy makers in medical communities and beyond as they
strive to acknowledge and support racial diversity in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We know that racialized concepts of human, and therefore
genomic, differences persist in biomedicine, yet the relevance of race and
ethnicity in genomics is contested. Focusing on Latinx populations for precision
medicine presents a paradox because the Latinx label is a broad one that
nonetheless contains strong diversity in genetic profiles. The first study phase
will be a content analysis of 100 precision medicine texts, such as research
reports, public education materials, and participant recruitment materials,
which reflect racial and ethnic identities of participants, data, or bio-
specimens. The second study phase will include ethnographic observations at
15-20 precision medicine events as well as in-depth key-informant interviews
with a target of 40 precision medicine investigators. Finally, the project will
conduct semi-structured interviews with 60 Latinx community members relating to
genomics, precision medicine and Latinx identity. Through examination of
investigator and research participant perspectives, this study will address how
social categorizations are constructed in biomedicine and in contemporary life
more broadly. Findings from the project will provide insight into sociological
theories regarding how social categorizations are engaged, reinforced, and/or
constructed in biomedicine; it will also inform sociological theories of racial
identity and medical practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.