* 2001704
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Detained Potential-Associative Stigma as a Core Mechanism Behind Educational Inequality for Children of Incarcerated Parents
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Erin McCauley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 10/31/2021
* USD 16,000.00

Educational inequality is a persistent issue in American life. Research
examining education and intergenerational mobility has concentrated on analyzing
how social class, race, and ethnicity shape educational trajectories. While
parental incarceration is another characteristic that may shape educational
inequality, it has been widely been ignored. This project will consider whether
and how the stigma of parental incarceration contributes to inequality through
differential teacher expectations and treatment. Teacher expectations and
behaviors in school have implications for educational achievement and
attainment, which structure the opportunities and trajectories of youth as they
move into adulthood and the labor market. These implications have long-term
consequences for income, social class, wellbeing, and health. Understanding how
stigma affects teachers’ assessments of students of incarcerated parents and
evaluations of student school work will advance research by incorporating
parental incarceration into analysis of the key determinants of educational
inequality. Findings from the project will inform interventions in schools and
influence training of teachers, so as to support educational equality and upward
mobility, thus advancing American prosperity.

Educational inequality limits upward mobility, and the stigma of parental
incarceration may influence teachers’ expectations and behaviors, which in turn
influence student achievement and attainment. To explore the role of stigma in
teachers’ assessments of youth and their work, this project will employ an
experimental design. Eight hundred and fifty high school teachers will receive a
student biography with randomly assigned parental incarceration status:
paternal, maternal, or none. Then they will complete a series of tasks that
relate to student academic skills and behaviors. Participants will grade and
provide feedback on the student’s writing sample and evaluate the student’s
competency. Then, participants will respond to questions about student
behavioral incidents and create behavioral management plans. Finally,
participants will respond to a series of questions about themselves and the
experiment. This experiment will create qualitative and quantitative data for
analysis. The quantitative data, including the writing score, length of
feedback, assessment of student competency, and behavioral response questions,
will be analyzed using t-tests and regression to compare the intervention
groups, paternal and maternal incarceration, to the control group of no parental
incarceration. The qualitative data will be analyzed using a general inductive
method to explore differences in the tone, texture, and style between the
intervention groups and control group. Findings from the project will inform
social psychological theories of stigma, and inform sociological theories
related to educational inequality and social mobility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.