* 2001834
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Case Study of How Consumer Innovations Disrupt Markets
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Akos Rona-tas, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2022
* USD 12,972.00

This project studies the interaction between social movements and markets in the
information technology (IT) sector. Using the specific case of the adoption of
free and open source software (FOSS) by the IT industry between 1998-2006, three
processes are investigated: 1) the transition of FOSS from the fringes of the IT
industry, to being the cornerstone of IT development; 2) the reconciliation in
companies of market motives with the morality often connected with FOSS; 3) the
cultural effects of FOSS on the IT industry. Findings will increase
understanding of the relationship between consumers, innovators, and large
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions will be investigated
through analysis of primary and secondary documents associated both with the
FOSS movement and the firms which first adopted the approach and through
interviews. A wide assortment of documents from various sources related to the
history of FOSS, alongside white papers, advertising materials, and other
documents produced by a key firm regarding its early involvement with FOSS, will
be collected, categorized, and analyzed. Document analysis will be supplemented
by 60 in-depth, semi-structured interviews of executives involved with FOSS, as
well as participants in select FOSS projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.