* 2001122
* Research PGR: Genome-enabled characterization of orphan receptor-like kinases in plants.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,10/31/2020
* Jay Thelen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 10/31/2020
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will improve understanding of an important class of proteins, the
so-called receptor-like kinases. Like cellular sentries, receptor-like kinases
have crucial functions in sensing and orchestrating responses to environmental
cues. Kinases perceive molecular signals from other organisms (like pathogens)
or from neighboring cells and pass signals along to other proteins to initiate
defense responses or other changes, such as halting growth. Consistent with the
importance of these functions, kinases are one of the most abundant plant
protein families; however, kinases have also proven to be difficult to study.
New advances in both understanding and technology will be used in this project
to enable matching of plant kinases to the signals that they detect and to the
downstream “recipients” of the information, thereby revealing the function of
these proteins. Improvements in knowledge of kinases will open new avenues for
improving plant production for food, feed, fiber, and energy. In addition, the
project will train at least five young scientists to use advanced technologies
and will provide plant science educational opportunities to ~60 teachers via
professional development workshops, introduce ~30 Native American high school
and undergraduate students to research via week-long plant signaling research
project workshops, and provide ~40 summer and academic year undergraduate
research opportunities that meld plant and data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will characterize the functions and
substrates of receptor-like kinases (RLKs) of Arabidopsis, rice, and soybean.
Objective 1 aims to reveal RLK functions by combing quantification of
phosphorylation and S-acylation (e.g., palmitoylation) as indicators of
involvement of an RLK in a biological process. This analysis will take advantage
of new results that suggest that these posttranslational modifications are
antagonistic. The project will use proteomics technology to deeply and
quantitatively sample total and plasma membrane-enriched proteins during rice
internode development, with and without drought stress; and soybean and rice
root responses to conserved putative small secreted peptides. The relatively
well-understood Arabidopsis- Pseudomonas syringae interaction will be examined
to optimize methods. The focus on peptide hormone ligands and root growth will
survey broadly across predicted small secreted peptide families. Objective 2
takes a complementary approach to revealing RLK function, by creating deep (12k)
peptide libraries for each species and screening them against purified protein
kinases with the goal of identifying kinase clients for at least 25 novel
kinases. The kinase client assay accelerates assignment of downstream signaling
and its usefulness has been demonstrated by rapid community adoption. In
Objective 3, experimental results will be extended using machine learning
approaches to predict plant phosphorylation sites and specific kinase clients.
Proteome data will be used for molecular network reconstruction and for
comparative analysis to identify patterns in RLK signaling. Results and
predictions will be used to enhance previously established databases, P3DB and
SoyKB, which are already well-used by the community, amplifying project
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.