* 2001936
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Capital in Employment Referral Networks
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,07/31/2022
* M Merli, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 15,852.00

This project investigates employment referrals for a population currently
undergoing displacement and movement, looking at effects of group solidarity,
reputation, and competition. Understanding how individuals integrate into a new
community is an important issue with global implications. Newcomers, like many
others, tend to rely on their social networks to find jobs upon arrival to a new
destination, which is crucial to their integration. Finding and holding a job
can be important for individual self-worth and well-being, beyond helping to
contribute financially to the household. The dynamics of the social networks of
newcomers and their labor markets can shed more light on how newcomers adapt to
new environments. Findings are relevant to decision making concerning employment
for newcomers, with implications for non-newcomers as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions are addressed through data
collected from a survey and through a vignette experiment. The survey is
administered to current and earlier newcomers in two communities that have
experienced population movement. The sampling approach, called Network Sampling
with Memory, allows an efficient, representative sample from the target
population and generates a map of the social network connecting its members. The
vignette experiment provides evidence of the causal relationship between group
solidarity and job referral processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.