* 2001376
* EAGER: Universal transport and diamagnetic signatures in non-magnetic topological semimetals with linear magnetoresistance
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Minhyea Lee, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,129.00

Non-technical Absttract:&lt;br/&gt;The electrical properties of materials are
governed by the quantum mechanical motion of electrons in the material.
Materials can be insulators, with very low electrical conductivity, or metals,
with high electrical conductivity, depending on how the negatively charged
electrons move amongst the stationary and positively charged atomic nuclei. Some
materials are semimetals where the properties lie between those of metals and
insulators. Recently there has been a great deal of interest in topological
semimetals where topology plays a major role in determining their properties.
This project will investigate the electrical conduction of topological
semimetals under high magnetic field to pinpoint their unique characteristics.
The results will enable laboratory tests to separate topological semimetals from
more conventional counterparts, and to determine the robustness of topological
characteristics under conditions that would be encountered in technological
applications. These outcomes can be directly employed in developing fabrication
techniques and device design strategies to incorporate the novel properties and
functionality of topological semimetals in innovative
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to identify the magnetotransport and diamagnetic signatures that
distinguish topological semimetals from conventional semimetals with large non-
saturating magnetoresistance (MR). The outcomes will clarify the universal
features of topological semimetal that are unique characteristics of topological
electronic structures and the associated Berry phase. A framework will be
developed to characterize the disorder leading to the emergence of linear MR in
the high field limit, which is expected to render a better understanding of the
roles of disorder in linear MR phenomena in general. The prediction for the
emergence of linear MR as a consequence of topological nodes and linear
dispersion in band structure will be tested for a broader range of semimetal
systems and will uncover the common elements of the linear non-saturating MR
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.