* 2001224
* Derived Categories, Noncommutative Orders, and Other Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Alexander Polishchuk, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2024
* USD 239,008.00

The proposed research is in the field of algebraic geometry with some
connections to string theory. Algebraic geometry is a branch of mathematics
studying geometric objects defined by polynomial equations and related
mathematical structures. Classically one associates with such geometric objects
(called algebraic varieties) the set of algebraic functions on them which forms
a commutative ring (i.e., functions can be added and multiplied). Modern
research involves more sophisticated algebraic structures associated with
algebraic varieties, such as the category of coherent sheaves (the notion of a
category is a generalization of that of an associative ring). One part of the
project is to establish some cases of the homological mirror symmetry conjecture
which identifies categories appearing in geometry in two seemingly unrelated
contexts. Another part of the project aims to give a rigorous mathematical
foundation to some aspects of the use of super Riemann surfaces (a
generalization of the usual surfaces) in string theory. This project provides
research training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the first part of the project
is on homological mirror symmetry for symmetric powers of punctured spheres. The
goal is to identify categorical resolutions of derived categories of coherent
sheaves on certain algebraic varieties with partially wrapped Fukaya categories
of the symmetric powers of punctured spheres. This may help to find a new
construction of Ozsvath-Szabo's categorical knot invariant. The second part is
to work out a generalization of the Hirzebruch-Riemann-Roch formula to the
categories of matrix factorizations over non-affine varieties and stacks. The PI
also would like to use categories of matrix factorizations to find a Landau-
Ginzburg counterpart of the G-equivariant Gromov-Witten theory. The third part
of the project is to realize trigonometric solutions of the associative Yang-
Baxter equation in terms of noncommutative orders over nodal cubics. The fourth
part is related to the geometry of stable supercurves. The PI proposes to
understand the poles of the analog of Mumford's isomorphism for the Berezinian
of the moduli of supercurves near the boundary of the compactification by stable
supercurves and to study some problems arising in integration over the moduli
space of supercurves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.