* 2001777
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impact of Geography and Social Ties on Health and Well-being
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Margaret Traeger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2021
* USD 3,697.00

This project examines how the social and spatial environments in which people
live either jointly or separately and independently affect their mental and
physical health. A fundamental social and biological fact about human beings is
that where people live shapes who they become, and their health and economic
prospects in particular. The reasons for this are still not fully understood but
one key reason is that people do not live on their own; relationships to others
give rise to face-to-face social networks, and these social connections
generally occupy the same places. Research has established the connections
between networks and place, and between networks and health, but this doctoral
dissertation research project explores the intersection of all three (people in
networks in places). Results may help practitioners and decision makers create
new ways of thinking about geographically contextualized networks and new ways
of addressing important public health concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research uses extremely detailed data on 24,812 individuals in 176 communities
in a setting in which people live in close proximity to members of their social
networks. Statistical methods such as multilevel models are employed to answer a
variety of questions related to networks, geography, and health. The researcher
investigates the following questions: 1) Is network centrality associated with
geographic centrality and how do these locations impact health? 2) Are negative
ties between individuals spatially patterned such that individuals “keep their
enemies closer” than their friends, and how does this proximity influence
health? 3) Using the ecological concept of “ecotones,” do individuals in
particular locations experience higher variability in health
outcomes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.