* 2001321
* Digitization PEN:  Partnership to the New England Vascular Plant Network (NEVP) for the Environmental Management and Monitoring Alliance (EMMA)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Keri VanCamp, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 48,904.00

Herbaria, collections of pressed and dried plant specimens, provide windows into
the past. They tell us what kinds of plants were present, where those plants
were, and when the plants were there. With this information we can track changes
over time, such as the return of wildflowers and forest trees to previously
farmed land, and the introduction and spread of invasive plant species.
Herbarium specimens are also records of past seasonal events such as when
wildflowers bloomed, and when trees leafed out in the spring and dropped their
leaves in fall. The information stored in herbaria can help us understand past
environmental changes, and also to predict and prepare for future change. This
project will allow six members of the Hudson Valley Environmental Monitoring and
Management Alliance (EMMA) to digitize their collections. Making the images and
label information available online to anyone in the world will immeasurably
increase the research and societal value of the EMMA herbaria. The images and
information will help the Alliance address urgent threats to ecosystem health in
the Hudson Valley, including climate change, invasive species, habitat loss and
fragmentation, and deer overabundance. The EMMA herbarium information will also
contribute to numerous other projects with scopes beyond the Hudson
Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EMMA herbaria participating in this project are
the Louis Calder Center of Fordham University, the Highstead Arboretum, the E.N.
Huyck Preserve, the Mohonk Preserve, Pace University, and Vassar College.
Together, they will partner with the existing New England Vascular Plant Network
(NEVP). Approximately 22,250 specimens will be digitized, of which around 13,550
are from New York State. This project will provide training opportunities for
undergraduate students at Pace and Vassar, who will digitize specimens from
those herbaria onsite. A travelling team will carry out most of the digitization
work at the other four herbaria. This will increase the NEVPâ€™s New York
specimens by 27%. Images and data will be made available through the Consortium
of Northeastern Herbaria portal and through iDigBio.org. Along with the
herbarium data, site-specific weather and phenology data will be available to
researchers through the Forest Ecosystems Monitoring Cooperative platform and
the EMMA website. Phenology data will also be available through the USA-National
Phenology Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.