* 2001548
* PEN: Digitization: Enhancing LepNet: Digitization and integration of significant butterfly and moth collections from the upper Midwest Tension Zone region
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Daniel Young, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,647.00

Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) are one of the most diverse groups of
organisms on the planet: worldwide there are approximately 160,000 species,
including around 14,300 species in North America. Moths and butterflies are a
conspicuous component of terrestrial habitats and one of the most diverse groups
of plant-feeding animals worldwide. This insect group includes species of great
economic importance. Their juveniles feed on plants useful to humans, including
grains, cotton, tobacco, and timber and shade trees. However, many of the adults
are beneficial as pollinators and are icons of conservation as evidenced by
Monarch butterflies. Given their economic importance and sheer beauty,
butterflies and moths are one of the most abundant insect group in museum
collections, but only a fraction of the approximately 15 million specimens in
non-federal collections have had their specimen label information digitally
recorded and accessible to researchers and educators. This award will allow the
Wisconsin Insect Research Collection (WIRC) at UW-Madison to join with the
Lepidoptera of North America Network Thematic Collection Network (LepNet TCN) as
a Partner to Existing Network (PEN). A floristic “Tension Zone” separating
temperate and sub-boreal biota passes through the Great Lake Region; Wisconsin
contains a greater portion of this zone than any other state in which it is
found. The majority of Lepidoptera specimens in the WIRC were collected in
Wisconsin and their data will thus fill a significant and critical gap in our
knowledge of Lepidoptera species in the upper Midwestern United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide digitized and
georeferenced data for nearly 70,000 North American Lepidoptera specimens.
Currently, Wisconsin records for Lepidoptera are scarce in the LepNet SCAN
portal. Inclusion of the WIRC dataset will significantly increase the number of
species-level occurrences for the Great Lake Tension Zone region for most
Lepidoptera superfamilies, greatly enhancing the target number of species for
ecological niche modeling. Project personnel will develop and implement a
workflow that involves transcribing data to add new specimen records to the
WIRC’s existing Specify database. These data will be available through the
LepNet SCAN portal, iDigBio.org, and GBIF.org, where they can be accessed for
research, education, and public use. High-resolution images will also be
generated for about 1,500 adult exemplar specimens for Lepidoptera species in
and around the upper Midwest tension zone. Participating undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as interns and volunteers, will be trained and
mentored in databasing workflows, specimen curation, imaging, and collections-
based research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.