* 2001076
* Biomimetic Redox Chemistry for Antiviral Application
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Caryn Heldt, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 302,958.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Reactive oxygen species
(ROS) can be used to disinfect a wide range of pathogens, such as viruses,
bacteria, and fungi. ROS is an attractive disinfectant as it decomposes into
non-toxic degradation products (water and oxygen). However, ROS is highly
reactive and can be hazardous to store and transport. This project aims at
utilizing a unique chemistry found in mussel adhesive proteins to create a
portable biomaterial that can be activated to generate ROS. The antiviral
capability of the generated ROS will be tested against different viruses with
varying properties and levels of chemical resistance. The biomaterial itself
does not contain ROS and is only activated to generate ROS by a simple hydration
process. The proposed biomimetic material can potentially be used as a portable,
light-weight disinfectant for preventing viral infection. The proposed research
will engage undergraduate and graduate students, as well as underrepresented
community college students, in interdisciplinary research involving polymeric
materials, biomimetic chemistry, and antiviral research. Additionally,
investigators will develop a new polymeric biomaterials module as part of the
Michigan Technology University Summer Youth Program to introduce high school
students in hands-on activities related to the use of biomaterials as a drug
carrier. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work aims at harvesting the byproduct
of a unique reduction-oxidation chemistry found in mussel adhesive proteins for
antiviral application. Polymers are functionalized with the adhesive molecule,
catechol, which generate hydrogen peroxide during autoxidation. To enhance the
antiviral capability of catechol-containing materials, polymer architecture and
composition, as well as the reactivity of catechol will be tuned to create
polymer systems that are optimized to generate potent radical-based ROS, such as
superoxide anion and hydroxyl radical. The ability for the generated ROS to
inactivate both enveloped and non-enveloped viruses as well as a herpes virus
will be explored. Results from this proposal will provide a greater
understanding on the dose, duration, and type of ROS needed to inactivate
different types of viruses with varying properties and levels of biocide
resistance. ROS is generated on-demand when the material is hydrated in an
aqueous solution with neutral pH. This process involves the conversion of
molecular oxygen in the solution to ROS, through the oxidation of the catechol
moiety. This approach is drastically different from other existing approaches
that contain ROS, require externally provided chemical reactants, or require
external energy sources to generate ROS. The material does not contain a
reservoir for storing the reactive ROS, which greatly simplifies how it could be
stored and transported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.