* 2001041
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Rethinking Access Pattern Privacy: From Theory to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yaacov Nissim Kobliner, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2023
* USD 254,891.00

When a program accesses data stored in memory, disk, or on a remote server, its
access patterns can leak information about its secret inputs and data. There has
been decades of work that investigated how to prevent programs from leaking any
information by making their access patterns "oblivious", i.e., independent from
their execution. This project is motivated by the significant overhead that past
techniques incur. The project introduces and investigates new relaxed notions of
access pattern obliviousness, and discovers new algorithms that achieve these
notions with a significantly reduced overhead. The project includes training of
Ph.D. students and postdoctoral researchers, and mentoring activities focused on
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project rethinks the definition of access pattern privacy, and considers (but
not limited to) a new notion called "differential obliviousness". In analogy
with differential privacy, differential obliviosness requires that the access
patterns resulting from executing a program on similar inputs should be hard to
distinguish. The project establishes theoretical understanding, including new
lower and upper bounds, of the extent to which various notions of obliviosness
impact the performance of programs. The investigators also explore the practical
performance of new privacy-preserving algorithms in cloud outsourcing and
database scenarios. The project develops open-source libraries for the new,
differentially oblivious algorithms and data
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.