* 2001161
* SaTC: TTP: Medium: Reducing Container Kernel Attack Surface with TRACKS
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Justin Cappos, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

The infrastructure that powers modern cloud computing environments uses isolated
environments called containers to help keep users' data safe. Unfortunately,
containers are still vulnerable to flaws in the core operating system (the Linux
kernel), which can be used to compromise the security and integrity of container
environments. The TRACKS (TRimming Augments Container Kernel Security) project
aims to strengthen the security of container environments by hardening the Linux
kernel. The project's novelties are its use of how frequently code is
encountered as a way to measure how likely it is to have security flaws. Prior
NSF-supported research has found that frequently-used code is less likely to
have serious security vulnerabilities; TRACKS will transition this security
metric to practice by placing security monitoring and additional checks into the
portions of the Linux kernel that are most likely to be vulnerable and working
to incorporate these kernels into real-world cloud environments. One benefit of
this approach is that since the checks are placed in code that is rarely used,
the additional security comes at a very low performance cost. The project's
impacts are expected to be a significant improvement in the security of
containers using the Linux kernel, which in turn will help protect the safety
and privacy of millions of users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TRACKS works by first
profiling the execution of the Linux kernel under a wide variety of common
container workloads, creating a profile of the most commonly executed code
paths. Next, the least commonly used code is instrumented using an LLVM-based
compiler pass that can, according to user-defined policies, insert logging, add
exploit mitigations such as bounds checking and control flow integrity, or even
trigger a shut down of the container when rare code is encountered. In prior
work, the investigators found that around 95% of kernel vulnerabilities were
located in rarely executed code; as a result, the investigators expect that by
creating these hardened kernels and working with cloud infrastructure providers
to incorporate them into production environments, a significant improvement in
cloud container security can be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.