* 2001239
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Bayesian Reasoning Machine on a Magneto-tunneling Junction Network
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Amit Trivedi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,986.00

Bayesian networks are a computational model that is very efficient for computing
in the presence of uncertainty. It excels in such tasks as predicting stock
market behavior, disease progression, etc. It is ideal for taking an event that
occurred and predicting the likelihood of different known causes to have been
the contributing factor. For example, given the symptoms of a patient, it can
compute the probabilities of various diseases that could be causing the
symptoms. Unfortunately, implementing Bayesian networks usually requires complex
hardware that is expensive, prone to failure, dissipates too much energy and
consumes too much area on a computer chip. The goal of this research is to
overcome these disadvantages by replacing traditional electronic hardware with
magnetic devices that interact with each other in a special way to elicit
Bayesian inference. This can reduce the hardware complexity and all associated
costs dramatically, making Bayesian networks compact and efficient. This
research will establish the viability of this approach through extensive
simulations. Graduate students will be trained in this field to produce a pool
of skilled scientists and engineers with cutting-edge
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian networks for computing in the presence
of uncertainty leverage Bayesian inference engines implemented with complex
hardware that often involves microcontrollers, shift registers, analog-to-
digital converters, logic gates, etc. that dissipate exorbitant amounts of
energy and have enormous footprints on a chip. It ha recently been shown by the
project team that magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) that interact with each other
by means of dipole coupling can implement Bayesian networks with vastly reduced
energy cost and much smaller footprints. Two dipole coupled MTJs A and B can
realize an extremely efficient 2-node Bayesian network, where the probabilities
of high and low resistance states of MTJ A are set by current or voltage, while
the (random) resistance state of MTJ B is determined by varying degrees of
dipole coupling between the two MTJs. The degree of dipole coupling is tuned
with local strain applied to the soft layer of MTJ B using electrical
excitation. This allows one to generate any desired anti-correlation or
correlation between the resistance states of the two MTJs that can be varied
between 0% and 100% using electrical excitation. In turn, this allows the
generation of programmable conditional probabilities that can be exploited for
Bayesian networks. This research will build a simulation base for this approach,
test the viability of MTJ-based inference engines under different scenarios and
design optimal sub-systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.