* 2001115
* Negative transcription elongation factors prevent transcriptional interference in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Scott Michaels, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 02/29/2024
* USD 972,974.00

The genomes of plants and animals can contain tens of thousands of genes, each
of which must be turned on, or expressed, at specific levels, times, and
locations. A fundamental challenge is ensuring that the expression of one gene
does not inappropriately affect the expression of its neighbors. In plants,
little is known about how such interference is prevented, and studying this
mechanism is the goal of this project. The research will be carried out by
undergraduate and graduate students, and the data generated in the project will
be used in an online Molecular Genetics and Genomics course for high school
teachers to help them gain new skills that they can take to their classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When two genes are located close together on the same
strand of DNA, i.e., in tandem, there is potential for expression--transcription
by RNA polymerase II (Pol II)--to interfere with expression of the downstream
gene. One way to prevent this interference would be to block the progress of the
Pol II as it nears the end of the first gene, so that invasion of the promoter
region of the second gene is barred. Preliminary work led to discovery of a
family of negative transcription elongation factors, called BORDER proteins,
that are enriched regions between tandem genes. The BORDER proteins appear
prevent expression interference by promoting pausing of Pol II near the end of
the upstream gene. In the absence of BORDER proteins, pausing in the upstream
gene is reduced and Pol II moves into the promoter region of the downstream
gene, resulting in its decreased expression. Experiments will study how the
BORDER proteins interact with Pol II to induce pausing. Studies will be
conducted in two plant species, Arabidopsis and rice, which both have BORDER
proteins, but different spacing between tandem genes. This comparative approach
will help discern the shared features of BORDER protein function across species.
Moreover, because proteins with similarities to the plant BORDER proteins exist
also in fungi and animals, the work is expected to have broad impact on
understanding how expression of tandemly arranged genes is
coordinated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is co-funded by the Biological
Sciences Directorate Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.