* 2001641
* Collaborative Research: Digitization PEN: Expanding and enhancing the California Phenology TCN
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Jason Cantley, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 15,301.00

Flowering time is an important biological phenomenon, affecting human societies
through its effects on agricultural crops, pollinators, pests, and biodiversity.
Given the sensitivity of flowering times to climatic conditions, a thorough
understanding of how plants respond to changing environments is necessary for
predicting the consequences for pollinators, herbivores, parasites, and plant
populations. A record of historical flowering times is found within the nation's
herbaria – collections of dried and pressed plants. In 2018, the California
Phenology Thematic Collections Network (CAP-TCN) was established to advance our
understanding of flowering time changes over time. The network brought together
22 California universities, research stations, natural history collections, and
botanical gardens, with the goal of imaging and recording the flowering status
of approximately one million herbarium specimens collected over the past 150
years. These data are freely available through the newly established Consortium
of California Herbaria (CCH2) portal. This project will add a partnership of
seven new collections and six new institutions to the CAP-TCN, contributing an
additional 150,000 herbarium specimens. The project participants will be fully
integrated into CAP-TCN training and outreach activities including Notes from
Nature online expeditions, which educate and involve members of the public in
learning about herbarium specimens and flowering phenology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By expanding the geographic scope to encompass Oregon and
the northern Baja California peninsula, the CAP-TCN will now cover the entire
California Floristic Province, a biodiversity hotspot of global significance.
This will increase the number of species with imaged specimens across their
entire range from 1,217 to 1,850, a 55% increase. The addition of 80,000 Oregon
and Baja California specimens to CCH2 will facilitate efficient specimen-based
analyses of the entire California Floristic Province and for the first time
allow a more objective and reproducible specimen-based delineation of its
geographic boundaries. Three institutions in California and Nevada will fill key
geographic gaps for northwestern California, the northern San Joaquin Valley,
and the Mojave Desert. Two additional institutions will significantly increase
CAP-TCN representation of 1) the ecologically important and taxonomically
complex genus Arctostaphylos (manzanita); and 2) introduced and invasive species
of importance to California agriculture, rangelands, and native ecosystems. An
estimated 25 additional undergraduates will participate in digitizing
activities. Ongoing public outreach efforts about the floras of Oregon and Baja
California at Oregon State University and the San Diego Natural History Museum
will also benefit from the newly imaged specimens. Data will be shared through
online resources, including iDigBio.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.