* 2001186
* Exotic Quantum Criticalities in Low Dimensions and Systems with Unusual Quantum Many-Body Thermalization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Olexei Motrunich, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 368,515.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research studying exotic collective behaviors involving many quantum particles.
At absolute zero temperature, such systems can organize into myriad quantum
states of matter---quantum phases---depending on details of interactions between
particles. While the most common of such phases and their transformations are
well understood, some quantum phase transitions do not fit into conventional
paradigms, most notably continuous transitions between phases with mismatched
orders as can occur in quantum magnets. Yet another class of phases---so-called
gapless spin liquids with emergent itinerant quasiparticles---are proposed to
occur in several antiferromagnetic solids that defy ordering even at zero
temperature. (Here, "liquid" refers to randomness in the directions of the
electrons' magnetism inside a solid.) The PI's group will pursue tractable
examples of such unusual quantum phase transitions in one and two dimensions and
also questions motivated by recent experiments in candidate spin-liquid
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A different aspect of collective quantum
behavior is evolution in time when a system of many particles is started in a
non-equilibrium state with finite energy density above zero temperature. This
has come to the fore as experimentalists are engineering systems with many
degrees of freedom that behave quantum-mechanically, in part in an effort to
develop quantum technologies. A fundamental idea to describe such an evolution
is that of dynamical thermalization and the closely related eigenstate
thermalization hypothesis, which offers a way of understanding why time flows
only in one direction. A notable exception to thermalization---so-called many-
body localization---occurs in the presence of a large number of impurities. A
challenging question, also of technological interest, is whether thermalization
can be completely or at least very strongly suppressed in the absence of
impurities. The PI's group will continue work on understanding pre-
thermalization phenomena and also on so-called quantum many-body scar states
that violate the eigenstate thermalization
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects under this award will initiate
graduate students to research at the frontier of quantum many-particle physics
and will teach them a variety of analytical and numerical approaches that will
prepare them for future careers in quantum physics and quantum engineering
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research studying
different facets of quantum many-body physics: 1) unconventional quantum phase
transitions and critical phases at zero temperature, and 2) unusual
thermalization dynamics at non-zero energy density above zero
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) While by now we have good ``fixed-point''
pictures of myriad gapped phases, both conventional and exotic, we do not have
as good an understanding of quantum phase transitions in many cases. Among
these, so-called ``deconfined quantum critical points'' that lie beyond the
Landau paradigm have fascinated researchers for more than fifteen years;
however, finding truly controlled instances of such critical points has been
controversial. Another challenging open problem is the description of gapless
fractionalized phases, which are believed to be critical phases that do not
require fine-tuning. The PI's group will search for tractable examples of
unconventional quantum critical points in low dimensions and will also pursue
projects motivated by recent experiments in candidate gapless spin-liquid
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) This award will also pursue research in
quantum many-body dynamics and thermalization in closed quantum systems. For
many years, the interest in such questions had been primarily theoretical, as
they relate to foundations of statistical mechanics and notions of quantum
chaos. However, modern experiments in engineered quantum systems such as cold
atom arrays, trapped ions, dipolar spin impurities, etc., have already achieved
well-isolated systems with many quantum degrees of freedom, and are already
finding unexpected phenomena opening new exciting directions in the field. In
this context, the PI's group will specifically pursue examples of unusual
thermalization in systems without disorder and will explore questions of pre-
thermalization and quantum many-body scar states. The PI's group studies
concrete systems to address challenging open questions and combines and develops
both analytical and numerical tools to achieve
this.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects under this award will initiate graduate
students to research at the frontier of condensed-matter physics. The students
will learn a variety of analytical and numerical approaches to quantum many-body
systems that will prepare them for future careers in quantum physics and quantum
engineering areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.