* 2001671
* Conference on the Food-Energy-Water Nexus
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Serpil Guran, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This Food-Energy-Water Nexus Conference will be held December 5-6, 3019 in New
York City. The conference provides a venue for: (1) Highlighting obstacles and
initiatives in the development of technologies related to the food-energy-water
nexus, (2) Examining current policies, technologies, methods of analysis, and
innovative solutions related to the food-energy-water nexus, (3) Showcasing
research done by professionals in fields such as chemical and biological
engineering, chemistry, environmental science, and more, (4) Encouraging active
participation by graduate student researchers and post docs who represent the
future of the field, (5) Bringing scientists and engineers together to provide
an atmosphere and venue to discuss their disciplines and approaches, and to
motivate new research into barriers limiting the development of technologies
that would ensure resource security in the future, (6) Fostering collaborations
between government, industry, and academia, and (7) a particular focus on women
professionals and scientists from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is designed to bring together researchers
from academia and industry to a highly-interactive and engaging meeting,
enabling professionals and young researchers to hear from one another through
organized talks, panel and Q&amp;A discussions, and poster sessions. Outcomes of
the conference will include both evaluation and summary of various ways to
measure sustainability as well as novel technological developments related to
the food-energy-water nexus. A focus will be on optimizing resource use as to
ensure resource security amidst a changing climate and a growing population.
Special attention will also be paid to the issue of food waste and its
associated impacts on energy and water. Engineers from academia and industry
from chemical, civil, electrical, environmental, and mechanical engineering
perspectives will be engaged, and a virtual network will be sustained by AIChE
to enable continued collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.