* 2001743
* Unifying synthetic small regulatory RNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Tae Seok Moon, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2024
* USD 664,519.00

RNA is generally known as a messenger to carry genetic instructions from DNA,
however, many small RNAs act as regulators controlling gene expression. Over the
past two decades, researchers have engineered such regulatory RNAs and have
built simple RNA-based genetic circuits in bacteria, nevertheless, the
construction of complex RNA-based genetic circuits remains challenging. This
project involves developing generalizable design principles by which simple RNA-
based genetic circuits can be combined to generate complex genetic circuits. The
utility of these complex circuits is demonstrated by engineering bacteria that
produce valuable chemicals that contribute to the bioeconomy. In addition, this
project provides unique interdisciplinary training opportunities for students,
involving biophysics, biochemistry, molecular biology and engineering. An
outreach program provides K-12 teachers with the materials to lead their
students through lab activities, broadening student participation in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past two decades have witnessed remarkable
progress in understanding complex gene regulatory networks by building simpler
genetic circuits from the bottom-up. However, RNA-based genetic circuits have
seldom been built by integrating different types of RNA regulators that control
multiple steps of gene expression (e.g., both transcription and translation).
Consequently, RNA-based circuit complexity is limited. In this project, the
investigators first build RNA-based gene expression controllers (GECs) that
demonstrate consistently predictable behaviors regardless of connected genetic
parts. Mathematical modeling is combined with experimental characterization in
order to systematically connect different sensors to RNA regulators. Next,
insights into the circuit integration rule are obtained first by quantitatively
characterizing both integrated genetic programs and individual GECs then by
comparing their behaviors before and after integration. Finally, based on the
gathered design rules, dynamic pathway controllers are created to autonomously
modulate metabolic pathways, demonstrating enhanced biochemical production. This
interdisciplinary project provides the research community with a unified,
standardized RNA regulator toolbox for fundamental research and biotechnological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.