* 2001226
* Understanding Why Cells Choose to Migrate Towards the Cathode: Directing Cell Motility Using Electric Fields
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Zachary Gagnon, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2021
* USD 110,682.00

PI: Gagnon, Zachary R&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1605553&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How a
cell senses, responds, and moves towards or away from an external cue is central
to many biological and medical phenomena including embryogenesis, morphogenesis,
immune response, wound healing and cancer metastasis. Electrotaxis, the
phenomenon by which cells bias their motion directionally in response to an
externally applied electrical field, is important in a number of cellular
processes; however, the underlying physical mechanism of how electric fields
influence cytoskeletal organization within the cell is unknown. The overall goal
of the planned research is to determine the physical mechanisms responsible for
initiating electrotaxis in cells. The goal will be achieved by observing
electrotactic migration and quantifying the ion activity surrounding
electrotaxing cells using precise microfluidic cell confinement chambers.
Intellectual merit is based on the innovative strategy and fundamental
significance in determining the physical entry point where electric fields are
converted into a downstream chemical signal during cellular electrotaxis. Unlike
traditional electrotaxis work that focuses on downstream signaling proteins,
this project focuses on understanding the immediate influences of the electric
field at the cell membrane. Educational impact is achieved through providing new
courses and laboratory training for undergraduate and graduate students,
outreach to high school students through the institutions "Engineering
Innovation" program, engaging 6th - 8th grade students through the "Science
Academy Technology" program in Baltimore and Charles City Middle Schools and
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in the proposed research
projects through hands-on research and community
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How a cell senses, responds, and moves towards or
away from an external cue is central to many biological and medical phenomena
including embryogenesis, morphogenesis, immune response, wound healing and
cancer metastasis. Many eukaryotic cells have internal compasses that allow them
to sense these cues, often in the form of gradients of chemoattractant, voltage,
or mechanical stress, and bias their motion in a specific direction.
Electrotaxis, the phenomenon by which cells bias their motion directionally in
response to an externally applied electrical field, is important in a number of
cellular processes; however, the underlying physical mechanism of how electric
fields are transduced into the cell to influence cytoskeletal organization is
unknown. The overall goal of this proposal is to determine the relevant physical
mechanisms responsible for initiating electrotaxis in cells. The goal will be
achieved by observing electrotactic migration and quantifying the ion activity
surrounding electrotaxing cells using precise microfluidic cell confinement
chambers. The specific objectives are: 1) to develop and build microfluidic
confinement geometries for cell membrane level analysis of electrokinetic ion
flux during electrotaxis, 2) to quantify the electric field-induced membrane
processes including ion-flow and ion channel activity during electrotaxis, and
3) to understand how downstream cell signaling is activated and transduced by
these upstream electric field-induced events. The intellectual merit of the
planned research is based on the innovative strategy and fundamental
significance in determining the physical entry point where electric fields are
transduced into a downstream chemical signal during cellular electrotaxis.
Unlike traditional electrotaxis work that focuses on downstream signaling
proteins, this project focuses on understanding the immediate influences of the
electric field at the cell membrane. Educational impact is achieved through
providing new courses and laboratory training for undergraduate and graduate
students, outreach to high school students through the institutions "Engineering
Innovation" program, engaging 6th - 8th grade students through the "Science
Academy Technology" program in Baltimore and Charles City Middle Schools and
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in the proposed research
projects through hands-on research and community outreach.