* 2001333
* CDS&amp;E: Efficient Uncertainty Analysis in Multi-physics Phase Field Models of Microstructure Evolution
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Raymundo Arroyave, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 301,620.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials design has been accelerated
under the Materials-Genome Initiative by simulating materials with many possible
input parameters (composition, processing, etc.) in order to predict those
combinations that will yield desired properties, for example, more efficient
thermoelectrics for cooling applications. In any such design cycle, there are
uncertainties in the inputs, and it is important to understand how these
uncertainties propagate to uncertainties in the output properties. For complex
computations, uncertainty propagation has traditionally been estimated with
random ("Monte-Carlo") sampling, but when each calculation takes substantial
computer time, such sampling becomes prohibitively expensive. A major outcome of
this project is the development and public release of efficient software to
propagate uncertainty across computational materials-science calculations. While
the focus will be on simulations of the evolution of materials microstructures,
the proposed framework will be applicable to a wide range of materials-science-
relevant modeling tools. Activities will also be conducted to increase the
impact of the project. These include the generation of an extensive library of
2D and 3D microstructures that can be used as model systems to teach and develop
new frameworks for microstructure informatics, the creation of a microstructure-
zoo citizen-science platform to assist in labeling and annotating synthetic
microstructures created in this project, and the creation of interdisciplinary
training tools for uncertainty quantification in computational materials
science. This award will also support the training of two graduate students at
the interface of materials science and statistical
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to create
sequentially optimal sampling policies for the propagation of uncertainty from
model inputs to model outputs. The problem considered here is that of conducting
accurate and efficient uncertainty propagation when faced with computationally
expensive models, specifically phase-field models of microstructure evolution in
thermoelectrics and other materials. Expensive in this research refers to models
for which resources will only permit order 10 model evaluations prior to the
need to make a decision informed by the uncertainty analysis. Such models are
prevalent in many fields, though the focus here will be on computational
materials-science applications. Specifically, in this project, the research team
will demonstrate the efficient propagation of uncertainty across CALPHAD-Phase
Field Model chains that attempt to describe the microstructure evolution of
materials under chemical and elastic driving forces. These models tend to be
highly non-regular in that the model output can differ qualitatively depending
on the region in the input/parameter space being sampled. Moreover, they are
computationally expensive, with full three-dimensional realizations of the
simulations requiring upwards of 10,000 CPU-hours. In addition, the
input/parameter space is often high dimensional, with more than 20 stochastic
input conditions and model parameters. One of the main features of this
uncertainty propagation framework is that it is non-intrusive, as it works on
the input space of the models. Thus, the only information needed is the joint
probability distribution of the input parameters, which makes the framework
widely applicable, beyond the specific test problem(s) used to develop it. The
framework is capable of reweighting previously executed model evaluations in
order to maximize efficiency for uncertainty propagation with negligible
additional computational expense. The PIs will release uncertainty-propagation
and phase-field code through a Github repository under open licenses. They will
set up a public Materials Models and Data Management System (MMDMS) to make the
phase-field and DFT data they generate in the course of this research widely
available and coordinate with other data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.