* 2001624
* Collaborative Research: Electrospray Additive Manufacturing of Thin Low Resistance Polyamide-Based Ion Exchange Membranes for Water Treatment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Geoffrey Geise, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 333,654.00

This grant supports research to develop new knowledge about an electrospray
additive manufacturing process to promote the progress of science and to advance
national prosperity and well-being by facilitating the manufacture of materials
to address water purification challenges and clean water shortages. Electrospray
additive manufacturing is a process where organic monomers are deposited onto a
surface to form a thin polymer film or membrane. This process carefully controls
the way by which these molecules are placed on the surface and can be quickly
adapted to manufacture a range of different membrane materials. The electrospray
process, in this sense, has significant advantages over conventional film
coating or casting processes. An example of one benefit of this approach would
be that manufacturers could quickly adapt the process to make tailored water
treatment membranes in response to emerging contaminants or pollutants in water.
Results from this research benefit the U.S. economy and society by enabling the
manufacture of very efficient membranes that provide better access to clean
water. This research involves several disciplines including advanced
manufacturing, materials science, chemical engineering, and electrochemistry.
The use of a multi-disciplinary approach broadens participation of
underrepresented groups in research and enhances engineering education and
training for the future engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
electrospray additive manufacturing process overcomes fundamental limitations,
inherent to conventional manufacturing, that prevent reliable and controlled
preparation of very thin polyamide ion exchange membranes with tunable
properties. This research addresses knowledge gaps related to the use of
electrospray additive manufacturing to enable incorporation of a range of co-
monomers into the final membrane. This range of compositions allow the
manufacture of materials not previously accessible via conventional
manufacturing such as doctor-blade or slot-die casting. The research team
prepares and characterizes the membranes to determine if electrospray additive
manufacturing can be used to overcome mass transfer, solubility, and reaction
kinetics limitations associated with conventional interfacial polymerization
manufacturing. Additionally, the team uses the new process to incorporate fixed
ionic groups into polyamide membranes to precisely engineer their properties via
control of fixed ionic group concentration and cross-link density. Furthermore,
the research team demonstrates that the electrospray additive manufacturing
process can be used to manufacture membranes on a range of different substrates
and that a resistances-in-series model can be used to inform the selection of
support substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.