* 2001547
* Digitization PEN: Addition of the Yale Peabody Museum to the Terrestrial Parasite Tracker (TPT) Network
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Lawrence Gall, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 58,075.00

Arthropod parasites (specifically, insects and their relatives) are responsible
for economically critical issues in human health, wildlife conservation, and
livestock productivity. Because natural history collections are permanent
repositories for past and present parasite specimens, these collections and
their data can help address these significant societal challenges in human and
animal health and safety. Natural history collections often contain specimens
and ancillary materials that are completely unknown to the broader community,
yet represent irreplaceable knowledge about organismal habitats, distributions,
and parasite-host associations. Further, these collections yield information
that can be used to model ecological processes and changes in species
distributions, predict the future spread of human and animal disease, update
taxonomy, and help identify under-represented parasite groups in urgent need of
sampling and threatened parasite diversity in need of conservation. This project
will provide digital records (i.e., specimen label data and images) of
invaluable arthropod parasite collections to make research-ready baseline data
accessible online, catalyzing new research and education initiatives. These
newly digitized data will have immediate and long-lasting benefits for our
understanding of organismal associations, biodiversity, and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Terrestrial Parasite Tracker Thematic
Collection Network (TPT-TCN) will digitize over one million arthropod specimens
representing species that are significant parasites and disease vectors of
vertebrates in the United States. The TPT-TCN is a collaboration among 26
research collections, and includes vertebrate and invertebrate taxonomists and
curators, epidemiologists, ecologists, data-scientists, and biodiversity
informatics specialists. This Partners to Existing Networks (PEN) grant allows
the Yale Peabody Museum to join the collaboration, and digitize specimens that
fill critical gaps in geographic and taxonomic coverage in the existing TPT-TCN.
This project will integrate arthropod data with millions of vertebrate host
records with vector and disease monitoring data shared by state and federal
agency collaborators, creating a novel foundation for integrative, long-term
research. It will also empower ongoing citizen science and public awareness
campaigns with tools for understanding distribution changes of arthropod vectors
and associated diseases due to environmental change and global movement.
Educational initiatives include partnering with natural history museums to
educate the public about parasites via science-focused lectures, exhibits,
summer youth programs, informal presentations, and developing new online
educational resources for teachers in underserved communities. All specimen
images generated by this project will be shared with iDigBio.org and used in
developing a rapid parasite identification tool, which will be accessible over
the internet and smartphone apps. The TPT-TCN will also develop and implement
undergraduate teaching modules focused on data held in natural history
collections. These modules will be disseminated to academic institutions across
the United States and made available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.