* 2001749
* STTR Phase I:  Protease-based purification of recombinant human matrix metalloproteases
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Jeremy Selengut, SARKAR-KLEIN-LABS
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2023
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is an enabling technology to improve research into many diseases. This
STTR project will develop human matrix metalloprotease (MMPs), a class of
enzymes that degrade many biomolecules including collagen, the most abundant
structural protein in the human body. MMPs are critical for numerous normal and
pathological processes, such as tumor growth. However, MMPs are expensive to
produce, and researchers need a reliable source of well-characterized human MMPs
so that researchers can pursue high quality, reliable experiments on basic
science and medical applications. Furthermore, this project can impact other
fields that use enzymes, such as the food industry, renewable energy, and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will commercialize inexpensive
recombinant human MMPs produced in E. coli. MMPs degrade and regulate various
structural components of the extracellular matrix (ECM), impacting pathologies
such as metastasis of solid tumors, which cannot occur without MMP-mediated
degradation of collagens. Recombinant MMPs can support this research. This STTR
project will advance development of protease-based protein purification without
chromatography, enabling rapid and low-cost purification. The technical R&amp;D
tasks include developing technical assessments for MMPs. The technical
assessments will contain raw and curated data for purity, identity,
concentration, and activity of MMPs at different solution conditions. This
project will investigate development of MMPs as anti-biofilm and anti-clot
agents beyond the traditional collagen degradation field of research. The
protease-based method used to obtain MMPs can be used to purify other proteins
as well. MMPs also have biotechnological applications in broad-spectrum
degradation of tissue components for cell isolation from tissue samples and
diseases involving aberrant collagen depositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.