* 2001169
* Workshop: 6th Biennial Structural Geology and Tectonics Forum; Brunswick, ME; June 2020
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Emily Peterman, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 46,168.00

This award will support the sixth biannual Structural Geology and Tectonics
Forum, which will be held June 15-19, 2020 at Bowdoin College in Brunswick,
Maine. The forum will bring together specialists in structural geology and
tectonics for oral and poster presentations, field trips, and short courses. The
Structural Geology and Tectonics Program provides the framework for the
structural geology and tectonics community to communicate, develop, and advance
teaching and research among educators and investigators. These forums play a key
role in identifying key pedagogical advances and methods applied to structural
geology and tectonics, important science questions in structural geology and
tectonics, while initiating collaborative relationships to address these
questions. The meeting will include three days of presentations that will
include technical sessions that involve themes that have been identified by a
recently published community vision document that highlighted important research
areas in tectonics. The workshop will also identify and discuss pedagogical
advances and advances and methods, specifically as they apply to some of the
discipline specific challenges of teaching structural geology and tectonics and
discuss future directions in tectonics research. It will create opportunities to
foster new collaborations through the cross-pollination of ideas and techniques,
and it will provide a platform for early career professionals and students that
supports and promotes their careers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Following the format of previous meetings, each session will
highlight an important area of current research and/or education that will be
anchored by a distinguished keynote speaker and will showcase relevance of work
on the topic. Poster sessions with abundant time for full participant
interaction will accompany each session. The forum will be organized to maximize
the exchange of ideas between participants in open discussions. Sessions will
provide ample opportunity to ask questions of individual presenters, assess the
current state of our knowledge, and consider productive areas for future
research. In addition to the formal meeting, there will be field trips to
examine the geology of selected areas of adjacent areas that will focus on best
practices for teaching in the field and leading more accessible field trips.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Structural Geology and Tectonics Forum is designed to
facilitate community building and personal interaction within different segments
of the structural geology community. It will bring together faculty from
research universities, liberal arts colleges, community and two-year colleges,
and minority-serving institutions. Speakers who identify as members of
traditionally underrepresented groups as well as professionals from two- and
four- year colleges will provide diverse representation across all of the
organizing committees for the 2020 forum. Importantly, there will be group
discussions on critical developments in structural geology and tectonics, and
what future research priorities should be. This community building effort will
help create a stronger, more vibrant group of scientists and help introduce
graduate students and advanced undergraduates to the structural geology and
tectonics disciplines. The setting will be particularly useful for graduate
students, who will be able to use the venue and informal nature of the forum to
find out what research is taking place at other institutions, meet a wide range
of faculty, and develop useful contacts which will be of great value to their
future careers. Informal mentoring sessions will facilitate opportunities for
early career professionals and students in navigating careers in structural
geology and tectonics. Students will present their own work in a friendly
environment where they can obtain thoughtful and useful feedback, as well as
providing opportunity to build new scientific collaborations. An important
contribution of this forum will include a session aimed identifying one session
will be aimed at best practices to promote equity, diversity and inclusion in
the classroom. By focusing on classroom activities and approaches, successful
strategies can be identified that can be adopted by other institutions to
minimize the “leaky pipeline” that is known to be part of the problem with
retention of underrepresented groups in the geosciences. Abstracts, field
guides, and short course notes will be disseminated through a dedicated website
that will be publicly accessible. Continued support for the Structural Geology
and Tectonics Forum contributes to the long-term health, vitality, and
infrastructure of the Earth Science community. The Structural Geology and
Tectonics Forum benefits society and advances desired societal outcomes by its
emphasis on STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) education and
educator development at a variety of levels, by contributing to the training of
the next generation of scientists, by contributing to the broadening of
underrepresented groups in STEM, and by contributing to the advancement of
scientific literacy of the public. These activities contribute to the increased
economic and scientific competitiveness of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.