* 2001058
* Emerging and Effective Culturally Relevant Practices for Mathematics and Science Teaching in High Needs Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Charles Granger, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,974,059.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
project aims to serve the national need for high quality mathematics and science
teaching and learning. A key component of the project includes hosting three
annual regional conferences, virtual and face-to-face workshops, and
professional development webinars. The annual regional Noyce conferences will
facilitate interactions among Noyce Scholars, Fellows, and project leadership
teams, including both STEM and education faculty. The conferences and
accompanying activities will provide professional growth experiences and
community building opportunities for preservice and practicing mathematics and
science teachers. These efforts have potential to develop an established network
of teachers and teacher educators who will share teacher preparation
programmatic results, mathematics and science instructional lessons, and
mentoring strategies for keeping teachers engaged in the profession. The
structure of the network will respond to the need for evidence-based communities
of practice in high-need schools and districts. Sustaining professional networks
of practice among Noyce Scholars and Fellows can help to support overall teacher
satisfaction and long-term persistence in diverse classrooms and the teaching
profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Illinois State University will
include partnerships with University of Missouri - St. Louis, Southern Illinois
University - Edwardsville, and Kansas State University. Over three years, the
project will: (i) develop learning communities for preservice and inservice
mathematics and science teachers; (ii) use evidence-based teaching practices to
increase the personal and professional connections among Noyce project
leadership and Noyce Scholars in the Midwest region; and (iii) increase the
understanding of and enhance the implementation of culturally relevant practices
for mathematics and science teaching and learning among Noyce Scholars and
Fellows. The project will serve an average of 500 members of the Noyce community
each year. The annual conferences and supplemental ongoing activities will
provide a network of support to Noyce projects with the goal of improving Noyce
project effectiveness throughout the Midwest. The Noyce Midwest region includes
16 states: Arkansas, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan,
Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Dakota, West
Virginia, and Wisconsin. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate
majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.