* 2001744
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Food security interventions in the food system
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Jill Harrison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 15,240.00

This project examines shifting discourse and practice in development food
security efforts. Specifically, this study examines local food security programs
that share commonalities with social movements for food sovereignty. This study
asks what role development programs play in both challenging and maintaining the
current food system. By providing a detailed account of food security programs
and their effects, this study will add a deeper understanding of the way that
food security efforts unfold in practice, their unintended results and
opportunities to intersect with more transformative projects. By evaluating the
possibility of development institutions to be involved in efforts to attain food
sovereignty, it will be of interest to decision makers and development
professionals. Findings from this project will inform future directions of food
security efforts in food insecure regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During five
months of field work, interviews and ethnographic observation will be conducted
with development agency program officers, non-governmental organization field
staff, food program participants, and food sovereignty advocates. Eighty
interviews will be conducted in total. Data will be analyzed using an iterative
process to understand the landscape of food sovereignty and food security
interventions, the origins of atypical food security programs, and the effects
these programs have in practice. Findings will shed light on the changing
landscape of food security decisions and how these changes can be understood
within the broader food system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.