* 2001870
* Workshop: Modern methods in microscopy: Elucidating the physical biology of the cell; Summers - 2020 and 2021; Lawrence, Kansas
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Eduardo Rosa-Molinar, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 01/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This award will support a workshop entitled “Modern methods in microscopy:
Elucidating the physical biology of the cell” at the University of Kansas. This
activity will consist of a ten-day hands-on workshop focused on using cutting-
edge technology, team building, mentoring by the project team of scientists from
underrepresented groups, and follow up support as these scientists from
Hispanic-serving Institutions (HIS) scientists prepare NSF proposals. This
workshop will contribute to meeting the national need for a strong, diverse, and
inclusive workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop activities will include
lectures and hands-on experiences. Teams consisting of a research faculty
director and a scientist from four HSIs will receive training on topics such as
calibration and standards, capabilities of bright-field, laser scanning
confocal, capFRET, epi-fluorescence microscopy, and imaging ethics. All members
of the workshop and leadership team are from groups underrepresented in STEM.
Participants will learn how to use imaging technologies and resources that
greatly advance their research programs that may not be available at their home
institutions. The outcomes of the project will be assessed by the University of
Kansas Center for Educational Opportunity Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.