* 2001189
* Unraveling biofilm matrix composition, architecture, and function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lynette Cegelski, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 999,999.00

Bacteria are essential to life as we know it and colonize and thrive in
astonishing environments, ranging from within the human host to the acidic
microbial mats in Yellowstone and industrial oil pipelines. The propensity for
bacteria to form multicellular communities termed biofilms far exceeds the
tendency to persist in suspension. Bacteria secrete and surround themselves with
molecular polymers as building materials to enmesh and protect resident bacteria
in slime-like assemblies. The PI’s recent work revealed the assembly of
extraordinary mechanically robust basket-like architectures surrounding E. coli
cells in biofilms and led to the discovery of a new chemical structure never
before observed in nature within these baskets. Cellulose is the most abundant
biopolymer on Earth, present in the cell walls of plants and trees, leading to
wood, paper, and cotton products. Other industries also employ methods to modify
standard cellulose through synthetic routes for desirable properties and are
used as food additives and in membrane and biotechnology applications. E. coli
produces its own uniquely modified form of cellulose with phosphoethanolamine
groups through newly defined molecular machinery. This project tackles crucial
questions involving nature’s phosphoethanolamine (pEtN) cellulose: its
modification patterning, its physical properties and potential for application
in new industrial materials, and the molecular basis for the assembly of the
full polysaccharide-protein nanocomposite structures. This project will fuel new
research directions with implications for bacterial physiology; glycobiology;
and industrial applications including the production of new materials and uses
in renewable energy. The PI communicates scientific concepts and discoveries
through scientific and educational research articles targeted to broad
audiences. This project will train undergraduate and graduate students,
particularly those from groups under-represented in STEM. The PI is designing
coursework changes to introduce more quantitative concepts and hands-on course-
based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) into undergraduate chemistry
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate biochemical
analysis with characterization of polymer strength and materials properties,
electron microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, solid-state NMR spectroscopy and
mass spectrometry to: (1) deliver a fundamental understanding of the molecular
patterning and physical properties of the zwitterionic phosphoethanolamine
cellulose; (2) determine the influence of the cellulose modification on the
Velcro-like association of curli at the bacterial cell surface; (3) define
atomic-level parameters corresponding to molecular interactions between curli
and pEtN cellulose in native bacterial composites in situ and highly tuned
complexes formed in vitro. In addition to revealing the fundamental chemical
principles underlying biofilm matrix assemblies, the work will introduce new
methods for the production of pEtN cellulose and isotopically labeled matrix
materials, and provide unprecedented atomic- level analysis of insoluble matrix
materials that pose a challenge to analysis by conventional methods. The project
may serve to reveal a new paradigm for understanding the molecular basis of
other amyloid- polysaccharide interactions, prevalent not only in microorganisms
but also in eukaryotic cell systems and should inspire the search for
alternately modified celluloses and polysaccharides. This project is supported
by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.