* 2001125
* Interaction of a Shock wave with a Homogeneous Field of Acoustic Waves: Theory and Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/23/2019,08/31/2022
* Lian Duan, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 160,254.00

A shock wave occurs when a wave moves faster than the speed of sound in a fluid.
The interaction of a shock wave with compressible turbulence is relevant to a
wide range of engineering applications including aeronautics (supersonic flight
and propulsion), energy (fusion), medicine (shock wave lithotripsy), and space
physics (star formation and supernovae explosions). Understanding the physics of
the interaction between a shock wave and a homogeneous field of acoustic waves
(shock/acoustics interaction) are of major theoretical and practical importance.
Given that the coexistence of shock waves with background acoustic noise is an
almost unavoidable feature for any experiments conducted in supersonic wind
tunnels, the study of shock/acoustics interaction is particularly important to
the characterization of background acoustic disturbances in supersonic wind
tunnels and to the extrapolation of measurement data obtained in noisy
supersonic wind tunnels to free flight. The experiences and results gained from
the research effort are being incorporated into education activities including
classroom teaching, research training, and outreach activities via involvement
in Missouri S&amp;T Student Diversity, Outreach and Women?s Programs in order to
engage students to consider careers in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this research project, significant flow characteristics associated with a
homogeneous field of acoustic waves passing through a nominally normal shock
wave are quantified using direct numerical simulations and linear interaction
analysis. The full-fledged nonlinear simulations and the linear analysis are
enabled by a pre-cursor numerical database of boundary-layer acoustic radiation
that provides incident acoustic fields with a high degree of physical realism
and applicability. This study advances the state of the art knowledge of
shock/acoustics interaction, including (1) the generic statistical and spectral
features of the post-shock fluctuations and their dependence on flow parameters;
(2) the distinctions between linear and nonlinear mechanisms; and (3) the
transfer function associated with the total pressure and the contribution of
individual Kovasznay modes to the post-shock total pressure. This research
contributes to the fundamental understanding of the interaction of a shock wave
with a field of turbulence by characterizing its behaviors in the pure
dilatational limit and complements existing studies of shock/turbulence
interaction with a vorticity-dominated incident turbulent field. The project
also provides the basis for measuring tunnel freestream noise with intrusive
probes in noisy supersonic wind tunnels and for elucidating the impact of
facility noise on the experimental data obtained in such wind tunnels.