* 2001474
* Digitization PEN: oMeso: Opening Mesoamerican Herpetofaunal Diversity to Whole Phenome Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Emily Braker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 173,380.00

The oMeso project is a Partner to an Existing Network (PEN) award to the
University of Colorado Museum of Natural History to join the openVertebrate
(oVert) Thematic Content Network (TCN). oMeso expands upon oVert objectives by
using 2D and 3D specimen imaging technologies to facilitate exploration of
structural and functional diversity in Mesoamerican reptiles and amphibians. The
unique ecology and geology of Mesoamerica has fostered the rapid evolution of
multiple species adapted for a variety of habitats and life modes. Computed
tomography (CT) scans of internal anatomy paired with high resolution photos of
external traits will provide complimentary image datasets to create a novel
resource for one of the world’s most hyperdiverse regions. Increased access to
digital vouchers generated by oMeso will enable research spanning multiple
disciplines, from evolutionary biology and ecology to biomechanics and
conservation science. The project provides inclusive training opportunities for
university students in curation, data dissemination, and cutting-edge museum
technologies. Beyond its research value, the oMeso PEN aims to increase
scientific literacy and public engagement around Mesoamerican herpetofaunal
diversity through a year-long exhibit accompanied by a community lecture, K-12
programming, and open access lesson plans that incorporate project
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;oMeso will increase the taxonomic scope of the
oVert TCN by adding 1100 species across 160 genera, additionally filling a
phenotypic data gap in the digital biodiversity landscape pertaining to reptile
and amphibian media. These data will broadly support analysis of the patterns
and processes relating to evolution, adaptation, convergence, and comparative
and functional morphology. Extensive regional sampling will drive investigations
into ecomorphology along various environmental gradients, and targeting endemic
species will uncover rare or cryptic phenotypes such as those belonging to
narrowly distributed microhabitat specialists, endangered, threatened and
extinct species, and miniaturized taxa found throughout Mesoamerica. oMeso will
leverage existing oVert TCN workflows and digital infrastructure to optimize
efficiency and standardize products. Roughly 10% of specimens will be prepared
with contrast-enhancement to render soft tissue structures in scans. Resulting
raw CT tomograms, 3D surface models, and photo-stacked images will be openly
disseminated through MorphoSource and Arctos and integrate with iDigBio, linking
project media to corresponding source specimen records and extended data
products (e.g., genetic sequences, publications, symbionts). oMeso will bring
together collaborators from the University of Colorado, the University of
California, Berkeley, and the University of Florida, along with specimen
contributions from seven museum institutions to develop this comprehensive and
globally accessible whole phenome resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.