* 2001180
* RoL: RUI: Collaborative Research: Understanding the Ecological and Genomic Bases of Local Adaptation in an Obligate Pollination Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jeremy Yoder, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 436,696.00

All living things must manage stress from their environment and interactions
with other living things. Biologists have long believed that interactions with
predators, competitors, and helpful mutualists are a powerful force in the
history of life, helping to spur the formation of new species. However, it is
difficult to test whether interactions between living things have been more
important than the effects of the physical environment like heat, freezing, or
drought. This project makes that comparison by taking advantage of a unique
interaction between species that live in the extreme environments of the Mojave
Desert. Joshua trees, the spikey, twisted-looking trees found across the Mojave,
cannot produce fruit without the help of yucca moths. Joshua tree flowers appear
to be adapted to the moths, but the trees also experience extreme heat and
drought, and it seems likely that these effects of the physical, nonliving
environment also impact their survival. The Joshua Tree Genome Project will use
genetic sequencing and experiments with Joshua tree seedlings to study how the
trees cope with different climates in different parts of the desert. The project
collaborators can then compare the effects of climate on Joshua tree populations
to the effects of their interaction with yucca moths. The team will also engage
volunteers and science teachers across the Mojave region to measure and monitor
Joshua tree populations in their own backyards. By examining the Joshua tree's
adaptation to climate in detail for the first time, this project will help to
answer a longstanding question in the history of life on Earth — whether
interactions between living things or the physical environment have been more
important — and develop scientific tools and community partnerships that can
help protect Joshua trees under changing future
climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Joshua Tree Genome Project is a collaboration
of ecologists, geneticists, bioinformaticians, and plant physiologists at
Willamette University, California State University Northridge, the Universities
of Alabama and Hawaii, and the US Geological Survey Western Ecological Research
Center. The collaborators will plant Joshua tree seedlings at common-garden
sites around the Mojave, monitor their growth and physiological performance, and
use RNA sequencing to identify genes that are differentially expressed in
different climates. The team will complete a Joshua tree reference genome and
use it with the gene expression results to design a sequence capture array for
targeted sequencing of hundreds of trees. Targeted sequencing will allow them to
perform genome-wide association study (GWAS) of physiological traits that
contribute to seedlings’ survival and performance in the common gardens, and of
floral traits related to pollination by yucca moths. The team will then use
landscape genomic analyses to identify genes showing signatures of local
adaptation to variation in climate and moth traits. Meanwhile, the team will
expand a participatory science program working with Mojave-regional conservation
nonprofits and K-12 educators to train volunteers to survey the demography of
Joshua tree populations, recording how many trees flower and produce fruit, and
how many young trees are present to renew the population. Finally, the team will
use the results of their genetic analyses to build a genomic prediction protocol
that can project the physiological and pollination-related traits of a Joshua
tree population from genetic data alone. The team will use this protocol to
predict the traits of trees at sites profiled by volunteer surveys, and test for
relationships between populations’ predicted trait values and their demographic
health. This will allow them to identify specific traits that influence the
fitness of Joshua trees in current conditions, and would provide a tool to
assess the resilience of Joshua tree populations in future
climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.