* 2001589
* Digitization PEN: Integration of data from the UNH Insect Collection with LepNet.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Istvan Miko, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 157,277.00

An award is made University of New Hampshire for the Don Chandler Entomological
Collection (UNHC) to establish a Partner to Existing Networks (PEN)
collaboration with the Lepidoptera of North America Thematic Collection Network
(LepNet TCN). The LepNet TCN unlocks data from North American Lepidoptera
holdings across the US that provides a baseline to track changes in species and
communities, and to correlate them with climate and other human-related changes
in the environment. This PEN will complement the Lepnet TCN by adding
underrepresented historic New England moths and butterflies including species
from the unique pitch pine / scrub oak ecosystems. The project will increase the
number of currently digitized New England species in LepNet by 63 percent and
the number of digitized specimens by 40 percent. Data from this project will be
made available on the LepNet portal for the research community, government
agencies, students, educators, and the general public. Undergraduate students
will be trained in all aspects of nature history collection curation. The
general public will be engaged through Bioblitz and annual Open Day events at
UNHC, which includes yearly tours for visually impaired students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 700,000 specimens of the historical and taxonomically
important holdings of the Don Chandler Entomological Collection (UNHC) have been
partially inaccessible to researchers and the general public, and digitization
effort will increase research and public access. During this project students
and technicians will image and transcribe the label information of 50,000
specimens, generate 35,000 specimen images and create the dorsal and z-stack
image sets of the dorsal and ventral sides of 15,000 microlepidoptera specimens
using a Macropod imaging system. This project will utilize a new, cell phone-
based imaging workflow that increases the speed and accuracy of the digitization
of entomological collections. Locality data for 30,000 specimens will also be
georeferenced. Undergraduate students will be trained throughout this process
and data recorded during this project will be integrated into undergraduate
courses at the University of New Hampshire to model changes in distribution of
Lepidoptera. The UNHC will display results from the proposed project in 3 public
exhibits at the Spaulding Life Science Complex. Data produced by this project
will be shared through the LepNet portal, iDigBio.org, and
GBIF.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.