* 2001914
* Collaborative Research: Windows of Opportunity-Understanding Black Male Engineers in the Pursuit of Advanced Degrees
* ENG,EEC
* 07/23/2019,08/31/2023
* Erik Hines, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,325.00

Producing graduates with science, technology, engineering and mathematics
competencies continues to be a national concern and priority. Research has
suggested the United States workforce may suffer a deficit of one million STEM
graduates over the next decade. Annually, less than half of the three million
students who enter U.S. colleges intending to major in a STEM field persist in
STEM until graduation. The situation is worse among groups (i.e., African
American, Hispanic, and Native American) traditionally underrepresented in STEM.
For example, in engineering, underrepresented groups account for just 16% of all
undergraduate students; those who decided to major in engineering switch to non-
STEM fields before graduation twice as often as White students. The
representation of Black males particularly continues to be a challenge. Each
year, about 64% of White males earn a bachelor's degree in engineering, compared
to about 5% of African American males. At the graduate level, Black males only
account for 3% and 1.7% of STEM master's and doctoral degrees, respectively.
Moreover, Black males account for 3.6% of the engineering workforce and a dismal
2.5% of engineering faculty. This collaborative research focuses on
understanding the factors that influence the decisions of Black males to pursue
advanced engineering degrees, uncovering the assets/strengths that Black males
possess who persist or plan to continue in engineering beyond the baccalaureate
degree, and determining the role of academic self-concept and engineering
identity in the intent to pursue advanced engineering degrees. This study
includes Black male engineering students, advanced degree holders and faculty
from a Predominantly White Institution (University of Connecticut), a Hispanic-
serving institution (University of Houston), a Historically Black University
(Prairie View Agricultural &amp; Mechanical University) and from members of the
National Society of Black Engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues
three research questions: 1) What factors influenced Black males to pursue
graduate degrees in engineering? 2) What assets/strengths do Black males possess
who persist or plan to continue in engineering beyond undergraduate studies? 3)
What role does academic self-concept and engineering identity play in the intent
to pursue advanced degrees among Black males? To answer these questions, the
project employs a mixed-method approach. Data sources include formal semi-
structured interviews and surveys. This project uniquely contributes to research
literature on cultural capital, anti-deficit achievement, and engineering
identity work. The evaluation uses a values-engaged, educative approach. This
work stands to influence the recruitment and retention of engineering graduate
students and give insight into creating a pipeline for Black male engineering
faculty. This work will be leveraged to create a national Black male engineering
colloquium devoted to sharing relevant research along with career development
and graduate school opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.