* 2001261
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Wildfire Damage on Housing Access and Migration
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Justin Farrell, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2022
* USD 15,808.00

Scholars and policy-makers have predicted that large-scale changes to migration
patterns will significantly impact human communities. While migration
scholarship has proliferated in attempt to better understand these dynamics, the
field has overlooked one of the major factors reshaping landscapes: wildfires.
The first aim of this project is to describe how wildfires affect migration
patterns in the United States. The second aim is to examine the role of the
built environment in mediating whether and how wildfire damage impacts migration
patterns. It is well-established that housing access plays a crucial role in
determining disaster recovery; initial damage to homes influences whether or not
a household is displaced, and reconstruction or the availability of alternative
housing is a major factor that affects longer-term return migration. Greater
attention to the built environment can therefore improve scholars’ understanding
of not just whether fires may influence migration, but how they may do so. The
core topics investigated by this research – disaster displacement and post-
disaster housing access - are immediately relevant to policymakers working in
emergency management settings and to municipal and state officials working in
regions at high fire risk, thus providing important input into policy and
preparedness in these jurisdictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study utilizes
mixed-methods to examine questions of disaster preparedness from wildfires at
multiple scales, and will involve three primary components. First, difference-
in-difference econometric and network approaches will be used to analyze the
relationships between fire damage and mobility patterns at a national scale.
Data sources include the Internal Revenue Service’s County-to-County Migration
Data, Arizona State University’s Spatial Hazards Events and Losses Database for
the United States, and the U.S. National Incident Management System. Second,
qualitative fieldwork in Butte County, California - including 50 semi-structured
interviews and participant observation - will be used to illustrate from the
ground-level how individuals and families navigated post-disaster housing access
in the aftermath of the 2018 Camp Fire. This fieldwork will further examine what
factors facilitated and what factors prevented return migration and post-fire
reconstruction. Third, geospatial analysis of satellite imagery will be used to
describe and quantify post-fire building reconstruction rates, which will in
turn be compared between four major fire sites. Data sources include Microsoft’s
U.S. Building Footprint Data, the multi-agency Monitoring Trends in Burn
Severity database, and remote sensing images from DigitalGlobe. This research
will contribute to a growing body of sociological theory on threats to the built
environment by blending social and environmental data, incorporating spatial
methods, and drawing from literatures on migration and urban
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.