* 2001247
* Coulomb Branches, Shifted Quantum Groups, and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,07/31/2020
* Oleksandr Tsymbaliuk, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2020
* USD 165,000.00

This project lies at the intersection of several fields of mathematics:
representation theory, classical and quantum integrable systems, mathematical
physics, and enumerative algebraic geometry. While the former three branches
originate from quantum physics, the last one deals with applications of purely
algebraic concepts to geometry. Representation theory concerns the study of
symmetries of a vector space such as three-dimensional Euclidean space (more
generally, an infinite dimensional space) with additional structures. These
symmetries can be often thought of as algebraic structures such as groups, Lie
algebras, or associative algebras. Two cases are of particular interest: (1) the
case of sufficiently many pair-wise commuting symmetries, which is a primary
subject of study in integrable systems, and (2) the case when the underlying
vector spaces arise via generalized cohomology theories associated with
geometric moduli spaces. This project aims at resolving several open questions
pertaining to those cases through the study of shifted quantum groups; the first
surprising connections of those novel algebras to Toda-like quantum (difference)
integrable systems and quantized Coulomb branches were discovered in the recent
work of the PI.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The major theme of the proposed research
is the study of shifted quantum affine algebras and the corresponding new
structures on the quantized Coulomb branches. The project is broken down into
five parts, as follows. The first part will investigate integral forms of
shifted quantum affine algebras. One objective is to show that they map
surjectively onto quantized K-theoretic Coulomb branches and to describe
explicitly the kernel of these maps using the shuffle approach. Another
important structure to be constructed on such integral forms are coproduct
homomorphisms: these will descend to the truncated counterparts, thus quantizing
multiplications of the corresponding classical K-theoretic Coulomb branches. The
second and the third parts of the project are aimed at the construction and
study of monoidal categorification of the quantum cluster algebra structure on
quantized K-theoretic Coulomb branches via shifted quantum affine algebras, and
a construction of new vertex operator algebras via shifted affine Yangians of
gl(n). The fourth part deals with a novel approach to Lax matrices via
antidominantly shifted quantum groups. This will bring new insights into now
relatively old subject of the inverse scattering method. At the same time, it
will also emphasize an overlooked importance of antidominant shifts, leading to
a new study of Bethe subalgebras of the quantized Coulomb branches. This work
will also provide a systematic construction of Baxter Q-operators, implying
functional and TQ-relations for them. The fifth part of the project aims to
obtain Kazhdan-Lusztig type character formulas for finite-dimensional
representations of DeConcini-Kac truncated shifted quantum affine algebras at
roots of unity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.