* 2001015
* Topics in Noncommutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jian Zhang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 330,000.00

A noncommutative algebra is a fundamental concept that represents solutions to a
system of equations of several non-commuting variables. Noncommutative algebras
are frequently used to encode models for networks, communication, quantum
computing, and chemical molecules, as well as many other objects in sciences and
engineering. It is generally impossible to assess a given algebra by dealing
with its elements, while invariants of an algebra capture many key features of
the algebra. Then understanding invariants becomes extremely beneficial for
understanding different aspects of these algebras. This project focuses on new
invariants of noncommutative algebras that arise from several subjects such as
noncommutative projective geometry, category theory, combinatorics, and the
study of infinite dimensional Hopf algebras or quantum groups. The principal
investigator will involve graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns several central
topics in the field of noncommutative algebra with connections to noncommutative
geometry, combinatorics, the representation theory of quivers and category
theory. The principal investigator plans to study several invariants of
noncommutative algebras and their associated categories, to develop foundations
for new research directions, and to classify algebraic objects that describe
noncommutative spaces. Specifically the project investigates noncommutative
discriminants, Frobenius-Perron dimension, primitive cohomology, and other
effective invariants and crucial structures in noncommutative algebras, quiver
representations and tensor triangulated categories. The principal investigator
continues to search for methods for the automorphism problem, the isomorphism
problem, and different versions of the cancellation problem in noncommutative
algebra. Finally one of PI's ultimate goals is to construct new Hopf algebra
domains of Gelfand-Kirillov dimension two in positive characteristic and new
tensor triangulated structures on the quiver representations of either finite or
tame representation type. The principal investigator will train students in
fields closely related to his research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.