* 2001808
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regulating the Care Boom: Labor Standards and In-Home Care Work in Three U.S. Cities
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Ruth Milkman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 09/30/2023
* USD 15,999.00

Home-based elder care and other forms of in-home work are driving rapid job
growth in care occupations in the United States, in part because of the
country's aging population. Yet job quality in these occupations remains low,
with median wages stagnating near $11 per hour and worker rights violations
commonplace. Such work conditions exacerbate a mounting home health care labor
shortage and deepen gender and racial inequality, given that women and people of
color are disproportionately employed in this sector. The labor shortage, in
turn, hinders labor force participation among those, particularly women, who
provide care to elderly and the young. As governmental and non-governmental
actors seek to improve these conditions, one key challenge they confront is that
of implementing labor standards—a difficult task in the context of atomized
workplaces, intimate labor processes, and ambiguous employer-employee relations.
This study examines regulatory efforts to overcome those challenges and
translate labor standards on paper into improved working conditions. The
findings will provide evidence of when and how such efforts impact worker
outcomes and will inform policymakers as they work to address this unfolding
crisis in paid care work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on two
regulatory forces in the U.S.—labor unions and government-civil society
collaborations—and their impacts on employer compliance, workers’ ability to
claim their rights, and resulting work conditions in home-based care work. The
research involves an individual-level analysis of original survey data, and a
comparative analysis of New York City, San Francisco, and Seattle. Survey data
provide indicators of worker outcomes across cities, with participants recruited
primarily through targeted digital advertisements. Variations in these outcomes
will be explained through analysis of public records, administrative data, and
120 qualitative interviews with workers, employers, and policy actors. In
addition to the cross-city comparison, outcomes will be measured at two points
in time in Seattle, before and after the initial implementation of new domestic
worker regulations. Findings will demonstrate whether and how unions and
government-civil society partnerships affect labor standards enforcement in the
context of in-home care work. In doing so, the project informs sociological
theories of paid care work and workplace regulation, advancing knowledge about
the conditions under which policy change translates into substantive change in
worker outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.