* 2001231
* Flexible Optoelectronic Systems for Chronic Bi-Directional Neural Interfacing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Kwanghun Chung, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Understanding how the brain produces behavior and mental processes such as
cognitive functions is one of the major goals in neuroscience. The brain
consists of millions of neurons that are interconnected and form distinct
circuits that transmit signals in coordinated manners. To analyze how neural
circuit activity lead to behavior, neuroscientists rely on technologies to
manipulate and track signal transmission of neurons in live animals. This
project aims to develop strategies to form a novel interfacing device technology
capable of chronically stable, optical, multi-regional, and bi-directional
neural communication in behaving animals. Successful development of the flexible
neural interfacing device would enable newfound understanding of the mechanism
of human brain functions, as well as improved treatment protocols for
neuropsychological diseases such as the Parkinson’s disease. Another aim of this
project is to create a new course on bioelectronics that include intensive lab
modules on layer-transfer processes for thin-film electronic devices, aimed at
providing K-12 to graduate students opportunities to apply textbook theories to
research laboratory settings or industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state-of-
the-art neurotechnologies rely on optical fibers or miniaturized microscopes to
deliver light to and from the animal’s brain, which is engineered to produce
proteins that make neurons interact with light at specific wavelengths. The two
approaches, however, suffer problems such as poor resolution and inability to
interact with neurons in deep brain regions, respectively, which limit their
potential for brain-wide interfacing. This project aims to address these issues
by developing a novel semiconductor-based optical brain-machine interface via
the heterointegration of thin-film III-V optoelectronic devices in flexible
geometries. Integration of freestanding, single-crystalline layers of micro-LEDs
and photodetectors can yield a novel device platform capable of simultaneous
optogenetic neuromodulation and functional recording in behaving mouse brains.
The development of such technology requires wide range of skillset including the
design, epitaxial growth, layer-transfer, and micro-fabrication of the neural
probe, as well as in vivo demonstration including surgical implantation,
input/output interconnection, optical stimulation and recording, and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.