* 2001318
* Tensor Categories and Representations of Quantized Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Pavel Etingof, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2025
* USD 418,352.00

Representation theory is a study of symmetries of space, such as our
3-dimensional space, or, more generally, a space with any (even infinite number)
of dimensions. In this theory, symmetries are represented by linear
transformations of this space, or, more explicitly, by matrices. Thus, a
representation of a given symmetry structure is basically a collection of
matrices which satisfy a certain natural system of nonlinear equations. The
equations are determined by the exact type of symmetry structure we are
representing - a group, a Lie algebra, or an associative algebra.
Representations of a given structure themselves form a quite intricate and rich
structure, which encodes relations (or mappings) between different
representations. This higher-level structure is called the category of
representations. For some type of structures (e.g. for groups, Lie algebras,
quantum groups), representations can be multiplied; in this case the
corresponding categories are tensor categories (as multiplication of
representations is similar to multiplication of tensors). It turns out that the
notion of a tensor category is very interesting in its own right, and that many
tensor categories don't arise as categories of representations. The PI will
investigate ordinary and tensor categories, some of which arise as
representation categories and some of which don't, as well as the connections
between them. In particular, complex rank generalizations of representation
categories proposed by P. Deligne will be investigated. Roughly speaking, this
is a generalization in which the number of elements of a set or rows of a matrix
is allowed to be non-integer. This seemingly nonsensical setting becomes
meaningful and useful when the invariants one is interested in turn out to be
polynomials of the number of elements or rows, which is often true. The PI will
also investigate quantizations of singular symplectic varieties, for instance
symplectic resolutions. These are non-commutative algebras that appear in
certain kinds of quantum field theories of recent interest as algebras of
quantum observables. This project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
research on: tensor categories; quantum groups; representation theory in complex
rank; cherednik algebras; short star-products on quantizations; analytic
approach to Geometric Langlands program. The plan of PI's work is as follows. 1.
Develop a theory of Frobenius functors for symmetric tensor categories in
characteristic p and Frobenius exact &lt;br/&gt;categories; classify exact
factorizations of fusion categories, in particular twisted Deligne products;
classify fiber functors and module categories over the representation category
of the small quantum group; compute the semisimplification of the category of
tilting modules for a reductive group in small characteristic, and use it to
compute the dimensions of tilting modules modulo p; prove quasi-motivicity of
representations of braid groups arising from braided fusion categories;
construct new symmetric tensor categories in characteristic p&gt;2 similar to
the Etingof-Benson categories in characteristic 2; compute cohomology of these
categories; develop Lie theory in the Verlinde category; develop a theory of
symplectic reflection fusion categories; continue to develop the theory of
actions of finite dimensional Hopf algebras on division algebras (in particular,
fields); classify unipotent tensor categories. Work on a discrete analog of the
monodromy theorem of Toledano Laredo for the Casimir connection, using dynamical
Weyl groups, Study signatures of representations of quantum groups for |q|=1. 2.
Continue to develop the ideas of P. Deligne, and extend representation theories
of various classical structures (containing the symmetric group S_n or classical
Lie groups GL(n),O(n),Sp(2n)) to complex values of the rank parameter n. These
structures will include degenerate affine Hecke algebras, rational and
trigonometric Cherednik algebras, symplectic reflection algebras, real reductive
Lie groups (i.e., symmetric pairs), Lie superalgebras, affine Lie algebras,
(parabolic) category O for reductive Lie algebras, Yangians, and other
structures. Compute reducibility loci and obtain various character formulas and
signature formulas in these representation theories, and answer various other
representation theoretic questions which are known to be interesting in the
classical setting. 3. Work on the representation theory of double Yangians, the
theory of elliptic algebras, representations of cyclotomic Cherednik algebras,
signatures of representations of Cherednik algebras, representations of
Cherednik algebras in positive characteristic, direct and inverse image functors
for Cherednik algebras. 4. Continue to develop the theory of short star-products
on filtered quantizations. 5. Continue to work with E. Frenkel and D. Kazhdan on
an analytic approach to the geometric Langlands
correspondence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.