* 2001484
* W-Algebras and Universal Objects in Vertex Algebra Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Andrew Linshaw, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2023
* USD 165,802.00

Many structures and concepts that were inspired by physics have had a profound
influence on mathematics during the last half century. For example, stringy
invariants of manifolds such as quantum cohomology have led to spectacular
advances in enumerative geometry. On the algebraic side, a fundamental new
structure called a vertex operator algebra (VOA) emerged from quantum field
theory in the 1980s, and was axiomatized by Borcherds in his work on the
Moonshine Conjecture. VOAs are natural generalizations of commutative rings, and
in the last thirty years, they have found applications in a diverse range of
subjects including finite group theory, representation theory, combinatorics,
number theory, and algebraic geometry. In this project, the PI will investigate
the structure and representation theory of VOAs, as well as some connections
between VOAs and algebraic geometry. These projects will advance the subject and
provide educational and collaborative opportunities for the PI's current and
former graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the PI's work on the coset
realization of principal W-algebras of A, D, and E types resolved a 30-year-old
conjecture which had been a key starting assumption in physics. It has many
striking corollaries such as the unitarity of all discrete series
representations of principal W-algebras, and the existence of modular tensor
categories of modules for affine VOAs at admissible levels. The PI will
construct coset realizations of principal W-algebras of other Lie types, as well
as non-principal W-algebras and W-superalgebras. Second, the PI recently
constructed a universal two-parameter VOA which interpolates between all the
type A principal W-algebras, in the sense that they arise as one-parameter
quotients of this structure. The PI will construct more general universal
objects, which are VOAs defined over the ring of functions on some variety X.
Typically, interesting VOAs are obtained by specializing the universal object
along certain subvarieties of X, and unexpected isomorphisms of these VOAs
correspond to intersection points on these subvarieties. Third, the PI will
study two affine schemes that have been attached to a VOA by Arakawa: the
associated scheme and the singular support. There is always a closed embedding
of the singular support in the arc space of the associated scheme. The PI will
investigate good criteria for this embedding to be an isomorphism. This has many
applications in VOA theory and is connected to questions about the geometry of
arc spaces that are of independent interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.