* 2001096
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Exploring the Boundaries of Large-Scale Secure Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Rafail Ostrovsky, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 324,000.00

As the capability and connectivity of communication networks scale up, existing
secure distributed protocols need to resort to a frugal use of their
communication resources to ensure their scalability. Secure multi-party
computation (MPC), which allows a set of mutually distrustful parties to perform
arbitrary computations on their joint inputs in a secure way, even in the
presence of malicious participants and attackers, epitomizes such kind of secure
distributed computation, and despite great improvements in all communication
metrics over the last decade, existing solutions do not scale well in settings
where a large number of participants are involved. One of the reasons is that in
standard MPC protocols every party needs to directly communicate will all other
parties, yielding protocols with high communication costs. Recently, some
attempts to address this issue were made to carry out MPC with lower
communication costs. The project's impacts are to put forth a systematic study
of this type of MPC protocols, which we call "Communication-Frugal MPC" (CF-
MPC), and to advance its theoretical foundations to meet the state of the art
comparable to standard MPC. In an era where computation on large data has become
a dominant application, such exploration is of central importance in both theory
and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's novelties include: (1)
Development of a rigorous and composable cryptographic model for capturing CF-
MPC; (2) feasibility study of CF-MPC with optimal resiliency (i.e., the maximal
number of potentially malicious participants that can be tolerated) across all
standard communication and adversary models (synchronous vs asynchronous, and
static vs adaptive); and (3) improved constructions on additional communication
metrics such as message, bit, and round complexity. The project will train
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.