* 2001490
* Collaborative Research to Explore the Spatial/Temporal Statistical-Physical Structures of Rain in the Vertical Plane
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Michael Larsen, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 399,196.00

A good understanding of rain in time and space is important for improved public
safety and productivity. With regard to public safety, this means better water
control designs for reducing the impact of flooding from smaller urban to larger
regional scales as well as for improved spatial and temporal warnings of
flooding in order to reduce damage and fatalities. With regard to productivity
in rural areas, such information has the potential for reducing the impacts of
soil erosion through the better design of field run-off and water storage. In
more urban areas, productivity depends in part upon good wireless communication.
However, the advent of 5G wireless networks will be more subject to signal loss
due to rain, a loss that also depends upon the largely unknown spatial structure
of rainfall particularly above the ground. All of these improvements, however,
depend upon the proper translation of radar measurements and numerical model
outputs to many different scales. This in turn requires that radar measurements
above the ground as well as numerical model products be correctly transferred to
what appears at the surface where people live. This, then, is a central
objective of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically with regard to
the science, this project allows a more complete description of rain structure
in a multi-dimensional context including height with the additional benefit of
developing a better multi-dimensional understanding of drop interactions and
evolution. Furthermore, the project is directed toward a more comprehensive
investigation into the prevalence and the importance of statistical homogeneity
in all three spatial dimensions as well as in time. Statistical homogeneity is
important for the proper scaling of rainfall measurements, but, of course, not
all rain is statistically homogeneous. However, it often appears that when the
data are statistically heterogeneous, such data may be subdivided into
statistically homogeneous sections which can then be properly treated
analytically. This project develops this approach. In addition, wind tower
measurements as well as simultaneous measurements between two 2DVD disdrometers
will be used to explore further the reported deviations of drop fall speeds from
their nominal terminal values both aloft and at the surface. This is potentially
quite important for the proper understanding of the evolution of
rain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.