* 2001064
* Minimal Free Resolutions and Syzygies
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Irena Peeva, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2023
* USD 272,325.00

A core goal in the mathematical areas Algebraic Geometry and Commutative Algebra
deals with understanding the solutions of a system of polynomial equations,
possibly in a large number of variables and with a large number of equations.
The solution set forms a geometric object. The main idea is to study the rich
and beautiful interplay between its geometric and algebraic properties. Closely
related to this is the concept of a free resolution, which was introduced by the
famous mathematician David Hilbert in two papers in 1890 and 1893. Constructing
a free resolution amounts to repeatedly solving systems of polynomial equations.
The study of these objects flourished in the second half of the twentieth
century, and has seen spectacular progress recently. The field is very broad,
with strong connections and applications to other mathematical areas and string
theory. Recent computational methods have made it possible to compute some free
resolutions by computer. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main research goal in this
project is to make significant progress in understanding the structure of free
resolutions and their numerical invariants. The main research topics
are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) The structure of minimal free resolutions of binomial edge
ideals with a quadratic initial ideal in a polynomial ring. The project is
inspired by a conjecture of Ene, Herzog, and Hibi, that the graded Betti numbers
of such an ideal coincide with the graded Betti numbers of its quadratic initial
ideal (with respect to the lex order). &lt;br/&gt;(2) The structure of infinite
minimal free resolutions of lexicographic ideals in Clements-Lindstrom quotient
rings, which will be studied using the methods recently introduced by Eisenbud
and Peeva in their research monograph "Minimal free resolutions over complete
intersections‚Äù.&lt;br/&gt;(3) The PI plans to explore a new area of research:
minimal free resolutions of binomial edge ideals over exterior algebras.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to train graduate students in her research
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.