* 2001187
* Understanding the Burst of Hydroxyl Radicals (OH) in Newly Formed Cloud Droplets
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Suzanne Paulson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 514,307.00

Aerosol particles and aerosol-cloud interactions remain one of the least
constrained aspects in global climate modeling and prediction efforts. To help
increase current understanding, the PI seeks to characterize reaction mechanisms
in aerosol particles that have shown recently to produce light-induced initial
bursts of the most oxidizing species, hydroxyl radical (OH). Focus will be on
trace metals and organic peroxides, latter of which represent a new class of
molecules to be studied in this context. Results from ambient aerosol analyses,
laboratory simulations and chamber experiments will inform parametrization of OH
production for incorporation into larger scale climate models.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at increasing understanding of mechanisms of
atmospheric production of OH in cloud droplets. The work is motivated by the
PI’s observation of an initial and substantial burst in OH production when
exposing aerosols to near-UV radiation. Identifying new OH sources in cloud
droplets has important and potentially transformative implications on many
chemical and physical atmospheric processes that affect global climate and human
health. The three-pronged experimental approach consists of measuring OH
production in (i) collected and chemically analyzed ambient aerosols of various
types; (ii) controlled laboratory experiments using a series of synthesized
(hydro)peroxides, trace metals, and varying pH, conductivity, and wavelength;
and (iii) chamber generated aerosol particles. A new semi-portable instrument
(direct-to liquid OH analyzer) is sought to be developed that allows aerosols to
grow to droplets that are collected and analyzed for OH formation on the time
scale of tens of minutes to hours. Chemical kinetic modeling of results from all
components of the experimental approach will be used to derive rate constants
and parametrization for implementation in larger scale models. Two graduate
students will receive training through this project, and a number of
undergraduate students from underrepresented populations will be recruited from
existing programs on the PI’s campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.