* 2001789
* CICI: SSC: Real-Time Operating System and Network Security for Scientific Middleware
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Gedare Bloom, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 03/31/2024
* USD 766,079.00

Remote monitoring and control of industrial control systems are protected using
firewalls and user passwords. Cyberattacks that get past firewalls have
unfettered access to command industrial control systems with potential to harm
digital assets, environmental resources, and humans in proximity to the
compromised system. To prevent and mitigate such harms in scientific industrial
control systems, this project enhances the security of open-source
cyberinfrastructure used for high energy physics, astronomy, and space sciences.
The results of this project enhance the security of scientific instruments used
in particle accelerators, large-scale telescopes, satellites, and space probes.
The benefits to science and the public include greater confidence in the
fidelity of experimental data collected from these scientific instruments, and
increased reliability of scientific cyberinfrastructure that reduces the costs
associated with accidental misconfigurations or malicious
cyberattacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to enhance
the security of the open-source Real-Time Executive for Multiprocessor Systems
(RTEMS) real-time operating system and the Experimental Physics and Industrial
Control System (EPICS) software and networks; RTEMS and EPICS are widely used
cyberinfrastructure for controlling scientific instruments. The security
enhancements span eight related project activities: (1) static analysis and
security fuzzing as part of continuous integration; (2) cryptographic security
for the open-source software development life cycle; (3) secure boot and update
for remotely-managed scientific instruments; (4) open-source cryptographic
libraries for secure communication; (5) real-time memory protection; (6) formal
modeling and analysis of network protocols; (7) enhanced security event logging;
and (8) network-based intrusion detection for scientific industrial control
systems. The project outcomes provide a roadmap for enculturating cybersecurity
best practices in open-source, open-science communities while advancing the
state-of-the-art research in cyberinfrastructure software engineering and
industrial control system security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.