* 2001611
* NSF Center for Sustainable Nanotechnology
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2025
* USD 12,000,000.00

The NSF Center for Sustainable Nanotechnology (CSN) seeks to understand how
nanoparticles, particles that are at least 10,000 times smaller than the width
of a human hair, transform and interact in and with water and biological
systems. Nanoparticles can vary in elemental composition, structure, and
properties, which makes them useful for industries ranging from electronics, to
batteries, to cosmetics. As nanoparticle use becomes more widespread, however,
they are appearing in the environment. When nanoparticles are incorporated into
biological systems they may induce unusual behavior that is beneficial or
harmful, but is as of yet poorly understood. For instance, due to their small
size, some nanoparticles can easily pass through some cell membranes. With very
high surface area to volume ratios, nanoparticles can also be highly reactive,
which may trigger chemical changes in the environment or to the nanoparticle
itself. The CSN applies a "make, measure, model" strategy to develop new
functional nanomaterials with increased sustainability and reduced biological
impact. Expertise with synthetic methods, in situ analytical techniques, and
computational methods is leveraged to understand, predict, and control
nanoparticle properties and their chemical interactions with the environment and
biological systems. The CSN addresses key knowledge gaps in the areas of
nanoparticle properties which will result in better prediction of specific
nanoparticle chemical properties and their biological interactions. This will
ultimately serve the national interest by allowing for the design of more
effective and more benign nanoparticles for many applications. Some of the
systems the CSN investigates include: transition metal oxides and phosphates and
two-dimensional quantum materials; gold, diamond and silicon based nanoparticles
with defined organic and inorganic surface coatings; and as well as emerging
nanoparticle compositions that exhibit fundamental new science and utility, such
as those based on polymeric carbon dots, and nanovacancies in nanodiamond. This
integrated, multi-institutional, and collaborative team involves researchers
from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, University of Minnesota, Boston
University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Johns Hopkins University, Augsburg
University, University of California-Riverside, University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee, University of Iowa, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
University of Maryland Baltimore County, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory,
and the Connecticut Agricultural Experimental Station. The Center has a strong
innovation component that involves the translation of research results into
intellectual property, as well as other collaborations with several industrial
partners. The CSN has an inclusive and transparent management approach that
enables a positive Center climate and facilitates the integration of student
learning across Center activities. Students broaden and deepen their technical
expertise and grant writing through student laboratory exchanges and seed grant
opportunities. The CSN places special emphasis on communication training.
Example mechanisms to develop student communication skills are the popular
Sustainable Nano Blog, http://sustainable-nano.com/, and the Spanish language-
based Nano Sostenible Blog, http://nano-sostenible.com/. These are key
components of the Center's informal science communication efforts, and students
have ample opportunity to participate in these educational websites. Webinars on
fostering technical innovation, internship opportunities, and opportunities to
serve on the advisory board are mechanisms through which students further
develop their professional skill sets. The CSN is committed to broadening
participation efforts and incorporates summer research experiences for
undergraduates and veterans, and relationships with minority-serving
institutions, primarily undergraduate institutions, and community colleges as
ways to address inclusivity. The strong focus on the CSN climate helps to ensure
all participants feel welcomed, valued, and supported. Partnerships with the
University of Puerto Rico at Cayey and Rio Piedras, the University of Texas Rio
Grand Valley, Tuskegee University, and Georgia State University help to ensure
that a diverse group of students can participate in the CSN where they develop
not only the skills mentioned above, but also an understanding of the need to
approach questions in chemistry with an awareness of sustainability,
inclusivity, and interdisciplinarity. The CSN experience will prepare
participants to make unique future contributions as members of the chemical
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSN organizes their goals along four focus
areas. One area focuses on establishing nanoparticle structureâ€“function
relationships. Chemical composition, size, shape, and organic or inorganic
surface modifications are investigated with a combination of computational and
experimental approaches. Transition metal oxides, nanoparticles comprised of
earth-abundant elements, and nanoparticles that demonstrate novel properties or
new utility are focal points. A second area of investigation centers on
understanding nanoparticle transformations that occur in the environment and in
biological media. Chemical changes in the nanoparticle core, the roles of
inorganic and organic ions to impact nanoparticle stability, and surface
structure are some of the areas explored. The third CSN thrust area explores
nanoparticle coatings, referred to as coronas, formed by their exposure to the
environment or biological systems at aqueous interfaces as a function of time.
Analytical and computational approaches are developed to characterize and model
the chemical nature and formation mechanisms of nanoparticle coronas. The fourth
area is a chemistry-focused investigation of the physicochemical properties of
nanoparticles and their interactions with biological systems. Nanoparticles with
well-defined composition, structure, and surface chemistry are used to
correlate, better understand, and predict nanoparticle physicochemical
properties, spatial and temporal interactions at biological surfaces, and the
direct or indirect effects on molecular interactions in cells and organisms. The
CSN enriches the chemistry community by providing new tools for characterizing
chemical processes at nanoparticle surfaces and by developing experimentally
validated computational methods to predict the molecular-level behavior of
complex materials in aqueous media. CSN participants are engaged in activities
aimed at facilitating the creation and dissemination of knowledge, enhancing
innovation and translation of research products and outcomes to the commercial
sector, and providing unique education and training opportunities for students
and postdoctoral researchers from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.