* 2001012
* Study of Magmatic and Hydrothermal Processes in an Ultramafic Setting (Rainbow, Mid-Atlantic Ridge) Using Advanced Seismic Modeling and Imaging
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Hanchao Jian, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 398,244.00

The ocean crust is created at Mid-Ocean Ridges as magmas rise from the mantle
and cool. In order to cool this melt, seawater penetrates the ocean crust,
resulting in many chemical changes of both the rocks of the crust as well as the
oceans. Thus, “hydrothermal” fluid flow is a primary mechanism for mass and heat
transfer between the deep Earth and the oceans, accounting for approximately one
third of the global yearly heat loss. Of particular interest are hydrothermal
systems hosted in rocks that were brought up from the deeper mantle, so-called
“ultramafic” rocks due to their composition. This is because: (1) the mechanisms
that produce such mantle exposures are not fully understood; (2) there is
potential for these ultramafic rocks to sequester CO2 sequestration; and (3) the
fluids resulting from hydration of ultramafic rocks can create unique chemical
environments that are important for biology on earth. This project will use an
existing dataset acquired in 2013 that probes the subsurface of such an
ultramafic exposure beneath an active hydrothermal system along the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge. This project will serve the national interest by promoting the progress
of science, in particular by investigating the linkages and interactions between
mantle rocks, fluids, and (sub)surface ecosystems. This is a major scientific
goal of the geoscience community and its importance has been highlighted in
science plans providing guidance to scientists, funding agencies and policy
makers, such as the IODP Science Plan for 2013-2023 or The National Academy of
Sciences Sea Change 2015-2025 Decadal Survey of Ocean Sciences Report. This
project will support a postdoctoral investigator, providing an opportunity for
developing the early career of an independent scientist, and contributing to the
new generation of geoscientists with expertise in advanced seismic imaging
techniques. Such expertise is of great importance for the US industries in the
field of exploration and production of natural resources. By making use of
existing seismic datasets, this project will also leverage previous NSF
investments in marine seismic acquisition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will conduct a multi-scale advanced seismic modeling and imaging study
of a subset of a seismic data collected in 2013. These data were collected as
part of the NSF-funded MARINER experiment in the Rainbow massif of the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge. The dataset includes active-source long-streamer seismic
reflection data, ocean bottom seismometer wide-angle data, and a microseismicity
catalog. The approach will consist of (1) downward continuation and travel-time
tomography, yielding intermediate resolution models of the P-wave velocity
structure; (2) elastic full waveform inversion, yielding high-resolution models
of the P-wave velocity structure; (3) reverse time migration, yielding
geometrically accurate, high fidelity seismic reflection images; and (4) micro-
earthquake tomography, yielding a km-scale regional 3-D model of the S-wave
velocity structure. These models and images will be used to investigate the
physical properties of magmatic rocks within the oceanic crust. They will help
to quantify their partially molten or solidified state, and how they are linked
to active and inactive hydrothermal fields. Furthermore, the models and images
will illuminate fluid pathways and small-scale faulting, potential connecting
the seafloor hydrothermal fields to the magmatic system at depth. The results,
when jointly interpreted with existing seafloor geology observations, seafloor
sampling and near-bottom imagery from previous studies will provide a
comprehensive understanding of the role of magmatism and other geological
controls on hydrothermal activity in regions of mantle exposures along mid-ocean
ridges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.