* 2001018
* I-Corps: A Mobile-Based Opioid Overdose Alerting System
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Jeremy Cushman, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
smart wearable monitor capable of delivering clinical-grade measurements of lung
function (e.g., tidal volume, forced expiratory volume, minute ventilation,
etc.). However, while suitable for in-hospital care, the current solutions
present drawbacks in the delivery of telecare and self-management. The value
proposition of this project is to present a non-invasive continuous pulmonary
function monitor for persons with an acute or chronic respiratory illness to
self-manage, monitor, or prevent exacerbations of their illness. This monitor
would be implemented as a stretchable, wearable sensor that estimates changes in
the size of the ribcage from breathing. The development of such a technology has
significant potential for reducing fatal opioid overdoses, asthma- and COPD-
related emergency department visits, and support pulmonary rehabilitation
delivered via telemedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to
explore the commercial potential for a wireless single-band stretchable silicone
sensor, which when worn around the chest is capable of measuring tidal volume
from which other measures of lung function can be derived (e.g., forced
expiratory volume, minute ventilation, etc.). Currently, lung function testing,
spirometry, capnometry, respiratory inductance plethysmography, and pulse
oximetry are the clinical standard for vital monitoring and assessing lung
function. Until now, respiratory inductance plethysmography monitors, which
requires two bands â€“ a chest-worn and abdomen worn band, is the least invasive
technology for tidal volume monitoring. Pulse oximetry is an inferior technology
for the early detection of respiratory distress (or colloquially, shortness of
breath) because changes in oxygenation take time. In contrast, for example,
respiratory depression can be quickly detected by changes in tidal volume.
However, capnography and respiratory inductance plethysmography monitors, which
are capable of monitoring tidal volume, are cumbersome and ill-suited for use
outside a clinical setting.New evidence has now demonstrated that by measuring
the change in circumference of the ribcage, you can estimate tidal volume with
high fidelity using a stretchable sensor capable of confirming to the body.
Integrating this sensor technology into a wearable device with a wireless sensor
module has the potential to unlock new avenues for telehealth monitoring and
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.