* 2001724
* Investigating the Barriers to Retention and Tenure for Black and Hispanic Engineering Faculty at R1 Institutions
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Henry Tran, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The purpose of this project is to identify factors that facilitate or impede
progress toward tenure for Black and Hispanic engineering faculty (BHEF) on the
tenure track at four-year Research1 (R1) Institutions of Higher Education (IHE)
and how those factors contribute to faculty retention and/or turnover. This
project seeks to uncover how departments that do well in retaining BHEF might
operate differently from those that do not. The objectives are to (a)
empirically explore the link between faculty socialization and BHEF tenure and
retention, (b) better understand the “push/pull” (i.e., promote/impede) factors
that affect that relationship, and (c) how those factors look in
IHEs/engineering departments that retain their BHEF when compared to those that
do not. This research will provide greater insight into how to retain
underrepresented BHEF in the critical field of engineering. When talented BHEF
are tenured, institutions are better positioned to develop a diverse, globally
competitive, next generation of engineers. This in turn, contributes to
increased economic competitiveness in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Scholars maintain that socialization (i.e., the norms and values
transmitted) is largely responsible for the non-inclusive departmental
environments that spur higher rates of attrition for underrepresented minority
faculty. However, this theory has not been robustly examined. A sequential mixed
methods design will be employed to address three research questions. Phase One
explores, “What are the factors that facilitate and/or impede progress towards
tenure among pre-tenured BHEF at four-year R1 institutions?” and includes a
national survey to all professors of engineering at R1 higher education
institutions nationally to determine the relationship between diversity climate
and faculty turnover intentions. Diversity climate will be measured by the
Diversity Climate Perceptions scale (Mor Barak et al., 1998) and the Diversity
Promise scale (Chrobot-Mason, 2003), while turnover intentions will be measured
by the TI-6 instrument (Shore &amp; Martin, 1989). The initial results will be
disaggregated by sub-disciplines, (e.g., civil, electrical) to determine any
potential differences in engineering subfields. Phase Two addresses two research
questions: “How do the factors that facilitate and/or impede progress towards
tenure operate in contributing to faculty retention or turnover?” and “How do
IHEs/engineering departments that retain BHEF socialize their faculty
differently from those that do not?” The results of the phase one survey will be
used to identify the sample of late pre-tenure professors (self-identified as
Black or Hispanic) from which to recruit participants for follow-up interviews
over a two-year period. The investigators will examine the rationale and factors
influencing decisions to remain in or depart from the professoriate; and if they
depart, where they have gone and what they plan to do. In addition to
identifying supports and barriers to tenure for BHEF, this research is expected
to reveal ways to mitigate the exclusionary effect of barriers to better sustain
the diversification of engineering faculty, as well as provide insights to
create inclusive IHE/departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.