* 2001470
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Classical and quantum algorithms for number-theoretic problems arising in cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Sean Hallgren, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project is concerned with questions in several areas of cryptography. Since
currently used cryptosystems can be broken by a quantum computer it is important
to develop alternatives to these systems that are resistant to quantum
computers. This project will address the classical and post-quantum security of
some systems based on supersingular isogenies and of some lattice-based systems
that have been proposed as replacements for currently used systems. There seems
to be some urgency to achieve this: there has been continued progress in
building quantum computers, and it takes several years to design, build, and
deploy a new quantum secure infrastructure. Another part of the project deals
with making cryptosystems more efficient. These are important practical
questions. In addition this project will provide research training opportunities
for graduate students. For the educational component, the PI and co-PI will
teach middle school girls and students at local high schools about cryptography
and its mathematical background. The PI's involvement in groups of women
mathematicians will provide support and mentoring for underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project is concerned with the
classical and post-quantum security of the key-exchange and signature schemes
that are based on isogenies of elliptic curves. Several different schemes have
been proposed, and one goal is to analyze and compare the underlying hardness
assumptions of the different schemes. The project will also address the
possibility of generalizing these schemes from supersingular elliptic curves to
supersingular abelian varieties of dimension 2. The second part is concerned
with making systems that are currently being used more efficient. This will
involve finding more efficient algorithms for constructing curves. The last part
studies the security of some lattice-based systems. The lattice-based
cryptosystem called ``Soliloquy'' was recently broken by a quantum computer. It
is important to determine if other lattice-based systems, such as systems based
on Ring-LWE, can be broken by quantum computers as well. The Ring-LWE problem is
significant because a number of cryptographic constructions, including fully
homomorphic encryption, can be based on it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.