* 2001654
* CNH2-L: The Dynamics of Socio-Environmental Systems, Urban Depopulation, and Societal Stability
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Arion Mayes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,543,393.00

The project will bring together a transdisciplinary team of scientists to
address one of the most compelling questions in archaeology: was the Classic-
period collapse caused by environmental change? This period of dramatic social
change involved the collapse of rulers and ruling institutions as well as the
depopulation of cities and, in some cases, entire regions. For decades,
archaeologists and paleoecologists have debated the role of environmental change
in the collapse but have had difficulty in establishing causal connections
between environmental and social change. Much of the debate over the causes and
consequences of environmental change results from the lack of transdisciplinary
projects designed to address the specific ways in which environmental change
impacted social and environmental systems. Such a transdisciplinary approach is
crucial for demonstrating the causes of societal collapse, making the project
transformative for research on political collapse more generally. This project
includes STEM education and educator development; increased public scientific
literacy and engagement, support of full participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM research, and development of a diverse,
globally competitive STEM workforce. STEM education will involve development of
educational resources for students in K12 to college. Public scientific literacy
and engagement will be facilitated through the continued development of a
bilingual website, and through workshops for host communities. Meaningful
research experiences will be provided to twelve undergraduate and graduate
students, many of whom are women and members of underrepresented minorities in
STEM. Collaborations will enhance transdisciplinary approaches to understanding
societal collapse and environmental change, and forge new collaborations for
future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates archaeological,
geoarchaeological, paleoecological, paleoclimatological, and bioarchaeological
fieldwork and laboratory analyses designed to test hypotheses concerning the
role of environmental change and human impact on the environment in societal
collapse. Prior research on the Classic-period collapse has tended to focus on
specific sites or small regions. This study focusses on two interrelated, but
contrasting, ecological regions: a semi-tropical lowland and a temperate
highland region. This innovative comparative approach to societal collapse
allows for the examination of the human and environmental components of the
socio-environmental system and their interrelationships that promote or inhibit
resilience and vulnerabilities to societal collapse in the two regions.
Archaeological excavations at the two sites will examine the impact of
environmental and landscape degradation on land use, domestic economy, and human
health and diet during the Late Classic and Early Postclassic periods.
Geoarchaeological research will examine changes in land use and landscape
degradation by focusing on agricultural terraces while floodplain geomorphologic
analysis will examine human and climatological impacts on the river system. Lake
sediment cores and their biological and chemical signatures will be investigated
to determine environmental change and human landscape impacts. Chronological
precision will be achieved through a combination of radiocarbon, paleomagnetism,
and optically stimulated luminescence dating, while chronological modeling will
more effectively link the diverse datasets. By combining these different
datasets, this research will provide a novel detailed paleoclimatological record
for the study region. The results will provide a long-term perspective on
current and future problems facing humanity by contributing to models of long-
term environmental change and human impacts on the environment with implications
for future land use planning and resource management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.