* 2001288
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Building a global consortium of bryophytes and lichens: keystones of cryptobiotic communities
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Arthur Shaw, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 187,210.00

This collaborative project comprised of ten awards will integrate information
about bryophytes and lichens, with each other and with their commensal
organisms, including fungi, on a worldwide scale. Bryophytes and lichens are
functionally related as the main hosts for cryptobiotic communities forming
minute "forests" that provide a matrix of habitats for many microscopic
organisms, including tardigrades, mites, rotifers, micro-mollusks, microalgae,
microfungi, and prokaryotes. These communities have global relevance and perform
essential functions on our planet, for example, the biological soil crusts that
harbor these communities form a "living skin" covering approximately 12% of
Earth's terrestrial surface. In addition, professional training will be provided
for a large number of undergraduates, with a focus on leveraging local resources
to promote underrepresented students in STEM fields. Students will be trained in
digitization and collections management, and will contribute to the education
and public outreach components of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
this collaboration, twenty-five US herbaria will image and digitize associated
metadata for almost 1.2 million bryophyte and lichen herbarium specimens held in
US institutions. Imaging the physical specimens of these organisms and
integrating data from comparative genomics, nucleotide sequence data, and other
resources is unprecedented on this scale. These integrated data will form a
critical resource for evolutionary and ecological studies, that may, in turn,
lead to a deeper understanding of (1) how biocrusts perform their ecosystem
functions, (2) the roles of bryophytes and lichens in carbon/nitrogen cycling,
(3) the dynamic evolution of symbioses in space and time, (4) the historical and
contemporary drivers of endophyte co-diversification, and (5) the evolution of
biodiversity using spatial phylogenetics. Deep-learning approaches using
repurposed digital images may also provide powerful new investigative tools.
Digitized data will be shared with iDigBio.org and other repositories. A multi-
pronged approach to broader impacts spans from K-12 to participatory citizen
science initiatives. These include (1) diverse digital, interactive, and object-
based learning outreach programs; (2) online lesson plans; (3) science youth
groups; (4) Science Clubs and public educator workshops; and (5) a series of
videos using Learning Glass â€“ which collapses the perspectives of viewer and
presenter into one shared perspective. In addition, the PIs and collaborating
institutions will host WeDigBio and K-12 clubs hosting label transcription
crowdsourcing events during the award period. The project also partners with
Zooniverse, leaders in online citizen science, where we will develop an online
platform for citizen scientists to make observations on character traits that
can then enhance metadata not always on the scientific label
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.