* 2001358
* Digitiation PEN: Augmenting the Endless Forms TCN: digitization of imperiled plants with unique morphological adaptations
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Mare Nazaire, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,959.00

Only 36 areas on earth contain almost half of the world’s plant diversity.
Biodiversity hotspots occupy only 2.3% of the earth’s land surface but harbor a
high proportion of endemic species and house most undescribed plant diversity.
An important biotic component of biodiversity hotspots include plants with
unusual morphologies, such as succulence, carnivory, and epiphytism. These
plants are highly adapted to live in extreme environments but face serious
threats of extinction due to changing climate and land use regimes. This project
partners the Herbarium at Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden (RSA) with the Endless
Forms Project, a Thematic Collections Network (TCN) involving 17 institutions
aimed at digitizing nearly 2 million herbarium specimens from 15 plant families
with unusual adaptations. Collections targeted for this project are emblematic
of the unique strengths of RSA and will add immeasurably to the Endless Forms
TCN. This partnership fills an important gap by adding 70,100 herbarium
specimens representing all families, some of which are especially diverse
(cacti, agave, spurge) in California, a world biodiversity hotspot. Digitization
will promote scientific investigation and public understanding of these
potentially imperiled plants, and through public databases, will provide access
to a rich source of specimen data. Graduate and undergraduate students will make
up 90% of the workforce and participate in all aspects of the project. This
project will enhance RSA’s existing internship program through increased
participation of students from Hispanic Serving Institutions in the Greater Los
Angeles metropolitan area. Through coordinated efforts with California
Polytechnic University, Pomona (a Hispanic Serving Institution), undergraduate
students will barcode specimens as partial fulfillment of course objectives. An
exhibit will highlight plants of the Endless Forms project, including
digitization activities and student participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding
of the Endless Forms TCN was based on the unique value of digitizing plants that
exhibit extreme morphologies, such as succulence, carnivory, and epiphytism,
that can be used increase our understanding of how these plants have adapted to
extreme environments and how changing climate regimes may impact future
distributions. This project will add immeasurably to the Endless Forms TCN’s
endeavor with the digitization of 70,100 unique specimens held at the RSA
Herbarium. Important and TCN-relevant collections for the 15 families with
unusual morphologies included for digitization are well represented in the RSA
Herbarium, both in geographic breadth and taxonomic diversity, and owe
significantly to the contributions of several noteworthy researchers affiliated
with RSA who specialize on these plants. Digitization of these specimens will
result in high-resolution images and georeferenced collection locations that
will enable the potential discovery of species new to science, new distribution
and phenology data, and increased access to a rich source of specimen data
currently unavailable to the research community, students, and the public. Data
capture, efficient workflow development, and dissemination of data will adhere
to established guidelines as specified by the Endless Forms TCN. A large cadre
of students at different levels in their academic career will participate in all
aspects of the project, including data entry, imaging, and georeferencing. All
data resulting from this project will be made available through the national
resource (iDigBio.org). Additional information about RSA, its outreach
activities, and the results of this project is available at
calbg.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.