* 2001043
* CSEDI: Collaborative Research: Experimental Partitioning of Highly Siderophile Elements at Ultratrace Level for Understanding the Conditions of Core Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Michael Krawczynski, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 04/30/2024
* USD 136,725.00

Gold, platinum, osmium, irridium, ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, and rhenium
(known collectively as highly siderophile elements) are among the rarest
elements available to mankind. Their widespread use in technology and the arts
results in a high cost. It also justifies extensive mining, which has a high
environmental and human health impact. The reason for their scarcity is that
they were scavenged into the core when Earth separated into a silicate outer
layer (mantle and crust) and a metallic core. Even if these elements are highly
depleted in the mantle, previous experimental work indicates that they are
overabundant relative to expectation for scavenging by the core. Available
experiments suggest that the mantle should be completely barren of these
elements, which is not what is seen. A likely explanation for this discrepancy
between experiments and observations is that the highly siderophile elements
were delivered into the Earth's mantle by the late impact addition of meteoritic
material after the core had formed. There are differences however between the
composition of the mantle and meteorites, notably for ruthenium, and an
important question is whether previous experiments reliably predict the
scavenging of highly siderophile elements in the core. These experiments were
limited in the pressure-temperature conditions that they could achieve and
relies on large extrapolations to make inferences about the scavenging
efficiency of the core. A new experimental approach relying on the laser
ionization of selected highly siderophile elements coupled with experiments done
in diamond anvil cells that can routinely reach pressures of 700,000 atmospheres
and temperatures of 4500 K, will allow the partitioning of highly siderophile
elements to be measured under core formation conditions without relying on large
extrapolations. This work will apply a relatively new technique (Resonant
Ionization Mass Spectrometry - RIMS) to in situ ultratrace analyses, which can
find applications in a variety of fields outside of Earth sciences, including
material sciences/development and nuclear forensics. The project is a
multidisciplinary collaboration between geochemists, physicists and instrument
developers, an experimental petrologist, and a high-pressure mineral physicist.
The project will support two graduate as well as undergraduate students, who
will be trained on a multidisciplinary research project. The PIs will also be
involved in outreach at the K-12 level through the French-American Science
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reason for the depletions in highly
siderophile elements (HSEs) in the mantle is their removal into Earth’s core,
and their subsequent replenishment by late accretion of extraterrestrial
material representing ~0.5 % of Earth’s mass. To first order, this model of late
delivery of chondritic material to the Earth can account for the abundance of
HSEs in the mantle but it fails to explain the elevated Ru/Pt and Pd/Pt ratios
in the mantle relative to chondrites and other HSEs. One explanation for these
high ratios is that Ru and Pd may be less siderophile or chalcophile compared to
other HSEs, resulting in their partial retention in mantle when the core formed.
Testing this hypothesis is however difficult because the relevant metal/silicate
partitioning experiments have been done at P-T conditions that are quite remote
from those that are thought to have prevailed during core formation. The
investigators will study the origin of HSEs in Earth’s mantle by applying a
novel ultra-trace element quantification technique known as RIMS to measure the
concentrations of selected HSEs in metal-silicate experiments done using piston
cylinders and diamond anvil cells (DACs). Through this collaboration between
geochemists, physicists and instrument developers, an experimental petrologist,
and a high-pressure mineral physicist, the research group will study the effect
of nano/micro metal nuggets on metal/silicate partition data, and will measure
the partition coefficients of Ru, Pd, and Pt at 0–70 GPa and 2100–4500 K, which
spans conditions relevant to core formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.