* 2001733
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Experiences of Youth at the Intersection of the Child Welfare and Juvenile Justice Systems.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Florencia Torche, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 15,896.00

Crossover youth are a unique population of children involved in both the child
welfare and the juvenile justice systems. Crossover youth are disproportionately
likely to experience social and economic disadvantage, and the dual system
involvement may fundamentally shape their adolescence and transition to
adulthood. This project investigates how juvenile court institutions
characterize and respond to crossover youth, how crossover youth experience
their dual status as “dependent” and “delinquent,” and how crossover youths’
experiences in court influence their well-being as they proceed through
adolescence. In addition to investigating the relationship between state
institutions and inequality in the United States, the project will show how the
state distinguishes between victims and offenders and how it interacts with the
families so affected. Findings will inform state policies affecting the
operation of both child welfare and juvenile justice
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine longitudinal interviews
and ethnographic observation to examine how juvenile court institutions respond
to crossover youth and how crossover youth experience the court process
themselves. Data will be drawn from repeated interviews with 35 to 40 crossover
youth over the course of a year, as well as ethnographic observation in juvenile
court and interviews with key decision makers in both dependency and delinquency
courts. Longitudinal follow-ups with crossover youth will grant insight into how
young people experience the court process, and court observation will provide a
unique opportunity to observe interactions between court actors and youth and
compare what happens in court to how individuals describe their court
experiences in interviews. Findings will inform sociological theories regarding
juvenile justice and the law, as well as the sociology of childhood and
transition to adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.