* 2001628
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Discretion and Decision-making in Microlending
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Andrew Schrank, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 15,901.00

This project investigates how, at microlenders, an ascriptive characteristic of
loan officers and applicants may affect credit decisions that are made through
nominally neutral, standardized risk assessment practices. In places with high
poverty levels, microlenders make small loans to nontraditional borrowers using
more forgiving criteria than regular banks. Policy analysts and donor
organizations have portrayed microcredit as an inclusive solution to poverty.
The role of loan officers, however, who decide which applicants are approved or
rejected in the first place, often is overlooked. This study examines the effect
of an ascriptive characteristic on this decision and thus its potentially
consequential effects on who gets loans and on what
terms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research questions for this project are: (1) How do
loan officers determine creditworthiness among applicants, and how is this
evaluation affected by their values on an ascriptive characteristic? (2) How
does the standardization of risk assessment affect the exercise of loan
officersâ€™ discretion and the process of credit allocation? These questions are
addressed with a combination of qualitative and quantitative data collected over
the course of a major institutional transformation, including administrative
data, interviews, ethnographic observations, and written texts. Collection of
these data is made possible through access to a microcredit
provider.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.