* 2001439
* RUI: Compactifying Moduli Spaces of Orbits, Covers, and Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dustin Ross, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2024
* USD 160,217.00

One of the most consequential advances in mathematics during the 20th century
was motivated by a change in perspective: instead of studying a single
mathematical object, we should broaden our scope and study how classes of
objects fit together in families. To draw an analogy with ecology, this change
in perspective is akin to the realization that, in order to understand the
movement of a single fish in the sea, it helps a great deal to understand how
that fish interacts with the other members of their school. In mathematics, the
notion of a moduli space loosely refers to an entire family of objects; for
example, in the fish analogy, the moduli space could refer to the entire school
of fish. Moduli spaces can, themselves, be treated as a single entity, comprised
of many, and we can learn about the objects we are interested in by studying the
shape of the moduli space that parametrizes them. It can be especially
enlightening to understand the shape of moduli spaces near their boundary, and
the research supported by this NSF award is driven by the goal of understanding
the shape of the boundary of a number of moduli spaces that parametrize
different types of families of algebraic curves. This project provides research
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aspects in this project fall into
three interrelated categories, all with the common theme of investigating
various compact moduli spaces of curves and what geometric and enumerative
information can be gleaned from the structure of their boundary. In the first
line of problems, the PI will study new classes of moduli spaces that can be
realized as wonderful compactifications associated to certain complex reflection
groups. These new moduli spaces provide a fertile testing ground for
investigating the extent to which polyhedral methods can be generalized beyond
toric varieties. In the second line of problems, the PI will introduce moduli
spaces into the study of factorization problems in complex reflection groups. In
particular, the primary objective is to study the polynomial structure of
factorizations by constructing a suitable compactification of the associated
moduli spaces of admissible covers. In the final line of problems, the PI will
initiate a study of the tautological rings of the moduli spaces of pseudo-stable
curves. These spaces provide alternative compactifications of the moduli spaces
of curves that allow for curves with cuspidal singularities, instead of the
usual nodal singularities, and progress in this research would lead to advances
concerning the enumerative geometry of curves with cuspidal
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.