* 2001736
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Does Speaking Out Against Harassment Lead Women to be Negatively Stereotyped at Work?
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Chloe Hart, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2022
* USD 15,984.00

Understanding the barriers faced by women who are harassed at work is critical
to analyzing gender equality in the United States, because harassment severely
handicaps women’s ability to thrive and advance socioeconomically. This project
seeks to build a better understanding of the barriers that women face when they
experience harassment. Specifically, it tests whether women who speak out
against harassment are negatively stereotyped and therefore disadvantaged at
work. A better understanding of these barriers can help women strategize how to
best navigate existing biases when they wish to speak out against harassment.
Findings can also be used by organizations to craft policies that take into
account the barriers to speaking out against harassment. Finally, this research
can be used to educate the general public about the subtle biases that women
face when they confront or speak out against harassment in order to influence
cultural beliefs about harassment and erode biases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some
individuals experience harassment at work, and we know little about how speaking
out against harassment can exacerbate workplace inequality. This project uses
two online survey experiments to test for possible discrimination against women
who speak out against harassment. In Study 1, (run on YouGov, N=1,000) the
project will use a conjoint experiment to test whether a woman who does not fit
the cultural archetype of the “ideal” harassment target in various ways – for
example, a Black or Latina woman, or a woman who had previously been in a
relationship with her harasser – may be negatively stereotyped and therefore
viewed as less employable. The project will use statistical tests, including
t-tests and regression analyses, to determine whether variations in a harassment
target’s identity and story influence her perceived employability, and will use
formal mediation analysis to test whether any differences are mediated by
perceptions of her. In Study 2 (run on Amazon Mechanical Turk, N=580), the
project will examine how a different form of speaking out against harassment –
confronting the person who instigated unwanted behavior – may also cause women
to be negatively stereotyped and penalized on employment outcomes. This project
will analyze the double bind that women who experience harassment may face when
they consider speaking out against it. Although speaking out may help to limit
the harassing behavior, it may simultaneously damage the employment outcomes of
many women who do so. This project advances sociological theories of labor
market inequality by linking harassment to perceptions of employability. It also
contributes more broadly to theories regarding gender inequality at work and in
society more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.