* 2001652
* Digitization PEN: oBird: 3D Photogrammetry of Museum Specimens for Phenomics across the Avian Tree of Life
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* John McCormack, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 214,288.00

The oBird project (for “outside of the bird”) will create 3D digital models for
nearly all living bird species for research and education. Preserved specimens
in museum research collections are a record of Earth’s biodiversity and provide
a baseline for assessing past and future environmental changes, planetary
health, and for understanding how biodiversity arose and proliferated. Major
efforts over the last several decades have sought to make museum records digital
to facilitate their access and inclusion in large-scale research projects.
Computerized tomography (CT) scans are an increasingly common way to make
digital specimens, especially when the insides of the specimen have also been
preserved, as with whole fish preserved in jars. However, with birds, CT scans
will miss the color and arrangement of feathers, features of great importance to
researchers and also appreciated by the public. oBird will create 3D digital
models using a process called photogrammetry. Photogrammetry uses hundreds of
photographs from all angles of a specimen to create realistic, interactive 3D
virtual models in full, natural color. The 3D models from oBird will be free to
access on the internet, facilitating research on the origins of bird diversity,
including novel colors and pigments. The 3D models will also be incorporated
into public displays on biodiversity in the new Anderson Center for
Environmental Sciences at Occidental College as well as lesson plans for K-12
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a partner project to the Open Vertebrate
Thematic Collections Network (OVert TCN), oBird will extend OVert into the world
of 3D photogrammetry, an emerging method in collections digitization that
preserves the external features of specimens as interactive, 3D models. The
project will increase genus-level coverage of avian diversity compared to OVert
from 60% to 90%. The 3D photogrammetry technique involves taking hundreds of 2D
photos of a whole, dried bird specimen on a rotating stand followed by
processing with a novel, automated computational pipeline that generates a 3D
model with minimal manual oversight. oBird will prioritize imaging the same
species as OVert to provide paired external and internal anatomy across species.
The 3D models will be hosted on MorphoSource, an open-access platform for
storing and archiving 3D data, extending access to large-scale phenomic data in
furtherance of the OVert research theme: the evolution of vertebrate
morphological diversity. By providing natural-color data for 3D specimens, oBird
will thus bring more accurate and realistic color analysis to research on
plumage evolution, especially in the comparative context of an existing bird
tree of life. New questions that will be enabled include research into the
origins and evolution of bird plumage color and morphological novelty in beak
dimensions and wing shape, enabling comparative evolutionary study of these
important ecomorphological traits. oBird will integrate with a strong
undergraduate research program in a large bird natural history collection at a
small liberal arts college, providing training in digital technology and
effects, biodiversity informatics, and museum
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.