* 2001071
* Families of Automorphic Forms with Prescribed Local Behavior
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Nicolas Templier, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2024
* USD 350,001.00

The goal of the research project is to develop a quantitative theory of families
with prescribed local behavior. Generally speaking, the idea is that one can
study a mathematical object: a variety, a representation, or an L-function, by
deforming it in families. A family is a set of global objects that share some
common local features. Mathematicians predict that families have
equidistribution properties in the sense that their local components should vary
in a uniform way within their prescribed space. Building proofs of such
properties is a milestone in our mathematical ability to work with these
objects. Additionally this project will provide research training opportunities
for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Families are crucial even if one is
a priori interested in a single automorphic form. Arthur conjectured in 1988
that if an automorphic representation has a local component that belongs to a
supercuspidal L-packet, then it is tempered. Over function fields, the PI
proposes to establish with Sawin this conjecture for monomial geometric
supercuspidal (mgs) packets, that is for those packets that arise from compact-
induction of characters and remain supercuspidal after unramified base change.
The method relies on combining the l-adic geometry of the moduli space of
G-bundles on a curve and on trace formulas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.