* 2001248
* Diophantine Approximation and Aperiodic Order
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Alan Haynes, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 186,734.00

This award aims to develop and harvest a collection of interrelated results
spanning the fields of number theory, dynamical systems, and aperiodic order. A
central theme is to explore problems which have known applications to the
mathematics underpinning models for physical materials called quasicrystals. The
research goals are to use tools from number theory, probability, topological
dynamics, and ergodic theory, to prove new results about a number of long
standing open problems with significance in the world of pure mathematics, which
also have the potential for real world applications. The Principal Investigarot
will mentor graduate students on topics related to this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quasicrystals are physical materials with highly
ordered molecular structures, causing them to produce pure point diffraction
patterns, but which also possess rotational symmetries that are forbidden by the
classical Crystallographic Restriction Theorem. The discovery of these materials
in the 1980's by Dan Shechtman revolutionized the world of crystallography and
later earned Shechtman a Nobel prize. In the mathematical world the study, and
even the existence, of quasicrystals is intimately related to the theory of
aperiodic tilings of Euclidean space. Quasicrystals are often modeled by cut and
project sets, which give an abundance of examples of such tilings and which,
generically, are good examples of systems which possess `aperiodic order'. In
the last decade there has been an explosion of insight linking problems in
number theory with problems about cut and project sets. A number of unsolved
problems in Diophantine approximation have been reformulated, and some have been
solved, using ideas from the theory of mathematical quasicrystals. Major
problems about sets with aperiodic order have also been solved by understanding
the reverse connections. The research in this project is centered around well-
known open problems such as the Littlewood Conjecture and the Pisot Conjecture,
which are sitting on the border of these subjects. It aims to develop the theory
around them in order to create progress in both the realms of pure and applied
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.