* 2001069
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Botanical Insights into Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Mallory Melton, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 25,158.00

Questions regarding the role of food in urban sustainability are relevant to
modern problems of overcrowding and differential access to resources.
Archaeological study of the earliest urban centers is particularly well-suited
to revealing subsistence strategies that contribute to the persistence or
decline of populous settlements because ancient sites provide case studies for
examining the timing of changes in food-related activities in relation to major
political and social transformations. Within this broader context, this project
will use plant remains to investigate temporal changes in social relationships
at the household level. Mallory Melton and Amber VanDerwarker of the University
of California Santa Barbara (UCSB) will study ancient plant remains from two
Pacific coast sites dated 900-500 BCE and 500-BCE-100CE, providing a rare
opportunity to use food to diachronically evaluate inter-household social
differences amid state formation and increasing population aggregation. Regional
research will benefit from and work to foster cultural heritage knowledge with
results being featured in an exhibit at a local museum. Project members will
also work with local residents to create a pamphlet designed to communicate
project results to school children and teachers. Excavation maps produced by
this project are essential to raising local awareness and fostering site
stewardship as both sites are covered by plantains. They will be distributed to
local officials and institutions, and a time-lapse video of the maps will be
hosted on the UCSB Integrative Subsistence Laboratory (ISL) website.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. VanDerwarker and Mallory Melton will undertake
research on the identification of plant remains in household and public deposits
to reveal the nature of social diversity and political economy in two of the
earliest urban centers in the Americas. Research will begin with the use of a
collection in a regional museum, where the co-PI will collect artifact residue
and dental calculus samples for starch grain and phytolith identification.
Undergraduate students will be involved in the identification of charred plant
remains and microscopic starch grains and phytoliths, and the production of
large-scale maps that will bring the layout of each urban settlement to life.
Radiocarbon dates on charred remains of annual plants will provide the
chronological precision necessary to organize subsistence strategies according
to settlement occupation phase (e.g., formation, maintenance, decline).
Integrating multiple methods, this study will illuminate daily subsistence
activities during the occupation of two urban centers of different scale,
providing insights into strategies that contributed to their centuries-long
persistence. The team will investigate the use of food in evaluating differences
among households at each study site, potentially producing a powerful
methodology for detecting social diversity that would contribute to the
identification of neighborhoods in cases where residences are not apparent in
their groupings. The project will productively enhance understanding of the
relationship between food activities and urban sustainability while also
creating innovative opportunities for student training and international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.