* 2002482
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Summer Temperature Reconstructions for Eastern North America
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Justin Maxwell, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 124,787.00

This project broadly seeks to use blue light intensity measured in tree rings—a
proxy for wood density—to produce multiple, annually-resolved, regional summer
temperature reconstructions (e.g. Southeast, Mid-Atlantic, Northeast United
States/Canadian Maritimes) over the past, approximately, 500 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary motivation for conducting this research is the
need to better understand the current climatic warming trend across eastern
North America with regard to pre-instrumental conditions, as well as to better
understand the effects of climatic variability on temperature-sensitive tree
species across the region. Understanding the broader temporal and spatial
patterns, timing, and amplitude of cool and warm periods across eastern North
America may aid in constraining model scenarios of future temperature
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Longer temperature records (e.g. that extend beyond
the instrumental period) may provide information on: (i) past and current
spatiotemporal characteristics of temperature variability; (ii) the full range
and amplitude of pre-instrumental temperatures; (iii) the timing and direction
of temperature rate changes; and (iv) the influence of ocean and atmosphere
forcing mechanisms on centennial-scale temperature variability and the
sensitivity of temperature changes to these climatic forcing
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include
developing data from a data poor geographic location that are well situated to
advance knowledge on North American climate, supporting graduate students from
underrepresented groups, and providing outreach to K-12 STEM audiences including
those involving Native American communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.