* 2002539
* P2C2: Leveraging Bayesian Approaches to Link Reconstructed, Observed, and Projected Meteorological Drought while Accounting for Inherent Data Biases
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* James Stagge, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,155.00

This project aims to investigate past, present and future meteorological
droughts. Specifically, this project will address the issue of incompatible data
biases e.g. (temporal resolution) from these three data sources by testing two
fundamental questions: (1) do errors in proxy-based drought reconstructions
significantly differ from those in Global Climate Model (GCM)-derived climate
projections, particularly for higher order statistics, and (2) can a unified
statistical modeling framework explicitly account for inherent data source
differences to estimate drought severity from the pre-industrial past, through
the instrumental period, and into the future. The researcher will apply novel
statistical methods (Hierarchical Bayesian modelling) to merge drought
reconstructions, observations, and projections, and generate a gridded drought
time-series beginning 2000 years ago and extending to the end of this century
(2100). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include developing a
visualization website that will allow the public to view 2100 years of drought
index time series for any gridded cell, in North America which will also include
model and climate uncertainty. A conference-based workshop with hands-on code
demonstrations will be organized to train scientists on the statistical
modelling framework developed in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.