* 2002897
* Enabling Reliable Networked Microgrids for Distribution Grid Resiliency
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Peng Zhang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2021
* USD 143,755.00

This project investigates novel approaches to promote reliable networked
microgrid operations in the face of various cyber and physical disturbances.
Power distribution grid resiliency is a challenging problem with significant
economic and security impacts that has been exacerbated in recent years by the
increase in extreme weather events and cyber threats. Recently, networked
microgrids have become an emerging paradigm that demonstrates resiliency benefit
to their local customers. However, lack of awareness of stability margin,
inadequate capability to respond to grid disturbances, and vulnerabilities to
communication failure, delay, and cyber-attacks can undermine the capability of
networked microgrids to improve distribution grid resiliency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will create and implement networked
microgrids solutions on a novel cyber infrastructure to ensure distribution grid
resiliency. This cyber infrastructure is based on Software-Defined Networking.
Specifically, the project has three main objectives: (1) To establish a formal
analysis method to tractably assess networked microgrid stability; (2) To devise
a new concept of microgrid active fault management (AFM) enabled through online
distributed optimization; and (3) To build a Software-Defined Networking (SDN)
based architecture to enable highly resilient networked microgrids. The project
will contribute new formal analysis theories for deeper understanding of
microgrid stability under high levels of renewable generation. The idea of
integrating distributed optimization and power electronic control will pave the
way for building grid-friendly networked microgrids, significantly contributing
to grid resiliency. The novel SDN-based architecture and techniques will open
the door for innovations in devising secure, reliable, and fault-tolerant
algorithms for managing resilient networked microgrids and active distribution
networks. Overall, the proposed new model-based and data-intensive technologies
together will provide scalable, dependable and intelligent solutions to
otherwise intractable problems in integrating complex networked microgrids.
Building on the team's successes in minority student recruitment and
undergraduate education and leveraging existing resources, the education plan
targets underrepresented minorities and pre-college students to contribute to
the preparation of the next-generation workforce in power engineering. The
research results will be integrated in new Microgrids courses for educating
university students and power engineering professionals.