* 2002836
* Collaborative Research: Plasma Assisted Ammonia Combustion: Stabilization and Emission Reduction
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Wenting Sun, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2023
* USD 320,224.00

Ammonia is considered as a renewable fuel. However, ammonia combustion suffers
from two major issues which are preventing its practical application. One is
that ammonia flame is very unstable and can easily get extinguished. The other
issue is its high emission, which pollutes the environment. In this project, a
collaborative team will investigate using plasma (electric discharge) to enhance
ammonia combustion process and reduce emission at the same time. The plasma-
ammonia combustion interaction has not been studied previously. This award will
investigate the underlying physical and chemical processes using experimental
and computational tools. The new insights gained from experimental data will be
used to develop computational models that can be used in research related to
renewable energy. In this project, undergraduate and graduate students will
receive hands-on training in experimental and computational skills. They become
new contributors to the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
workforce of United States. Significant opportunities exist at both University
of Minnesota and Georgia Institute of Technology to engage underrepresented
students and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
understand the physical and chemical processes to stabilize ammonia flames and
reduce NOx emission simultaneously by non-equilibrium plasma. This project has
two key hypotheses: (1) prompt ammonia oxidation/decomposition introduced by
plasma enhances flame; (2) the production of NH and NH2 from plasma reduces NOx
emission. Accordingly, the scope and objectives of this proposed research are:
(i) investigation of fundamental ammonia plasma chemical kinetics to understand
its prompt dissociation and oxidation induced by plasma at different values of
reduced electric field (E/N). This will be achieved by conducting experiments in
a flow reactor with speciation measurement and one-dimensional (1D) numerical
simulations with detailed plasma and combustion chemical kinetics; (ii)
investigation of interactions between plasma kinetics and flame dynamics
(including lean blow-off and thermoacoustic combustion instability) by
conducting experiments in a model gas turbine combustor using NH, NH2, NO and OH
planar laser induced fluorescence (PLIF) and three-dimensional (3D) direct
numerical simulations (DNS) with a simplified plasma model deduced from detailed
1D modeling. The experimental work will be conducted by the Georgia Institute of
Technology team and the numerical work will be conducted by the University of
Minnesota team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.