* 2002852
* Collaborative Research: Tunable HDX and Ion-Molecule Interactions  Using Doped-Gas Ion Mobility-Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Christopher Hogan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 245,167.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, the research groups of Professor Brian H. Clowers (Washington
State University) and Professor Christopher J. Hogan (University of Minnesota)
are working to improve the performance and capabilities of ion mobility
spectrometry (IMS), a chemical analysis method with applications ranging from
rapid screening for explosives in airports to detailed insight into the
structure and function of biomolecules associated with healthy and diseased
organisms. The team is devising means of using selective interactions with
solvent molecules and other gaseous additives within the IMS instrument in order
to enhance the ability to separate and identify molecules in complex mixtures.
By combining these methods with mass spectrometry (a powerful complementary
technique) and new computational tools, the research aims to provide an
innovative workflow that is broadly applicable to chemical analysis. Students
engaged in this research obtain unique interdisciplinary training enhanced by
opportunities to work “out-of-discipline” as part of their studies. Research
opportunities are also made available to undergraduate and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, Professors Clowers and Hogan have
demonstrated enhanced separation factors through selective interactions between
gas-phase ions and organic vapor modifiers introduced into ion mobility systems.
They now seek to gain a more detailed understanding of the underlying
interactions of ion-vapor complexes in order to predict and enable expanded use
of IM-MS and tandem IM experiments. Their approach uses an innovative,
multidimensional ion mobility/hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry
strategy and first-principles modeling of gas-phase ion-neutral interactions and
vapor uptake. Primary aims are to determine (1) if thermodynamics of vapor
association depend upon chemical functionality in amino acids and simple peptide
ions; (2) if the extent of binding can be extrapolated as a characterization
tool for larger, multiply charged ions exhibiting known secondary structure; (3)
if clustering dynamics quantitatively describe the behavior of ions in high-
field and asymmetric waveform experiments; and (4) if molecular dynamics can
accurately describe solvated ion transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.