* 2002474
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--South African Hydroclimate Reconstructions Using Speleothem Multiproxy Analyses
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* R. Lawrence Edwards, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2023
* USD 109,221.00

This project aims to reconstruct and investigate drivers of climate variability
during the last glacial-interglacial transition in South Africa (~90,000-60,000
years ago). Specifically, this project will use high resolution trace element
analyses (mainly magnesium, strontium and barium) and Oxygen stable isotopes
from speleothem records located in the South African south coast to address the
following questions: 1) How did changes in global boundary conditions at the
last glacial-interglacial transition affect hydroclimate on the southern coast
of South Africa? 2) How are changes in hydroclimate related to variations of
atmospheric circulation and synoptic conditions during rainfall formation and
rainfall seasonality? 3) How are these high-resolution proxy records related to
millennial scale climate variations in the southern and northern hemisphere?
Additionally, this project will identify sulfur peaks in the speleothems that
are associated with the younger Toba eruption to link these records to ice core
records from both hemispheres. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader
Impacts include generating a new multi-proxy hydroclimate record in South
Africa. This record will further the understanding of past climate variability
in this region and provide a context for the evolution of plant diversity and
modern human behaviors. The paleoclimate proxy records produced by this project
will inform the development of a model that reconstructs the resource landscape
that people have encountered in this region and thus inform the critical
understanding of hunter-gatherer adaptations to their environments. Other
Broader Impacts include strengthening multi-institution and international
collaborations to develop a multi-proxy speleothem record, the training of
undergraduate students, support for a post-doctoral researcher and an early
career scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.