* 2002626
* IBSS: Understanding Social Diffusion Dynamics Among Networked Cognitive Systems
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Mark Orr, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 323,050.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine social diffusion dynamics,
including both the transmission of information within social systems and the
impact of those information flows on the ways that the social system functions.
The project will bridge the cognitive and social sciences by providing new
knowledge about the ways that ideas, beliefs, traditions, behaviors, and
information in general move through social channels from person to person and
create patterns of knowledge within communities, nations, and the world as a
whole. Although this project will focus on the diffusion dynamics of attitudes
about electronic cigarettes on Twitter, the project's approach and findings will
provide new ways to consider a broader range of problems, including obesity,
economic and social disparities, cyberterrorism, mass migration, and natural
disasters. The project will provide new insights for many different individuals
engaged who deal with issues for which the diffusion of information is critical.
The project will provide valuable education and training for undergraduate and
graduate students as well as post-doctoral researchers, and it will provide new
tools to enhance the infrastructure for scientific inquiry in the future.

The investigators will draw on theories and approaches from the psychological
and cognitive sciences, which focus on how individual people's minds work, and
the social sciences, which focus on the social structures that constitute an
individual's social context. They will seek answers to three core questions: (1)
To what degree does exposure to others' beliefs via social media channels affect
change in a person's beliefs? (2) How does the spread of beliefs operate over
large sociotechnical networks? (3) What is the appropriate set of computational
formalisms for representing the spread of beliefs on large sociotechnical
networks? They will employ a networked cognitive systems approach to analyze the
diffusion dynamics of attitudes towards electronic cigarettes on Twitter, using
online social experiments, data-mining techniques, and a to-scale formal
computational model of a real Twitter network. This project is supported through
the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS)
competition.