* 2002658
* Investigation of the strange metal normal state of electron-doped oxide superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* richard greene, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity, the complete absence of
electrical resistance, is an amazing low temperature property of some elements
and compounds. This property of solids was discovered in 1911 and was believed
to be fully understood in 1957 by the Bardeen, Cooper, Schrieffer (BCS) theory.
In 1987 some copper oxide compounds (cuprates) were discovered with unexpectedly
high superconducting transition temperatures (up to 140 Kelvin). This high-
temperature superconductivity cannot be explained by the conventional BCS
mechanism and it is not presently understood. A complete understanding of high-
temperature superconductivity is one of the major unsolved problems of condensed
matter physics. The solution to this problem could lead to the discovery of room
temperature (300 Kelvin) superconductors, a development with very significant
practical applications. This project performs experimental studies on one class
of cuprate compounds where the superconductivity can be completely eliminated by
the application of a small magnetic field. This enables the non-superconducting,
or normal, metallic state to be studied over a wide range of temperature from
600 K to well below 1K. The normal state of the cuprates has quite different
physical properties from those of well-known metals, such as copper or lead, and
the cuprates have been called strange metals. An understanding of this strange
metal state is believed to be crucial for an understanding of the origin of the
superconductivity. In this project a variety of transport and other experiments
are performed on specially prepared thin films. Variation of the magnetic field,
the temperature and electron doping can change the normal state properties in
ways that are expected to give deep insight into the nature of the strange metal
state and the superconductivity. This project supports the education of PhD and
undergraduate students at the University of Maryland---an urban university with
a diverse population---in advanced vacuum deposition and electrical
characterization techniques. These techniques have proven to be excellent
training for productive scientific careers in academic and technology
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
mechanism of superconductivity and the non-Fermi liquid (strange metal) normal
state in strongly correlated oxides is one of the most significant unsolved
problems of condensed matter physics. Recently some dramatic experimental
results have been reported by the PI (and others) that give new insights into
the physics of the copper oxides (cuprates) and that also report the discovery
of superconductivity in a related nickelate system, Sr doped NdNiO2. This
project follows up on these breakthroughs to gain a more detailed understanding
of the strange normal state of the electron-doped cuprates and the doped
nickelates. This project provides a comprehensive set of experiments to study
the nature of the normal state when superconductivity is suppressed, either by
magnetic field, disorder or critical current. The electron-doped cuprates are
particularly advantageous for this research because the low temperature normal
state (0&lt; T&lt; Tc) can be reached with a modest dc magnetic field (H &lt; 10
T). An understanding of the nature of the normal state of the cuprates is
believed to be crucial for understanding the cause of high-temperature
superconductivity in the cuprates. The experimental techniques used are
resistivity, Hall Effect, magnetoresistance, Nernst effect, thermopower,
specific heat and strain (pressure). Some transport experiments are done at very
high magnetic field at the NSF supported National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
(NHMFL) in Tallahassee and Los Alamos. The research includes an in-depth study
of the itinerant ferromagnetism discovered by the PI in 2019 in the highly doped
region of the n-type cuprates The combination of materials science expertise and
physics measurement expertise of the PI is essential for making progress in this
very important area of correlated physics materials research. This project
incorporates the training of high-school students, undergraduate science majors,
graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists in various experimental aspects
of condensed matter physics research. As in the past, the principal investigator
will encourage women and underrepresented groups to participate in this project.
The external collaborations in this project provide a unique vehicle for
students to experience research in different laboratory environments, i.e.,
university, industry, and government. An ongoing participation in the Graduate
Resources Advancing Diversity (GRADMAP) program at the University of Maryland
will involve undergraduates in research exposure programs designed to attract a
broader audience to graduate studies. Efforts to encourage a broader education
in science via existing Physics department outreach programs with predominately
minority public-school students near the University of Maryland will be
continued. These include, Physics is Phun, Physics Discovery Days, and the
Summer School Girl’s Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.