* 2002710
* RAPID: Investigating primate infant care via canopy-based research
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Andrea Baden, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2023
* USD 42,113.00

This RAPID award will support time-sensitive data collection in a wild primate
species, to evaluate how an individual’s interactions with their physical and
social environments during early infancy and childhood development relate to
their long-term patterns of gut microbial diversity. The research will
contribute to the growing body of knowledge about complex interactions between
early environment, the microbiome, and physiological well-being in primates,
including humans. Specifically, the study will combine genetic and behavioral
sampling on infant care in the nest and pilot new forest canopy data collection
methods for infants, their nests, and their mothers’ complex cooperative infant
care strategies, focusing on a recent birth cohort. The project also will build
on partnerships with K-12 classroom teachers, primate conservation educators,
and developers at Google Expeditions to generate online content, including the
creation of lesson plans and virtual reality “expeditions,” that will engage,
teach, and train primary and secondary school students from diverse backgrounds
in field research in the STEM sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of
research shows that interactions between primate hosts and the microbial
communities in their gut are complex and beneficial. Hosts, in particular, rely
on microorganisms for processes ranging from digestion to immunity. However,
despite the critical importance of host-microbe interactions, the factors
responsible for their development and maintenance are not well understood.
Ruffed lemurs in the wild are characterized by substantial variation in the
numbers, types, and strengths of their social relationships, providing an
opportunity to study the relative effects of different biological,
environmental, and social forces on establishing and maintaining gut microbial
diversity. The investigators will therefore use a combination of field
observations and nest cams to continuously monitor ruffed lemur infant care
behaviors in the nest; tree climbing and canopy-based research to sample
infants, their mothers, and their nests for microbiome data; and veterinary
health assessments to link social behavior and microbiome development to long-
term physiological outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.