* 2002782
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Studies of Flow and Clogging of Deformable Particles under Confinement
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2023
* USD 246,998.00

Squishy, deformable particles play an important role in many fields of science
and engineering, from the biological cells to droplets of fatty oils in water
that make up emulsions like mayonnaise, peanut butter, and milk. Microfluidic
devices with tiny channels of varying widths are used to process mixtures of
deformable particles and fluids and to manipulate DNA molecules. However,
microfluidic devices frequently clog near constrictions, which is expensive
since the device must be replaced when this occurs. Clogging has been studied
extensively for rigid particles, like grains flowing out of a silo, but clogging
of deformable particles is less well understood. In particular, it is unclear
how particle deformability and stickiness or cohesion affects clogging. For
example, will deformable and cohesive particles change shape and flow past each
other at constrictions, or will they form arches and clog the system? This
project combines experiments of emulsion droplets flowed through microfluidic
devices with novel computer simulations of deformable particles to understand
how they clog. This work will aid in future designs of critical microfluidic
devices involved in industrial processing, filtration, and analysis of
biological samples of cell-fluid mixtures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flow-induced
jamming, or clogging, is observed across a wide range of systems, from flows of
granular materials in silos to flows of blood cells through veins. Clogging is
well studied in the case of hard, frictional grains, but is poorly understood
when particles are deformable and cohesive. This project employs experiments of
suspensions of emulsion droplets with tunable deformability and adhesion flowed
through microfluidic devices, along with novel simulations of flows of
explicitly deformable particles designed to model emulsion droplets. The
combined experimental-computational approach can disentangle the effects of
deformability, particle mechanical response, and adhesion on clogging
probability. One key focus is the role of particle rearrangements during clogs
in unjamming the suspensions. During clogs of granular materials, particles are
static and clogs have long lifetimes. However, if particles are deformable,
particle shape relaxation and stress redistribution in a clogged suspension can
lead to intermittent clog release and avalanching. Additionally, this project
will investigate how the Beverloo Law, which describes how flow rate changes
with constriction width, changes in the case of deformable and adhesive
particles. The combination of computational and experimental studies will aid
the development of a comprehensive theoretical framework to predict when a clog
will form given the particle properties, flow rate, and constriction width. With
the increased use of microfluidic devices to analyze suspensions of colloidal
particles and cells, a predictive framework for clogging based on single-
particle properties like deformability, elasticity and adhesion is required to
design the next generation of efficient high-throughput microfluidic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.