* 2002532
* 2020 Smart and Connected Health Principal Investigators Workshop Advancing Health through Science
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Yingzi Lin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 11/30/2020
* USD 86,946.00

This project supports the Advancing Health Through Science: Principal
Investigators Workshop in Alexandria, VA on January 6-7, 2020. The meeting will
bring together principal investigators of projects awarded by the Smart and
Connected Health (SCH) program with other researchers looking at smart health in
the broader community. The SCH program was set up in order to bridge gaps in
fundamental science necessary to transform health and healthcare, as well as to
be focused on prevention and person-centered care. Advancing Health through
Science Workshop is designed to address the next generation of challenges in
advancing health with foundational research from the computer science,
engineering and the social, behavioral and economic disciplines. An objective of
the Workshop is to provide an opportunity for the principal investigators and
other smart health researchers to explore research progress in a diverse set of
projects and discuss important current issues, as well as future challenges
associated with research in transdisciplinary scientific areas. The discussions
will be supported by keynotes, panels, project-related posters, rapid talks and
cross-discipline participant-generated workshops. It is anticipated that the
meeting will stimulate discussions, connections, and collaborations that will
facilitate progress in the area of Smart and Connected Health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop should have a significant impact on the
participants and the future of the SCH program. The focus of the workshop is on
foundational research that supports the growth of smart health within connected
communities. The workshop results are likely to include new research directions
that will be publicized to the research community through publications and a
workshop website. The results dissemination should inform and the developing
Smart and Connected Health research community in their transdisciplinary
collaboration, educational activities, and spur other innovative research
directions. The broader impacts of the workshop are to facilitate progress in
the field and stimulate conversations, connections, and collaborations that will
lead toward better informed and effective smart and connected health research
and resulting technologies for the broadest possible user populations. In order
to address current concerns in Smart and Connected Health research, such as
cybersecurity and privacy, the meeting will include a cross-discipline workshops
with the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace research community. Additionally,
there will be a workshop attached to the Principal Investigator meeting that
will support the travel for ten students to attend the PI Workshop. This should
also help grow the field by providing mentorship and support for a new cadre of
investigators looking to do work in the Smart and Connected Health
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.