* 2002912
* New Strategy for Synthesis of Atomically-Precise Graphene Nanoribbons
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Guangbin Dong, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Guangbin Dong at the
University of Chicago to develop new approaches for preparing atomically-
precise, water-soluble graphene nanoribbons. These nanoribbons are strips
(50-100 thousand times thinner than a human hair) of graphene: a sheet of carbon
atoms arranged in a rigid structure that resembles chicken wire. Graphene
nanoribbons come in two different structural forms, armchair and zigzag.
Armchair graphene nanoribbons have emerged as attractive organic materials for
potential applications in high-speed, light-weight and flexible electronic
devices. Zigzag graphene nanoribbons represent promising materials for
developing efficient spintronic (spin-electronic) devices. To date, the
efficient and practical synthesis of water-soluble and processable graphene has
not been possible. The Dong group is combining physical organic chemistry
knowledge with advanced tools of transition-metal catalysis to overcome the
synthetic challenges and the processability problem. The development of scalable
synthetic approaches for the production of pure forms of armchair and zigzag
nanoribbons opens the way for novel applications of these materials in
nanoelectronics, spintronic and quantum computing devices. During the course of
this research, the Dong group is actively participating in the Leadership
Alliance Summer Research Program to encourage diverse groups of minority
undergraduate students to explore careers in science and engineering. The Dong
group is also actively engaged in the University of Chicago's graduate student
“ChiS&amp;E” program providing educational outreach activities to students from
local public middle schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to
offer efficient and scalable synthetic approaches for preparing atomically-
precise, water-soluble armchair and zigzag graphene nanoribbons (aGNRs and
zGNRs) that could be ultimately used in high performance electronic and
spintronic devices. The objectives are to realize solution-phase synthesis of
aGNRs and zGNRs with precisely installed piperazine side chains. The key
synthetic challenge is to exploit the newly developed palladium/norbornene
(Pd/NBE) catalysis to prepare these unique monomers for GNR synthesis. Compared
to the existing approaches of GNR synthesis, the merits of the new strategies
include: monomers that are prepared in a streamlined manner from commercially
available chemicals; redundant bulky side chains that are avoided for better
imaging of the material edge structures; and products that are expected to
exhibit high solubility and processability in aqueous solutions. The successful
implementation of the research may address two long-standing challenges:
synthesis of water-soluble GNRs and solution-phase preparation of zGNRs, which
are critical factors for solution processability of these materials and the
development of graphene-based spintronic devices. The research facilitates the
physical and theoretical studies of these intriguing materials, as many of those
aGNRs and zGNRs may be made for the first time in the lab and then used to
validate or examine various theoretical models and hypotheses proposed
previously by physicists and physical chemists. The knowledge obtained from
these investigations may improve our understanding of these graphene-like one-
dimensional polymers. This, in turn, may further inspire and stimulate the
development of other new conjugated organic semiconducting
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.