* 2002584
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging Massive Smartphone Location Data to Improve Understanding and Prediction of Behavior in Hurricanes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Linda Nozick, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 191,937.00

In this project, newly available anonymous smartphone location data will be used
to dramatically improve understanding of how households behave during hurricanes
(e.g., how many people will evacuate, when, how, from where, and to where).
Although previous research has provided valuable knowledge about population
behavior in hurricanes, important gaps remain. Available models have limited
ability to predict behavior in future hurricanes. Differences in behavior across
different types of households and people, such as tourists or people without
vehicles, are not well known. Neither are the sequence and timing of events that
unfold for individuals over the duration of a hurricane. These gaps are largely
due to limitations in the traditional types of data that have supported past
research—surveys, interviews, and focus groups. This project will promote the
science of modeling evacuation behavior by capitalizing on the availability of a
new type of data— anonymous location information from smartphones—to make a leap
forward in understanding and predicting the behavior of the population during
hurricane evacuations. The project will advance national welfare and benefit
society by substantially improving the ability to manage future evacuations.
During a hurricane, officials make many highly consequential decisions,
including issuing official evacuation orders, messaging the public, opening
shelters, staging materials and staff, implementing special traffic plans,
executing support for vehicle-less populations, and preparing to undertake
rescues. All of these depend directly on how many people are expected to
evacuate, when, how, from where, and to where. By providing a more accurate and
nuanced prediction of population behavior during hurricanes, this project will
enable officials to make those decisions in a more informed and effective way.
To ensure findings will be translated to practice quickly and effectively, the
research has been designed so that it can be integrated into the current
decision-making tools and processes used by emergency managers. Our practitioner
partners from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Florida and
North Carolina state emergency management agencies will also help us share
findings with the larger emergency management community. This study will
facilitate the development of a procedure to acquire and analyze, in real time,
similar data for other evacuation events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Availability of
new smartphone location data offers a rare opportunity to transform the study of
population behavior in hurricanes. The data offers many benefits, including
samples that are orders of magnitude larger than previously typical; offering
cohesive timelines of individual behavior; providing direct observations not
subject to recall or reporting bias; being available within 24 hours of
movement; and being available at low cost in consistent form for many
hurricanes. Combining the power of the new data with domain expertise based on
traditional survey and interview data will advance the science in this area in
five ways. First, we will improve knowledge by testing hypotheses from the
traditional literature using a larger, independent dataset and new hypotheses
not easily testable in the past. Second, multiple events may happen during the
course of a hurricane, including hurricane-related events (e.g., hurricane
turns, intensifies), official actions (e.g., issue official orders, close
schools), and personal events (e.g., released from work). Each person
experiences some or all of these events in a sequence over a hurricane’s
duration. We will use sequential pattern mining to describe key observable
events and actions, their possible sequences, the probabilities of different
sequences, and duration distributions of each event. This modeling of the
sequence and timing of events for individuals, which has not been done before,
will illuminate the range of ways hurricane behavior, official actions, personal
decisions, and time markers interact and unfold, and help identify promising
points of intervention for evacuation support. Third, we will develop new
statistical models to predict the probability a person will evacuate at each
time period and go to a particular geographic destination as a function of
attributes of the individual/household, official events, hurricane, forecast,
time markers, and past actions since the hurricane formed. These models will
offer improved out-of-sample predictive power by identifying influences on
behavior that are not observable with small datasets; by improving the ability
to predict geographic destination, which is important for estimating clearance
times; and by, for the first time, taking advantage of observations of behavior
early in the event that may be leading indicators of final behavior. Fourth, we
will test the route choice assumptions implicit in traffic models used to
predict clearance times, and determine the effects of road closures on traffic
patterns during evacuation and reentry. The new data will allow testing that is
more detailed and comprehensive than previously possible through isolated
traffic counts and surveys. Finally, we will identify new behaviors and
questions for future traditional research using a general inductive
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.