* 2002651
* Collaborative Research: Atomically thin topological insulators via confinement heteroepitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Joshua Robinson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;The dawn of quantum computing is rapidly
developing with the potential to completely transform the field of computation.
However, current quantum computers based on superconductors, ions, or atoms are
prone to error due to imperfections. The solution to this grand challenge is to
use new, engineered materials which are inherently immune to these
imperfections. However, key questions remain regarding how to make a material
that integrates the demanding properties needed to achieve superior performance
in a technologically relevant manner. The principal investigators have created a
new method to make ultra-thin metals, and this project focuses on understanding
the microscopic properties of such metals, specifically bismuth and lead. The
investigators will evaluate the impact of thinning these materials down to just
a few atoms thick to explore how their properties change when they are
manipulated at the atomic-scale. Beyond the scientific impact, this
collaborative project will provide interdisciplinary research training for
underrepresented graduate students, to broaden participation in science and
engineering programs. The project will also develop a unique industry/university
consortium to impart the importance of safety in industrial and research
settings. This will not only better train future scientists for post-graduate
careers in industry, but will also improve safety preparedness in
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The creation of a
quantum spin Hall insulator (QSHI) by reducing the dimensionality of a
topological insulator from 3D to 2D could provide a unique, robust route to
achieving topological superconductivity. This project will investigate the
atomic-scale physical, chemical and electronic properties of 2D bismuth (Bi) and
lead (Pb). Lead and bismuth exhibit very strong spin-orbit interactions, and
exceptionally robust and easily accessible topological insulator properties that
may enable the design of groundbreaking electronic devices with dissipationless
spin currents, and the realization of Majorana bound states. Furthermore, these
elements exhibit unconventional superconductivity, and could be combined with
ferromagnetic materials, suggesting the possibility of creating a Pb-based
topological superconductor. The investigators enable the study by synthesizing
atomically thin, two-dimensional forms of these materials prepared via
confinement heteroepitaxy (CHet) â€“ a novel intercalation process that stabilizes
2D forms of 3D materials developed by the PIs. The SiC/graphene interface
passivation is investigated before, during and after synthesis to understand how
interface reconstruction can enable in-situ removal of the graphene cap for
direct characterization access to the 2D-Bi and Pb. Additionally, removing the
graphene cap enables direct functionalization of the 2D metal to explore how
modifying the surfaces of 2D-Bi and Pb changes their underlying physical
properties, including bonding and electronic character. Finally, the project is
developing a mechanistic understanding of how the structure and interfacial
interactions with SiC and graphene impact electronic structure of 2D-Bi and
2D-Pb and elucidate how they differ from thin films deposited by traditional
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.