* 2002388
* First Passage Percolation and Related Models
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Arjun Krishnan, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The workshop First-Passage Percolation and Related Models will take place at the
International Center for Theoretical Sciences in Bangalore, India, July 27-Aug
14, 2020. This workshop will be devoted to presenting the latest research
progress on the first-passage percolation (FPP), a probabilistic model of random
growth, and closely related models. This is currently an active research area in
contemporary probability theory and has important connections to statistical
physics. Part of the workshop will be devoted to training graduate students and
early career researchers in those topics. This award will provide travel support
for the US based participants in the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In two dimensions, FPP is a model that
is conjecturally in the KPZ universality class, which consists of several models
describing surface growth processes. Models in the KPZ class are intimately
related with random matrix theory, asymptotic representation theory and number
theory. FPP and related models have also been studied by physicists as a model
for polymers in a random medium or as model of magnetic interfaces, and by
biologists as the Eden model of bacterial growth. Much progress has been made on
a class of these relatives which are in some senses "exactly solvable" by the
methods of integrable probability. However, even at the physics level of
heuristic, these models are poorly understood outside of solvable special cases;
for instance, there are hardly any results for dimensions larger than 2. Unlike
other conferences on FPP-type models, the ICTS workshop will emphasize methods
outside of the integrable or exactly solvable framework. By focusing on
techniques beyond exact solvability, the workshop will unify participants around
solving fundamental problems of interest to the broader scientific community.
The workshop website is maintained at
https://www.icts.res.in/program/FPP2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.