* 2002082
* CRII: CHS: Visualizing Data Relationships Across Multiple Views
* CSE,IIS
* 08/31/2019,09/30/2022
* Maoyuan Sun, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2022
* USD 175,000.00

In an increasingly data-rich world, effective design of tools for analyzing and
visualizing data in domains from health to national security can have great
social and scientific value. A common situation for analysts is needing to
manage multiple views of a dataset at the same time, raising questions of how
visual analysis tools can help analysts see relationships between separate
views. Current tools require extensive effort, such as repetitively selecting
individual nodes in a graph and manually following information highlighted in a
histogram, scatterplot, and map to identify abnormal behaviors. This project
will investigate methods for analytics tools to flexibly and unobtrusively
display relationships across multiple visualizations for supporting data
analytics. Doing this will deepen our scientific understanding of how multiple
visualizations support sensemaking of data and expand the design space of multi-
view visualizations. The work will also enrich educational materials in data
science and human-centered computing courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
includes four major lines of work. First, the team will design a usable overview
of cross-view data relationships, supported by computations, for helping users
to relate information from multiple visualizations. This design highlights a
core concept of "context separation", which creates stand-alone views to plot
computed, cross-view data relationships instead of relying on displayed visual
elements. Second, the researchers will create a novel layout method for
spatially organizing multiple visualizations by considering data relationships
among them. Third, the team will develop novel user interactions for
manipulating displayed cross-view data relationships, including merging and
splitting, to support both analysis and navigation. Fourth, the team will
conduct user experiments to study the effectiveness and cognitive load of these
cross-view data relationship visualizations. In addition, techniques developed
in this project will be open-sourced, so researchers, data scientists,
practitioners, and educators can use, extend or modify them for data analysis,
tool development, and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.