* 2002577
* Magnetized Outflows from Neutron Star Mergers and Collapsars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Brian Metzger, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 454,162.00

The merger of two extremely dense stellar remnants, or neutron stars, was
observed for the first time through gravitational waves and electromagnetic
light in 2017. Although this event, named GW 170817, has been studied
extensively, there are aspects of the explosion, called a “kilonova,” which are
still not well understood. Using detailed computer modeling, a research team at
Columbia University will investigate in detail how the merged stars may have
produced a new neutron star remnant (before ultimately succumbing to gravity and
collapsing to a black hole). They will explore how explosive ejecta flowed out
from the merger site, producing heavy atomic nuclei, whose radioactive decay
powered the kilonova. In parallel they will study similar physical conditions
that occur following the collapse of a massive star at the end of its nuclear
burning life when the star is rotating very rapidly (a so-called "collapsar").
This work will probe extreme physical processes such as relativistic spacetime
around black holes and the extreme densities found in the cores of massive
neutron stars. The project also has implications for the origin of the heaviest
elements in the Universe. Cataclysmic events, such as neutron star mergers,
capture the imagination of students, researchers, and the public alike. Research
and educational goals will be integrated in three ways: undergraduate student
research, a week-long international school on time-domain gravitational wave
astrophysics, and a website disseminated to local teachers for use as classroom
educational tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The binary neutron star merger GW170817
was accompanied by thermal emission ("kilonova"), powered by the radioactive
decay of heavy nuclei synthesized via the rapid neutron capture process
(r-process). However, the quantity, composition, and velocity of the ejecta
needed to match the observations disagree with those predicted by numerical
simulations of the dynamical merger phase. Instead, the bulk of the ejecta is
best explained as originating in outflows over longer timescales during the
post-merger phase, from either a strongly-magnetized neutron star remnant
("millisecond magnetar") or the neutrino-cooled accretion torus surrounding the
compact object. The researchers will explore the properties and kilonova
signatures of neutrino-heated magnetized outflows from millisecond magnetar
remnants of neutron star mergers and collapsars, both in isolation as well as
surrounded by magnetized accretion disks, using three-dimensional general-
relativistic magnetohydrodynamical (GRMHD) simulations. The numerical code will
be upgraded to include a realistic equation of state (bridging the interior of
the neutron star to the lower density wind region) and a neutrino transport
scheme to capture the neutrino-driven mass-loading of the winds and the
evolution of its electron fraction. A suite of simulations, performed for
different neutrino luminosities and mass accretion rates, will cover different
epochs in the post-merger evolution. The simulations will address the relative
importance and interplay between outflows from the star versus the disk, and
their respective baryon-loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.