* 2002642
* Collaborative Research: Disentangling physical and biological controls on Indian Ocean carbon storage during the last glacial-interglacial transition
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Elisabeth Sikes, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 128,645.00

Evidence suggests more carbon dioxide was stored in deep ocean waters during the
last ice age and released to the atmosphere as the Earth warmed. There are
several ways that this might happen. Carbon dioxide could be released when the
total amount of algae in ocean waters decreases after the last ice age. Or the
amount of carbon dioxide stored in the deeper ocean waters could change with
differing pathways of deep currents. Recent work suggest the Indian Ocean might
play an important role in one or both of these processes. Newly collected
sediment cores collected from the Indian Ocean will be examined for subtle
changes in the chemistry that will provide scientists a way to document how
carbon dioxide moves between the oceans and atmosphere over long periods of
time. The social media platform of the American Museum of Natural History will
be used to produce short video segments and visualizations of ocean circulation
and climate to share with educators and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of physical versus biological controls of CO2
sequestration in the glacial ocean remains unresolved after decades of research.
During glaciations, changes in thermohaline circulation, Southern Ocean
ventilation, and nutrient utilization are all believed to have played an
important role in reducing atmospheric CO2. An improved understanding of the
different roles of biological transfer versus physical transfer of CO2 requires
examining multiple water masses in multiple ocean basins. The scientific
objective is to reconstruct the magnitude and mechanisms driving carbon storage
in the southern Indian Ocean by determining the temporal evolution and vertical
distribution of Delta14C and oxygenation (using quantitative proxies: Delta-
delta13Cwuel-globo, and alkenone preservation) in Indian Ocean interior water
masses across the last glacial-interglacial transition. These proxies have been
chosen to distinguish between the rate of water mass circulation and
respiration-driven CO2 accumulation to assess the roles these mechanisms played
in CO2 sequestration. The use of multiple sediment cores across latitude and
longitude has been fundamental in determining that critical indicators of
oceanic CO2 storage (Delta14C and oxygenation) differed substantially in the
Atlantic and Pacific through time. Work proposed here will fill a substantial
gap in our knowledge by making use of the first new core material from the
Southern Indian Ocean in nearly 30 years. We have selected a suite of three
suitable cores from depths (1,118 to 3,164 m) that are bathed by the major
interior water masses that reflect both respiration and circulation driven CO2
storage in the region today. Results created here will be the first from this
area using these techniques to determine the magnitude and mechanisms of
Southern Indian Ocean CO2 storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.