* 2002699
* A Dynamic Flash Evaporation and Vapor Separation System for Seawater Desalination
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Vijay Dhir, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

There is a worldwide scarcity of potable water. Desalination of abundantly
available seawater especially in coastal areas offers a viable option for
conversion of seawater into fresh water. A number of schemes for desalination of
water in the past have been developed. However, these schemes are either energy
intensive or capital intensive. As a result, the cost of production of potable
water is relatively high. The project will develop, analyze, and optimize a
novel high-throughput desalination technique that is compact, modular, and
relatively inexpensive to build and operate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
technique solar-heated sea water from a solar pond flows through a set of
injector passages, where the water becomes superheated leading to formation of
vapor bubbles. Formation of bubbles accelerates the pressure drop allowing more
thermal energy to be converted into vapor. The vapor-liquid mixture exits the
injector passages into a larger tube tangentially. Centrifugal force generated
as a result of swirl causes liquid to move outward while vapor forms a core in
the middle of the separator tube. Vapor leaves the vapor core via a retrieval
tube to a condenser to create potable water. Separated liquid is pumped back to
the solar pond to be reheated. Having demonstrated the viability of the concept
in the laboratory, the team is proposing to expand the experimental work to
demonstrate the applicability of the concept over a broad range of operational
parameters. Data for thermal conversion efficiency, vapor separation
effectiveness and temperature and pressure profiles in the injector passages and
separator tube are to be obtained. The data will be used to support analytical
and numerical modeling of the process. Void fraction in the separator tube is to
be measured and stability of vapor core in the separator tube will be
investigated under a variety of mass and momentum flux conditions. This is an
area unexplored before and represents a significant intellectual challenge with
respect to meaningful experiments and analytical/numerical modeling. Gained
knowledge will be used to optimize thermal conversion efficiency and vapor
separation effectiveness under a range of flow conditions and temperatures of
water exiting the solar pond. Lastly experimental effort will be used to develop
an operational map that could be of great value for practical implementation of
this novel concept at atmospheric and sub-atmospheric
pressures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.