* 2002231
* Molecular mechanisms of heterochromatin spreading at the leading edge
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Aaron Johnson, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/29/2024
* USD 948,966.00

Molecular mechanisms of heterochromatin spreading at the leading
edge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will uncover molecular details of how
genes are stably turned off to produce different types of cells. Stable gene
silencing can distinguish single-celled organisms and it also helps the human
body use the same genome to create very different cell types that form organs.
One major determinant of stable gene silencing is how far along a chromosome the
wave of silencing spreads. Understanding how spreading occurs and how it is
stopped are the primary focuses of this project. Achieving the goals of this
project will help us understand variation across genetically identical cells
that underlies development and environmental effects on gene regulation. The
project will be undertaken by a team of scientists lead by the PI and including
postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduates. Summer research
experiences for high school students and their teachers from a local school with
a high minority population will enhance the training impact of the project.
Together, the team will contribute to the research, combining their resources
and skill sets while mentoring each other across levels. The results from this
project will be broadly shared with the research community and the public and
the resources generated will be made available to the scientific
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterochromatin is a genomic structure that
represses transcription in a manner that is epigenetically maintained through
cell division, contributing to stable cell differentiation in all eukaryotes.
Establishment of a heterochromatin domain involves site-specific initiation and
subsequent spreading across large regions of the genome, incorporating repressor
proteins that stably associate with chromatin. Spreading is coupled to the
conversion of histone modifications at the “leading edge” and eventual
transition to the stable heterochromatin state. This mechanism requires two main
modes of action for the heterochromatin machinery: dynamic spreading and stable
repressive association with chromatin. While much is known of the components of
heterochromatin in multiple systems, we do not understand at molecular
resolution how the machinery coordinates the transitions through the steps of
the mechanism. This project harnesses a purified budding yeast heterochromatin
system that fully recapitulates the dynamic conversion of histone modifications
and the formation of a stable repressive heterochromatin state. Previous work
from the research group using this system has generated models for many steps in
the mechanism that will now be tested at a new level of molecular resolution.
Advanced cross-linking mass spectrometry will be used, combined with “designer”
chromatin to capture the heterochromatin machinery in the multiple modes of
action that drive formation of an epigenetic repressive genomic structure. The
wealth of genetic and biochemical tools available will allow for identification
of the most important molecular interactions for heterochromatin assembly,
generating a new level of mechanistic understanding of this fundamental genomic
regulatory system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.