* 2002543
* Collaborative Research: Rapid Climate Change During the Miocene Climate Optimum: A Proxy-Model Comparison
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Mark Clementz, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 165,040.00

The Miocene Climatic Optimum, between 18 and 13 million years ago, is one of
Earth's most recent prolonged warming events with peak global surface
temperature about 7 degrees Celsius (13 degrees Fahrenheit) above present and
characterized by intervals of abrupt variability. Despite this warmer surface
temperature, carbon dioxide concentrations were similar to forecasts of the
coming decades while the configuration of continents on the global was quite
similar to present-day. Therefore, this period of warmer climate may provide a
useful benchmark to understand future climate change. The scientific results of
this research will help clarify the impacts of warming on the South American
Monsoon System may have on millions of people that presently depend on it for
water resources. Through a series of large public lectures, this project will
also increase awareness about the power of climate models for informing on
future climate and environmental change. Furthermore, the project will provide
content for undergraduate- and graduate-level courses and help grow the nascent
Department of Geosciences at the University of Connecticut (UConn). With the
potential impacts of this new data and the associated educational components,
this project stands to significantly benefit
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although understanding of the climate of this
Miocene Climatic Optimum (MCO) is well documented through a variety of proxy
records, the continental record remains poorly resolved. This data gap hinders
our ability to distinguish the temperature responses between land and sea, and
thus, limits our ability to use the MCO as an analog for future climate change.
This project will therefore analyze the record of paleoclimate from the Central
Andes preserved in the geochemistry, palynology, physical sedimentology and
paleontology of ancient sand seas and paleo river and lake deposits at key
localities in NW Argentina. The research team will combine this effort with a
series of Miocene sensitivity experiments with the Community Earth System Model
to test if CO2 driven warming is able to produce the geochemical and
paleoenvironmental data or if other mechanisms, such as Antarctic ice volume and
orbital changes, are required. This multidisciplinary research will provide
insights into the causes and responses of rapid climate changes under climate
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.