* 2002781
* CAS: Effective and Selective Sequestration of Functional Molecules with Baskets and Covalent Basket Cages
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jovica Badjic, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Badjić at the Ohio State
University examines novel ways for effectively removing pharmaceutical and
agricultural waste in our water systems. Through surface runoffs and ground
water, pesticides and their degradation products find their way into the living
world. Moreover, the illicit drug use and the overdose epidemic are on the rise
and are also contaminating waste streams. To provide solutions to these
challenges, Professor Badjić and his group are making cup-shaped compounds to
trap and remove environmental waste and/or illicit drugs from our water systems.
In this project, Professor Badjić and his group design specific molecular
structures using computational and experimental chemistry methods. By studying
these basket-shaped molecules, he expands the understanding of which molecular
structures would be most effective in the capture of toxic species. Professor
Badjić provides training and mentoring to his graduate and undergraduate
students. He also gives public talk about environmental and health related
problems in society, suggesting ways to use supramolecular chemistry to address
these concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is to
design, prepare and study the mode of action of sophisticated abiotic hosts that
are complementary to biologically-active organic molecules. With amino acids
preorganized at the rim of chiral ABC hosts that have three different amino
acids (A, B, and C) at top of a cup-shaped cavitand, Professor Badjić studies
the encapsulation of important drugs and pesticides. The second objective is
centered on scrutinizing chiral differentiation of pharmaceuticals and
herbicides with ABC baskets and developing tools for directing the sequestration
and removal processes. The third objective, use dynamic covalent chemistry to
investigate the preparation of covalent basket cages (CBCs) and their binding of
organophosphorus pesticides. CBCs could trap four organophosphorus compounds in
an allosteric manner resulting in the effective sequestration of these toxic
substances. The research project engages a large number of undergraduates in
research and educates the general public (through the Center of Science and
Industry) about the importance of basic science in solving real-world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.