* 2002865
* A telescopic algorithm for two-dimensional hidden Markov models with application to genetic studies
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Xiang-Yang Lou, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,172,296.00

Family-based genetic studies use a number of statistical techniques to
understand how genetic information flows from parent to offspring. The
investigators will develop computationally efficient algorithms for identifying
genetic information from family data using a technique known as a Hidden Markov
model. This model has demonstrated considerable success in a broad range of
scientific disciplines, including areas such as speech recognition in telephone
conversations and face identification from sequences of images. When the
complexity of the problem increases, computational algorithms confront
challenges with finding the solution of the model in realistic and practical
time frames. The investigators' research on novel computational and statistical
approaches will provide efficient algorithms, and software tools, of broad
scientific relevance. In their work the tools developed will yield a more
powerful approach for finding genes underlying complex diseases. The
collaborative team will also directly apply their techniques to forestry genetic
data describing a multi-year plant-breeding program. Educationally, the trainees
involved will be integrated into a vibrant interdisciplinary research team,
gaining exposure to techniques for the solution of real world problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-dimensional Markov processes are ubiquitous in the
real world. Dependencies in interacting particle systems, images, videos,
digitized documents, and gene transmission are all examples of multi-dimensional
Markov processes. A Markov process is a random process (i.e., a statistical
phenomenon in which the possible outcomes of a sequence of events or variables
vary) in which the prediction of the future state is made just using the
information of the current state, independent of both past history and unknown
future states. This idea generalizes for higher dimensions. For example, gene
transmission from parent to child is a two-dimensional Markov process, the
determination of the future state, the child, depends on the neighbors in two
dimensions, the parents. Most cases of interest, however, are hidden Markov
processes, in which the current state of a variable cannot be observed, but must
be inferred by consideration of all possible future states given all possible
current states. As the number of quantities to be determined increases, the
computational demand in both computer memory and computing time increases
dramatically. To apply the concept, therefore, to many important real
applications requires the development of novel and powerful computational
algorithms. This project is focused on the design of a novel software package,
specifically designed for the solution of hidden Markov models. The techniques
developed will be relevant for the solution of problems from a broad array of
disciplines, not only for wider family based genetic studies but also areas such
as text analysis from images. Thus, this project will increase the computational
ability to solve real-world problems across many engineering, geosciences and
biological disciplines, with commensurate potential positive societal impact. In
this case an interesting application arises in plant breeding through the
collaboration with experts in forestry science.