* 2002483
* P2C2: Evaluating North Pacific Hydroclimate during the Holocene Using the Denali Ice Core Archive
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Karl Kreutz, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 391,160.00

This project broadly seeks to develop a Holocene-length hydroclimate record from
the Mt. Hunter (Alaska) ice core archive and evaluate North Pacific hydroclimate
variability in context with existing paleoclimate data and models. This project
is motivated in part by recent observational and modeling studies that
demonstrate a connection between Pacific multidecadal variability and Arctic
warming during the early 20th century and since the 1970s. The impact of Pacific
multidecadal variability on Arctic climate has considerable implications for sea
ice extent and possible linkages between Arctic amplification, sea ice loss, and
enhanced mid-latitude winter variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work on
the Mt. Hunter ice core record demonstrates that the observed doubling of snow
accumulation and 60-fold increase in summer melt during the industrial era
(since the year 1850) is linked to Pacific multidecadal variability and is
unique in the last millennium. The research seeks to confirm if the same drivers
are relevant for the entire Holocene. Establishing how the Pacific-Arctic
teleconnection responded during warm intervals and abrupt events outside of the
instrumental period and last millennium would provide valuable insight into
Earth system sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will combine
several complementary techniques in different sections of the Mt. Hunter ice
core archive, with specific focus on the bottom 20 meters of the twin 208-meter
surface-to-bedrock cores. Preliminary radiogenic isotope (14-Carbon) analyses
demonstrate that the basal ice is more than 10,000 years old.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific project objectives include: 1) time scale
development using additional 14-Carbon measurements, tephrochronology, laser
ablation ICPMS measurements to extend annual layer counting, and a suite of
glaciological models; 2) hydroclimate proxy development, including snow
accumulation for regional moisture estimates (based on chronology and ice flow
models), stable water isotopes for the integrated water cycle, and trace element
chemistry for atmospheric dynamics; 3) integration with the new Holocene-length
Mt. Hunter record with the existing North Pacific ice core array and other
regional paleoclimate data; and 4) comparison of the new Holocene-length Mt.
Hunter record with Earth system models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
Broader Impacts include a multi-faceted approach that includes support and
mentoring of an early career scientist and a doctoral student in the context of
international research cooperation. The researchers will collaborate with
Colorado State University faculty and U.S. National Park Service faculty
personnel to fabricate educational kits based on the Mt. Hunter ice core record
that target grades 4-12 education in Alaska and Maine
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.