* 2002120
* Nonlinear Electrophoresis of Charged Colloidal Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Aditya Khair, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,343.00

The goal of this project is to predict and measure how electrically charged
particles in electrolyte solutions move under strong voltages. Such motion is
called electrophoresis and is important in lab-on-a-chip devices, e-ink
displays, pigments, coatings, and the petroleum industry. A central objective is
to quantify the ratio of the speed of the particle to the voltage strength,
which is known as the electrophoretic mobility. Such measurements are conducted
to infer the electrical charge of a particle, a key quantity in predicting the
behavior of suspensions of particles. One complication is that electrophoretic
mobility may depend on the voltage in non-linear way, particularly with large
voltages in organic electrolytes (e.g. oils doped with surfactant molecules).
However, predictive models for this nonlinear, voltage-dependent mobility are
lacking. Thus, the intellectual merit of this project is to develop theory and
numerical computations to predict the nonlinear mobility, which will be compared
to experimental measurements. A broader technological impact is the development
of new methods to determine particle charge to aid in designing dispersions with
enhanced stability, which will benefit the formulation of household and
personal-care products that use organic solvents. The educational broader impact
of this project includes course development, undergraduate research, and
outreach activities. For the latter, educational modules for K-12 students will
be developed and integrated into existing outreach programs at Carnegie Mellon
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to
predict the electric field-dependent mobility of a charged colloidal particle
via numerical solution of the electrokinetic equations governing fluid flow, ion
transport and reaction kinetics, and electrostatic fields in electrophoresis.
These predictions will be compared against experimental measurements, which will
enable feedback to refine modeling assumptions. The numerical scheme will employ
a custom spectral element code that is ideally suited to the task. The project
is split into two technical objectives. Objective 1 is focused on steady
electrophoresis under a uniform, steady (dc) field, for which the mobility is
time independent. The goal is to compute the field-dependent mobility over the
entire range of experimentally relevant field strength. In objective 2, particle
motion under a single frequency ac field will be examined, for which the
mobility is time dependent. Here, the hypothesis is that the nonlinear
distortion of the Debye cloud, beyond the weak-field limit, leads to rectified
migration under an ac field, due to a mismatch in the diffusion coefficients of
the cations and anions in an electrolyte. The project is novel since previous
efforts have predominantly focused on weak applied fields, where the mobility is
field-independent. The project will generate new computational tools to analyze
experiments on nonlinear electrophoresis. This will have a broader impact to the
colloid science and soft matter communities, who will be able to use the results
to infer surface charge from field-dependent mobility
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.