* 2002922
* Pendant Photochromic Switches Enabling Fluxional Macromolecular Pi-Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* John Tovar, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professors John D. Tovar and Arthur E.
Bragg of the Department of Chemistry at Johns Hopkins University to understand
how pi-conjugated building blocks with fluxional electronic structures driven by
light absorption can tune the properties of organic electronic materials.
Organic electronics can impact many areas of contemporary energy and electrical
science, with innovations on the horizon in fields such as large-area lighting,
energy storage, and even biomedicine. These materials are essentially long chain
plastic-like molecules but with unusual electronic properties imparted through
special bonds called pi-bonds. The alternation of pi-bonds with single bonds
enables the molecules or polymers to conduct electricity when these bonds are
varied. In this research, the investigators first construct molecular building
blocks for the polymers with different electronic properties. Computational
modelling is utilized to systematically investigate how chemical changes
introduced into the building blocks affect the overall properties of the
polymers from which they are formed. Advanced spectroscopic and electrical
measurement techniques are used to understand changes in electronic and
molecular structures in real time. Such systematic investigations generate
knowledge that could lead to significant improvements in cutting-edge
applications ranging from high-speed transistors to energy storage. Students
associated with this project are exposed to interdisciplinary research and
prepared to be leaders in the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists.
Education and outreach activities targeting students and underrepresented
minority groups in urban Baltimore high schools provide additional creative
opportunities for broader community involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
is focused on the exploration of organic electronic materials derived from
complex aromatic structures as components of photoswitchable conjugated
polymers. The research plan involves the synthesis of photoswitchable fluxional
monomer units triggered by various external stimuli and extensions to oligomeric
and polymeric analogues, computational modeling to understand how these chemical
changes impact electronic properties, and spectroscopic interrogations using
steady-state and ultrafast or other time-resolved techniques to capture changes
in electronic and molecular structure. The general research approach is
primarily concerned with new strategies to achieve highly polarizable polymer
electronic structures as opposed to particular bandgap engineering of energy
levels. The ideas elucidated from this project could be transitioned to many
types of application-specific materials designs such as stimuli-switchable
transistors whereby conjugation pathways can be controlled
externally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.