* 2002410
* Charting Arctic and Global Interconnections: Workshops on Physical, Digital, and Social Infrastructures
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Michael Watts, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2023
* USD 49,997.00

Arctic biophysical and climate systems are deeply intertwined with global
processes, so dramatic changes in the Arctic region are likely to be felt
elsewhere. For example, Arctic shifts may trigger impacts outside of the Arctic
including tropical forests turning to savannahs, monsoon systems weakening, and
coral reefs becoming dominated by algae, all of which will have extensive
consequences for humans across the world. Limited knowledge exists about the
interconnections between the Arctic’s changing environment and socioecological
systems across the world. The diverse but uneven effects of Arctic regime shifts
on ecosystems and cultural systems highlights the need for research to better
understand these Arctic-global interconnections. This project gathers scientists
and researchers for two workshops to address how transformations in the Arctic
may affect human well-being in global environments, in light of the rapid
changes undergoing in the Arctic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the Arctic
and global interconnections opens up new understandings of networked
environmental effects and the various infrastructures through which its
resources and representations are produced and circulated. As such, this
research advances systems-level understanding of links between the Arctic’s
rapidly changing environmental, social, and cultural systems with other regions
and networks across the world. Scholars are invited to consider theory and
methods for studying such interconnections through environmental,
infrastructural, and social dimensions. The workshops emphasize the increasing
complexity of physical infrastructures, especially energy infrastructures, and
digital infrastructures in shaping knowledge of environmental transformation and
mediating social adaptation to such change both within and beyond the Arctic.
One outcome will be an innovative research program that responds to the research
priorities of the Arctic Social Science Program and the Navigating the New
Arctic Big Idea about interconnections of Arctic changing systems and global
contexts. A report titled “The Translocal Arctic” will be generated by
conference participants and made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.