* 2002742
* Fundamental Study of Interaction of Ions Present in Water with Graphene Coatings for Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nikhil Koratkar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 317,268.00

This project will investigate an approach to energy harvesting based on the
interaction of a fluid such as water with a graphene surface. Graphene is a
highly flexible, two-dimensional sheet of carbon atoms and is ideally suited for
the coating of large surfaces. This project aims to demonstrate that water flow
over graphene surfaces can directly generate electricity. Graphene is ideally
suited for this application, since it possesses high-mobility charge carriers
that are ready to be coupled to moving ions present in the flowing fluid.
Graphene is also flexible, minimally invasive (it is the thinnest material),
chemically and mechanically stable, and environmentally benign. Moreover, its
synthesis is scalable and macro-scale continuous graphene films can be produced
by roll-to-roll deposition techniques. The proposed graphene coating offers
unique possibilities for energy harvesting from hitherto untapped renewable
sources such as rain, tidal action, waves, ocean currents, river water as well
as water flow over boats, submarines, and bridges. Such graphene skins could
enable harvesting of the ubiquitous, abundant and renewable mechanical energy of
moving water directly to electrical energy. Unlike traditional schemes, the
graphene coating directly converts the flow energy into electrical energy
without the need for moving parts. Such graphene coatings could also replace
conventional batteries (which are environmentally hazardous) in low-power, low-
voltage and long service-life applications. Once scaled up, this concept offers
a potentially transformative approach to energy harvesting, as compared with
incremental advances in current technologies. The investigators will develop
specially designed interactive learning modules (or virtual labs) which will be
integrated into the curriculum. Outreach includes demonstrations to
undergraduates as well as to high school students and teachers. The PIs aim is
to popularize science and to attract under-represented groups to pursue careers
in renewable energy technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will tackle the
fundamental science and engineering challenges associated with developing
graphene-based coatings for nano-fluidic power harvesting. The key science
challenge involves understanding in-depth the mechanism(s) responsible for nano-
fluidic power harvesting in graphene films. In particular, the project aims to
develop a fundamental understanding of how ions present in a fluid such as
water, interact and couple with graphene-coated as well as free-standing
graphene surfaces. This will be addressed using carefully designed control
experiments in conjunction with molecular dynamics and first principles density
functional theory calculations. The engineering challenge is equally important
and involves scaling up the graphene size in a manner that retains the
outstanding power density of the coating. This will be addressed by adapting
newly developed roll-to-roll and template-directed chemical vapor deposition
techniques to produce macroscale graphene films and foams. The graphene
manufacturing process will be optimized to avoid physical interfaces (breaks) in
the film as it is scaled up to macroscale dimensions and to tightly control
thickness and structure-properties of the graphene. The coupling between
experiments and theory, modeling and simulation work will build fundamental
understanding of the underlying science and enable successful development,
optimization and validation of the proposed technology. The PIs will develop
specially designed interactive learning modules (or virtual labs) which will be
integrated into the curriculum. Outreach includes demonstrations to
undergraduates as well as to high school students and teachers. The PIs aim is
to popularize science and to attract under-represented groups to pursue careers
in renewable energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.