* 2002540
* III: Small: Predictive Analysis of Diabetes Dedicated Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Jingrui He, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 448,049.00

This project will study diabetes dedicated social networks. It aims to harness
diabetes patients' online social behaviors from multiple networks to predict
their biomarker measurements such as glycated hemoglobin and fasting blood
glucose. This project will provides a paradigm shift from exploration to
prediction compared with state-of-the-art research on diabetes dedicated social
networks, transforming the massive social behavioral data into clinically
meaningful insights and tools. This project will advance computer science by
providing a suite of novel predictive models and methods for multi-modality
information extraction, densification, and prediction. It will also advance
diabetes care by revealing the mutual impact between diabetes patients' online
behaviors and their medical conditions. This project will involve students at
various levels, including both graduate and undergraduate students. The project
teams plans to disseminate the research outcomes from this project at major
conferences and journals in both computer science and
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consist of four complementary
research thrusts. The first thrust will extract features that characterize
diabetes patients' online social behaviors, including social content features
and social connectivity features. The second thrust will extract and infer
diabetes patients' biomarker measurements, with the help of auxiliary data. The
third thrust will learn the prediction function that connects patients' online
social behaviors with diabetes biomarkers; this thrust will start from a single
pair of feature and biomarker, and then jointly build the predictive models for
multiple pairs via a tensor-based regularization method. The fourth thrust will
thoroughly evaluate the models and methods from the previous three thrusts using
data from various sources, such as multiple diabetes dedicated social networks,
diabetes patients' clinical data, the online encyclopedia data, and data from
online and clinic-based surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.