* 2002659
* Nanoparticle Materials as Chemical and Biological Tools for Peptides and Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Yan Zhao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 525,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are extremely
important biomolecules involved in practically every biological process.
Although synthetic materials that bind peptides and proteins in aqueous
environments are highly desirable, they are difficult to produce due to
complexity of biological peptides. The research group of Professor Yan Zhao at
Iowa State University develops novel antibody-mimicking polymeric nanoparticles
for sequence-specific recognition of peptides. These materials are expected to
enable numerous applications in chemistry and biology including identification
of functional residues responsible for Alzheimerâ€™s disease, regulation of
enzymatic catalysis, and purification of peptides and proteins. The research
trains student researchers into professional scientists by exposing them to a
wide range of skills in biomaterials science, physical organic chemistry,
supramolecular chemistry, and polymer
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are extremely important biomolecules
involved in practically every biological process. Although synthetic materials
that bind peptides and proteins in competitive aqueous environments have
numerous applications in chemistry and biology, they are difficult to produce
because of complexity of the guest, subtle structural differences among some
amino acids, and difficulty in molecular recognition in water. This project,
funded by the Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research,
supports Professor Yan Zhao of Iowa State University to develop antibody-
mimicking polymeric nanoparticles for sequence-specific recognition of peptides.
The materials are prepared through molecular imprinting within cross-linked
surfactant micelles and can be tuned systematically in their molecular
recognition. With abilities to distinguish closely related amino acid residues,
they can be used to probe functional roles of specific sequences in a long
peptide, as well as flexible loops catalytically relevant in an enzyme. By their
strong and tunable binding for peptides, they enable facile purification of
peptides and proteins from complex mixtures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.