* 2002607
* Heterogeneous and Multiphase Reactions of Volatile and Semi-Volatile Organic Compounds on Mineral Dust Aerosol
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Vicki Grassian, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 561,767.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the NSF Division
of Chemistry supports Professor Vicky Grassian at the University of California,
San Diego. Professor Grassian and her team investigate the role of aerosols, in
particular, their interactions with different gases in the atmosphere from both
natural and pollution sources. Aerosols are solid or liquid particles suspended
in air. They are an important component of the Earth’s atmosphere and can impact
human health and climate. This project investigates the chemical reactions of
mineral dust aerosols, a class of aerosols from windblown soils and desert
regions that circulate around the globe. Understanding the interaction of
mineral dust aerosol with gases increases our knowledge of the different
components that make up the atmosphere and the air we breathe. Other broader
impacts include the training of undergraduate and graduate students. Professor
Grassian has a research program that attracts a large and diverse number of
students including many women and underrepresented minorities. Additionally,
educational and outreach activities for the broader public will be developed.
Dr. Grassian leads efforts to expand and enhance the effectiveness of outreach
activities including further development of hands-on activities for the broader
public that span K-12 students including activities that relate increase in
volatile organic emissions to familiar consumer
products.&lt;br/&gt;,&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on laboratory studies of
reactions of volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds with mineral dust
aerosol, an important component of the Earth’s atmosphere. The organic compounds
include trace atmospheric gases termed volatile chemical products (VCPs), which
recently have been identified as a class of compounds that comes predominantly
from industrial sources. A multi-technique, molecule-based approach employing
mass spectrometry and vibrational spectroscopy is used to probe mechanistic
details of surface adsorption and subsequent reactions of the adsorbed organic
compounds with acidic gases and oxidants. The research project identifies how
mechanisms for these reactions change as a function of relative humidity and the
presence of adsorbed water. The project also determines how the different
components of mineral dust aerosol impact its reactivity. New products formed in
these reactions are being characterized. This research aims to provide new
insights and a better understanding of the heterogeneous and multiphase
chemistry of volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds with mineral dust
aerosols from the perspective of fundamental molecular processes as well as
potential global impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.