* 2002721
* PFI-TT: Interactive Block Games for Routine Cognitive Assessment of Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kiju Lee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project addresses the urgent social need of a
low-cost, long-term solution for routine cognitive assessment of mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Early detection at the MCI stage
is a key to delaying onset of this degenerative disease and slow worsening of
the symptoms. This project will re-invent a novel, automated, game-based
technology that can be used for routine cognitive assessment of older
individuals who are at a high risk of developing AD. This technology-enabled
method will significantly lower the cost associated with cognitive assessment
and enable objective and accurate measurements of one's cognitive status, which
will lead to early detection of cognitive declines associated with MCI and AD.
This project also brings unique and valuable learning and training opportunities
for the diverse students participating in the research and workshop activities.
The proposed applied research will be tightly integrated with the training and
mentoring of graduate students to become future leaders in technology innovation
and entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a
novel technology platform for automated, play-based routine cognitive assessment
in older adults and demonstrate its commercial potential. This innovative system
employs a set of highly instrumented cubes interfacing with computerized games.
The cubes feature programmable visual, auditory, and tactile sensory feedback
mechanisms and embedded motion sensors for user performance and behavior
assessment via interactive play. The games will be designed to capture working
memory, spatial reasoning, response time, and hand-eye coordination skills
tailored for the target population. The integrated computational measures of
play complexity will enable the system to automatic adjust the game difficulty
based on the user performance. The system will not only automate the
administration and data collection process, but also produce new types of
behavioral data, such as hand tremor, repetitive or hyperactive motions, and
manipulation speed. The proposed technology development and evaluation will take
the co-design approach in order to effectively address user-specific
requirements and technical improvements for potential commercialization. A
partnership with a local continuing care retirement community (CCRC) will
streamline and accelerate the complex co-design process via utilizing the living
lab established in the partnering CCRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.