* 2002625
* Collaborative Research: Conformational Equilibria of Biologically Important Saccharides and Related Biomolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Anthony Serianni, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 12/31/2023
* USD 510,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Anthony Serianni from the University of Notre Dame and
Dr. Robert Woods from the University of Georgia to investigate the three-
dimensional properties of sugar molecules, or saccharides, in solution.
Saccharides embedded in cell surfaces play critical roles in biology. In humans,
they are attached to soluble and membrane associated proteins and lipids, and
their biological roles include cell-to-cell and immune recognition. While it is
well known that the structural properties of saccharides correlate with their
biological functions, it remains difficult to assign these structural details in
solution by experimental methods. This difficulty has led to a heavy reliance on
theoretical methods to assign structures even though these methods have been
difficult to validate experimentally. This project aims to solve this problem by
developing and applying a new experimental technique to determine populations of
flexible domains in saccharides in solution, including the linkages connecting
them together in polymers and linkages that attach them to other biomolecules.
The experiment-derived information obtained can be compared to what is obtained
from theory to test and/or validate the latter. Senior researchers, graduate
students and undergraduates with interests and expertise in experimental and
computational science collaborate to achieve the objectives of the project. This
work provides valuable new tools to determine molecular structure that can be
generally applied to any biomolecule in solution, including proteins and nucleic
acids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses stable isotopically
labeled oligosaccharides and glycopeptides, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spin-couplings, density functional theory calculations, circular statistics and
X-ray crystallography to determine conformational populations of the flexible
domains of oligosaccharides in solution. This experimental approach is possible
because saccharides contain multiple NMR spin-couplings that report on the same
conformational domain, allowing quantitative treatments that yield continuous
single- and multi-state populational models. Once a given domain is
parameterized (e.g., O- or N-glycosidic linkage), its conformational properties
can be investigated in different structural contexts to determine the degree to
which it adapts conformationally to environmental cues. Experimental models are
compared to those obtained from molecular dynamics simulations to validate the
latter. This work leads to new experiment-based conformational classifications
of O-glycosidic linkages in oligosaccharides, and to a deeper understanding of
the multiple factors that influence oligosaccharide conformation in
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.