* 2002874
* Collaborative Research: MLWiNS: A Coding-Centric Approach to Robust, Secure, and Private Distributed Learning over Wireless
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Amir Avestimehr, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2023
* USD 133,332.00

Human and industrial automation, powered by machine learning (ML) such as Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) and the burgeoning ecosystem of billions of edge
computing devices with sensors connected through the infrastructure of the
internet (i.e., Internet of Things, or IoT) is shaping the future of our
society. Federated learning (also known as, collaborative learning) techniques
work across multiple decentralized edge devices and/or servers holding local
data samples and facilitate training of the algorithms by exchanging parameters
(i.e., weights associated with deep networks) instead of the actual data
samples. Federated learning over wireless networks is challenging because of
data loss associated with the communication characteristics. The goal of this
project is to provide their critically needed augmented intelligence by enabling
federated learning at the wireless edge, via an innovative framework, named
coded computing. The societal impact of democratizing machine learning on low
cost edge devices is also expected to be vast. For instance, smart edge networks
that track safety automatically and continuously in workplaces can have a
significant societal and economic impact. This project paves the path towards
scalable realization of such applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coded computing
has been hugely successful for large-scale distributed machine learning, where
one can judiciously create computational redundancy in a coded manner to
efficiently deal with communication bottleneck and system disturbances such as
stragglers, outages, node failures, and adversarial computations -- precisely
the set of challenges that hobble distributed wireless edge computations for
machine learning. This project leads to the development of theory and algorithms
for federated machine learning over wireless that are driven by fundamental
principles informed by coding and information theory. In particular, this
project holistically addresses the challenges of (i) wireless bandwidth costs,
(ii) resiliency to wireless outages, (iii) security, and (iv) prioritizing user
data privacy that is critical for large-scale user participation in wireless
edge computing. Another key aspect of wireless networks is that mobile users
join and leave the network arbitrarily, and user locations can change
frequently. The research team will develop a federated learning framework that
can adapt to such dynamic network topologies by designing a self-configurable
protocol that can accommodate new users on-the-go, thereby adapting to the
changes in the network topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.