* 2002297
* Last Glacial Maximum Tropical Pacific Thermocline Structure and Wind Field:  A Data Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Jean Lynch-Stieglitz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 449,701.00

The spatial pattern of wind and rainfall in the tropics is not fixed, but
changes with time. The changes can be driven by the amount of greenhouse gasses
in the atmosphere, changes in seasonality, or the presence of large expanses of
ice outside of the tropics. By looking at these patterns during the height of
the last ice age, ideas about the links between these drivers and the tropical
climate can be tested. It would be difficult to directly deduce the patterns of
the ice age winds. But when the winds blow on the upper ocean, they pile up warm
water in some areas and bring cold water closer to the sea surface in others. In
this project, the investigators will use tiny shells (foraminifera) that contain
information about the temperature of seawater at different depths. These shells
accumulate on the sea-floor and preserve a history of ocean temperature. The
upper ocean temperature reconstructed from shells that fell to the seafloor
during the height of the last ice age can then be used to deduce the wind
patterns. The project would support two graduate students (one of whom is a
woman from an underrepresented minority), as well as providing support for
undergraduate summer researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs proposes a plan
of database development and analysis that will use the information about the
thermocline structure recorded in the oxygen isotope composition of surface and
subsurface planktonic foraminifera in the tropics to reconstruct the tropical
thermocline and winds during the Last Glacial Maximum. The isotopic composition
of the tests of different species will reflect the surface and subsurface
density and can be used to reconstruct thermocline structure. The tight coupling
between winds and thermocline structure will be exploited to infer changes in
the winds through the thermocline reconstructions provided from the foraminifera
proxy data. The PIs will first create a global database of tropical planktonic
foraminifera oxygen isotope data from recent sediments. Using this data, models
for foraminifera calcification habitat will be constructed and the uncertainty
in the calcification habitat quantified. A variety of statistical approaches
will then be explored in order to determine how to project the sparse
information about the vertical structure of the water column from the
foraminiferal proxy data into estimates of the tropical thermocline structure,
and to determine how to optimally estimate the long-term mean winds associated
with a given mean thermocline state. These analytical approaches will include
Empirical Orthogonal Functions, Optimal Linear Estimators, and Inverse Methods.
Finally, existing Last Glacial Maximum oxygen isotope data will be compiled for
these same species. The database will be augmented in the Tropical Pacific with
new measurements, as guided by the data analysis effort. Once the Last Glacial
Maximum foraminiferal database is complete the data will be directly compared to
results from isotope-enabled general circulation model simulations of ice age
climate, and also used to produce an estimate of Tropical Pacific thermocline
structure and winds using the data analysis tools developed as described
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.