* 2002300
* Mass Sensing, Strong Vibrational Coupling and Super-Resolution Imaging of Noble Metal Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Gregory Hartland, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 506,462.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Gregory V. Hartland and his group at the University
of Notre Dame to create ultra-small, nanometer-sized mass balances that can
operate at room temperature. All objects vibrate and the vibration frequencies
depend on the size and shape of the object. These vibration frequencies are very
high for nanoparticles and they change when two particles are attached to each
other. Using this effect, this project contributes to sensing particles whose
sizes make them very difficult to detect with conventional techniques. By
accurately measuring mass, the researchers are able to identify unknown
particles such as viruses. The fundamental knowledge gained from this study can
also enable the detection of a variety of chemicals and particles in the
environment. The accurate detection of chemicals and particles is important for
assessing potential risks from environmental and biological hazards. This
research provides training and education to graduate and undergraduate students
at the University of Notre Dame as well as from local primarily undergraduate
institutions (PUIs). This project also provides research experience for high
school students and teachers from Elkhart Community Schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vibrational modes of metal nanostructures suspended in
air or placed on low density substrates have very high quality factors which
allows their frequencies to be accurately measured. With this award from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program, Professor Hartland
and his group at the University of Notre Dame use suspended nanostructures to
study how the vibrational modes of the nanostructures are affected by adsorbed
mass. They also examine the coupling between the vibrational modes of different
nanostructures, and coherently control the vibrational motion of coupled
nanostructures. These experiments are performed by transient absorption
microscopy implemented with asynchronous optical sampling, a dual laser
technique that avoids the use of a mechanical delay line to record data. The
results of the measurements allow the masses of large uncharged particles to be
directly determined, which is a challenge for conventional mass spectrometers.
In addition, ultrafast mid-infrared pump transient absorption microscopy is used
to image the plasmon resonances of single metal nanostructures. These
experiments generate new information about the form of the plasmon modes of
these structures, which is important for understanding the field enhancements
that are central to surface enhanced spectroscopies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.