* 2002759
* Collaborative Research: Investigating out-of sequence magmatism and mantle plume-lithosphere interactions adjacent to the Snake River plain (U.S.A.)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Matthew Brueseke, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2023
* USD 286,745.00

Volcanic eruptions are significant hazards and drivers of societal and
environmental change. Continental hotspot eruptions are the soures of the
largest documented eruptions on Earth. Hotspot magmatism is recognized in part
on identification of a linear chain of volcanoes that becomes younger opposite
the direction of plate motion. These age-progressions may be unclear when
volcanism along a hotspot “track” does not temporally fit in the age progression
and is therefore, out of sequence and at times, off-axis. The Snake River Plain-
Yellowstone (SRPY) volcanic province (Wyoming-Montana-Idaho, including
Yellowstone National Park) is the classic example of continental hotspot
magmatism, and major SRPY “supervolcano” eruptions are well documented. Small-
volume volcanoes exist adjacent to the SRPY, however. This project will
investigate these out of sequence volcanoes to provide an analog to better
identify hotspots in the geological record, yield new constraints on how the
Yellowstone hotspot interacts with North America, and be used to help refine
models for the origin and eruptive history of volcanism associated with this
hotspot. The findings have implications for continental hotspot volcanic hazard
assessments. Student training and public outreach are also key aspects of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multidisciplinary approach will be employed to
unravel the spatial-temporal magmatic history adjacent to the youngest part of
the SRPY hotspot track, including field mapping focused on the relations between
structures and igneous activity, geochronology, and geochemistry. These data
will allow the research team to: [1] determine the temporal-spatial history of
out-of-sequence volcanism adjacent to the SRPY; [2] define the mantle and
crustal contributions to this out of sequence and off-axis volcanism; [3]
decipher the links between syn-magmatic extension, SRPY magmatism and the out of
sequence and off-axis volcanism. The proposed study will provide opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students to learn a diverse suite of field,
presentation, and laboratory skills. Curriculum for GeoFORCE, a Native Alaskan
STEM education program, will be created and taught. GeoFORCE participants shall
visit Yellowstone National Park. Scientific advances made during this project
will be communicated to the public via collaboration with the Dubois Museum
through public talks and field trips, the development of a geological guide of
the upper Wind River basin (WY), and via news articles published globally on the
web and in local newspapers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.