* 2002940
* Biomimetic Zwitterionic Functional Materials for Immunomodulation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Shaoyi Jiang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 411,138.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, there are many non-
fouling materials or immunomodulatory drugs. Non-fouling materials can
effectively resist nonspecific interactions in complex media, but are inert
without any immunosuppressive properties. At the same time, immunomodulatory
drugs or molecules are capable of specifically interacting and regulating
biologic systems, but lack stealth properties. For many applications, these two
functions are highly desirable. However, these two types of materials and drugs
compromise their functions when they are used together. In this project, a drug-
free stealth biomaterial capable of directly regulating the immune response will
be developed and studied so that both functions will be achieved in one
biomaterial. The success of this work will not only provide new insights into
the fundamental design of biomaterials, but also have far-reaching implications
for applications including drug and gene delivery, cancer immunotherapy and cell
therapy. Support of this project will provide highly interdisciplinary research
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students, particularly under-
represented students. Knowledge from this work will be disseminated through
international conferences organized, new courses taught, and outreach activities
engaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphoserine (PS), an immune-signaling molecule in
nature, serves as an immunosuppressant under physiological conditions. It is
hypothesized that zwitterionic phosphoserine-mimic polymer (ZPS) will be able to
achieve both stealth and immunosuppressive properties in one biomaterial since
PS is negatively charged without stealth properties. The aims of this project
are to examine the dual-functional properties of ZPS and investigate the
mechanisms accounting for its immunomodulatory functions. Moreover, the
importance and potential application of ZPS in drug delivery will be explored.
The success of the proposed work will elucidate the concept about how to
integrate biological properties into inert biomaterials or endow active
biomaterials with stealth properties. It will not only provide new insights into
the fundamental design of biomaterials, but also enriches the arsenal of
immunomodulatory biomaterials for a broad range of biomedical applications.
Knowledge from this work will be disseminated through international conferences
organized, new courses taught, and outreach activities engaged. The PI will
continue to promote the field of zwitterionic biomaterials through organizing or
co-organizing international conferences, editing special issues and engaging
student participations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.