* 2002158
* NSF Center for Synthetic Organic Electrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Shelley Minteer, University of Utah
* Cooperative Agreement
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2025
* USD 12,000,000.00

This center realizes a long-held goal of synthetic chemists: to use electrons as
chemical reagents in oxidation reactions (removing electrons) or reduction
reactions (adding electrons). There are currently very few cases where this is
viable at useful scales and across a range of substrates. The CSOE team brings
together synthetic chemists, surface chemists, electroanalytical chemists,
theorists, materials scientists and chemical engineers to understand the
detailed surface processes happening on a particular electrode and develop
creative new chemical reactions. The discoveries, new methodologies and
techniques developed in the Center enable safer and sustainable synthetic
organic chemistry in both academia and industry. Other broader impacts include
graduate and postdoctoral training in team science and entrepreneurship and
outreach efforts to underserved audiences including refugee communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the NSF Center for Synthetic Organic
Electrochemistry (CSOE) is to make synthetic organic electrochemistry mainstream
through the invention of enabling, green, safe, and economic new reactions and
the demystification of fundamental electrochemical reactivity. Oxidations and
reductions are still done with large amounts of oxidizing and reducing agents
rather than the greener and more efficient electrochemical methodologies.
However, as synthetic organic chemists work toward more sustainable chemistry,
preparative electrochemical methods become natural choices due to their high
product efficiency, mild conditions, and ease of scalability. Integrating
expertise across many areas (electrochemistry, material science, surface
science, computational modeling, mechanistic analysis, and synthetic organic
chemistry) builds the knowledge base, techniques, and instrumentation to promote
widespread adoption of preparative electrochemical methods. This Center has four
thrusts. The first thrust develops electrocatalysts and mediators for C-H
functionalization. The second thrust develops techniques for oxidative
electrosynthesis. The third thrust focuses on methods and materials for
reductive electrosynthesis. The fourth thrust applies the new electrosynthesis
methods to complex organic synthesis. CSOE also designs instrumentation and
electrochemical cells tailored to the needs of the synthetic organic chemist.
The integrated and synergistic research environment offers unique opportunities
for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. This training is further
enhanced through vibrant partnerships with industry, collaborative training with
a diverse set of scientists and engineers, and by engaging in community-wide
education and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.