* 2002169
* I-Corps: Plant sterols as potential pre-emergent herbicides
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Lawrence Griffing, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
low-cost weed control while improving the environment and human health. Weeds
can reduce farming yields by 60-75%, even when using best practices. The
proposed herbicide is a combination of abundant natural chemicals operating with
a different chemical mode of action, and thus it does not generate resistance,
and may even help support stronger plants. This technology will help support
farm production and profitability, and its use may diversify the food
supply.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the discovery of
a herbicide that has new mode of action: when genes for sterol biosynthesis
change and become inactive through mutation or genetic engineering, plant seeds
do not complete germination; and if they do germinate, they have severely
stunted growth. By applying plant (or animal) sterols that are final products of
sterol biosynthesis in an appropriate encapsulation agent to germinating seeds,
the exogenous sterols inhibit seed sterol production, thus causing a decrease in
total sterols similar to the effects of gene inactivation. Application of
exogenous sterols phenocopies or mimics the effects of mutation of several
different sterol biosynthetic genes, reducing complete germination, causing
changes in plant vasculature, and producing severe dwarfing when given during
seed germination. This effect is broad spectrum, affecting both monocots and
dicots. Furthermore, herbicide application to plants that have already
germinated and are actively growing experience minimal or beneficial effects on
growth. The beneficial effects include slight stunting of stems, which may make
crops more resistant to wind and hail damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.