* 2002469
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Insights into Tropical Pacific Climate from Paleoproxy Data Assimilation into an Intermediate Complexity Dynamical Model
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Michael Evans, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 65,576.00

This project broadly seeks to reconstruct and interpret the state of the
tropical Pacific over the last millennium in response to radiative forcing. This
will be accomplished by assimilating high-resolution paleo-proxies from corals
and trees into a dynamical El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamically informed paleo-reconstructions will be
studied to address the following science questions: (i) how does the tropical
Pacific respond to external radiative forcing (ERF); (ii) does ENSO exhibit
regime-like behavior and is ENSO irregularity primarily due to chaotic or to
noise-driven dynamics; (iii) how has ENSO varied in the past; and (iv) can a
dynamical ENSO model improve paleo-proxy reconstructions of the tropical
Pacific. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions have implications for
predictability and decadal variability and are relevant to understanding ENSO
and its impacts, past, present and future. Adding information into paleoclimate
reconstructions from a dynamical model of ENSO with documented predictive skill
is a novel approach and may enhance interpretation of Tropical Pacific proxy
records. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include improved
understanding of ENSO behavior over time, support of undergraduate students in
the research project, and outreach to the public through well-established
outreach efforts at Columbia University and the University of
Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.