* 2002737
* SHF: Small: Automatic Generation of Cache Coherent Memory Systems for Multicore Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Daniel Sorin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Todayâ€™s computer processors are called multicore processors, because they have
multiple processor cores in them, all of which can be working simultaneously on
computational tasks. These cores share data with each other using a
communication protocol called cache coherence, which ensures that the data used
by these cores is up-to-date and correct. Cache coherence protocols are
notoriously complicated and difficult to design, and they are at least as
difficult to then verify as being correct in all situations. Because of their
complexity, coherence protocols take a large and disproportionate share of the
design and verification resources when the computer industry creates a new
processor. Furthermore, the difficulty of designing coherence protocols is
increasing as processor cores scale up in variety and number on a single chip.
This project is developing a novel tool that enables computer architects to
quickly and easily design high-performance coherence protocols that are provably
correct. The tool has the potential to radically change the way that protocols
are designed, in both industry and academia, and thus make processor design
faster, cheaper, and more reliable. Through an outreach program and a research
fellowship program for undergraduates, the project will benefit from the
contributions of women, under-represented populations, and undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As processor designs change--with the addition
of more cores or different types of cores, or with different expected
communication patterns--there are incentives to create new coherence protocols
to suit these changes. Even if a new protocol is not a radical departure from
previous protocols, designing it and validating it are arduous, bug-prone
processes.&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a novel tool, called ProtoGen+,
for automating the design of verifiable cache coherence protocols. The
architects need only provide simplified protocol designs that omit complexity
like hierarchy and concurrent communications. The tool takes those simplified
protocol designs and automatically generates the high-performance versions of
those protocols, thus hiding the complexity from the architects. ProtoGen+ then
outputs the complicated, concurrent protocol. ProtoGen+ greatly reduces design
and verification effort and minimizes the number of design bugs. ProtoGen+
accommodates a wide range of protocols, including those with hierarchy and
heterogeneity. ProtoGen+ also generates the virtual network assignments
necessary to avoid protocol deadlock. Two secondary objectives of the work are
to explore the space of protocols that are compatible with ProtoGen+ and to
produce protocols that are compatible with the previously developed Neo
framework for verifiable protocol design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.