* 2002374
* P2C2: Pan-American Precipitation Extremes and Multi-Decadal Regimes Reconstructed with Tree Ring Chronologies from the Amazon
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* David Stahle, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,747.00

This project aims to develop new tree-ring chronologies in the Amazon to
reconstruct precipitation, document coherence in tropical and extratropical
precipitation extremes across the Americas, and examine multi-decadal
variability of Amazon rainfall in observations, reconstructions, and model
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rationale behind the research is that
climate model simulations of hydroclimatic variability in the Amazon indicate
that anthropogenic forcing may amplify the hydrologic cycle, resulting in more
severe drought, extreme floods, and a decline in annual precipitation over most
of the watershed. However, instrumental observations are limited before 1950 and
may not represent the full range of inter-annual to multi-decadal rainfall
variability over the Amazon. High-resolution climate proxies are rare in the
Amazon, but tree-ring chronologies have been widely used to reconstruct past
megadroughts and pluvials in mid-latitude North and South America. These
dendroclimatic reconstructions have proven valuable for testing model
simulations of the climate dynamics responsible for decadal moisture
regimes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include furthering
the understanding of Amazonian hydroclimate to the broader scientific community
and public. The data generated by this project will be used far beyond the
specific aims of the research. The capacity building with South American
researchers is a strong aspect of the project as is website development and
video production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.