* 2002902
* Collaborative Research: MLWiNS: Dino-RL: A Domain Knowledge Enriched Reinforcement Learning Framework for Wireless Network Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Cong Shen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 272,544.00

Reinforcement learning (RL) methods have met with renewed interest in recent
years for adaptively configuring wireless networks. Despite the promising early
results and the conceptual match, many existing approaches do not develop and
tailor the RL methods to fit the unique characteristics of wireless networking.
The goal of this project is to develop a novel domain knowledge enriched RL
framework, or Dino-RL, to address this problem. The Dino-RL framework aims to
seamlessly integrate the physical-law based modeling and an abstract episodic
memory into the RL process, and has the potential to revamp the operation and
management of future wireless networks. Developing this novel technology would
also help maintain the nation's continued leadership in wireless technologies
and its pipeline of highly qualified engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project pursues synergistic activities for the successful design and
implementation of Dino-RL, followed by a comprehensive, real-world data driven
evaluation. Episodic RL is first studied with the objective to incorporate
domain knowledge into building an efficient episodic memory. In addition, a
hierarchical hidden variable model is built to enable meta-reinforcement
learning for knowledge transfer and efficient exploration. Lastly, the conflict
between enhancing the physical-law based modeling and reinforcement learning is
balanced via novel sample-efficient model selection
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.