* 2002467
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing river discharge and hydrologic variability in Panama via coral geochemistry: Implications for management of the Panama Canal
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Braddock Linsley, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 338,346.00

Rivers and hydrology play a critical role in tropical ecosystems. They impact
aspects of climate, help to sustain life, and influence societal needs such as
drinking water, food security, and economics. In Panamá, a specific concern is
the impact of rainfall on the functioning of the Panamá Canal. Rainfall and
river discharge (Q) are strongly linked in Panamá, and they play a crucial role
in the sustained success of the canal. Rainfall totals across Panamá
consistently place it in the top five countries for annual rainfall, but when
major droughts occur, the Panama Canal Authority places restrictions on ship
traffic to conserve water so that the canal can continue to operate. Panamá has
a well-known seasonal variability in precipitation, with a wet season that lasts
from about May through November. However, little is known about rainfall
variation on longer time scales, on the order of decades or centuries. In
addition, it is not clear how El Niño events may influence Panamanian rainfall,
though there are suggestions of a relationship between El Niño strength and
drought severity. These questions are hard to address because instrumental data,
particularly river discharge records, are short and often unreliable – we need a
longer-term perspective. The chemistry of coral skeletons can preserve records
of climate conditions and climate variability; these chemical records are called
climate proxies. This project will use coral climate proxies to reconstruct
hydrologic variability along the Pacific Coast of Panamá over the past ~300
years at near-monthly resolution. The final product will be a multi-coral,
multi-proxy record that can be used to identify the frequency and strength of
events such as droughts or El Niño. This project includes support for 8 female
undergraduates and 1 Ph.D. student. Results from this project will be
incorporated into a teaching workshop for middle and high school educators and
will also be shared with water resource managers in Panamá.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many tropical nations are subjected to intense variation
in precipitation with extreme seasonality. Meridional migration of the
Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is largely responsible for this
variability, with northward movement during the boreal summer and a southward
shift during the austral summer. In the Pacific, El Niño and other less well
constrained decadal and century-scale modes of ocean- atmosphere variability
also dictate regional climate. In Panamá, a country whose rainfall and river
discharge (Q) are tightly coupled, understanding hydrologic variability is of
the utmost importance when considering the potential impacts on the Panamá
Canal, whose functioning relies solely on hydraulic head differences between the
canal locks and the Gatun Lake reservoir. Therefore, the probability of
anomalous hydrologic conditions, such as drought and flooding, must be well
defined. However, the lack of long instrumental records of tropical hydrology
(i.e.; rainfall and Q) limits our ability to develop a rigorous understanding of
drought and flood recurrence intervals. These issues raise the following
questions: 1) What is the relationship between El Niño Southern Oscillation and
droughts and flooding in Panamá? 2) Can we identify droughts and flood years
that are not related to El Niño? And 4) Has there been multi-decadal or long-
term secular changes in Q in Panamá and what climatic processes are involved?
Preliminary results indicate that barium/calcium (Ba/Ca) time-series data from a
coral core collected in 1984 at Secas Island in the Gulf of Chiriquí (GoC) along
the Pacific Coast of Panamá has a remarkably strong correlation with Q from two
major nearby rivers. Given these encouraging results, we will be completing the
Ba/Ca analyses of the Secas Island core back to 1707 CE and to analyze a new GoC
coral core collected in 2018. The final near- monthly resolved composite Ba/Ca
record of Q will extend from 2018 to 1707 CE. By pairing Ba/Ca and δ18O on the
same 1mm samples we can separately evaluate salinity and sea surface temperature
changes in the GoC over the last 311 years. These paleo-Q and salinity
reconstructions will provide a comprehensive history of Panamanian hydroclimate
that can be exploited to track protracted deviations from average
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.