* 2002554
* SHF: Small: MIGS -- Efficiently Evaluating Multiple Iterative Graph Queries
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Rajiv Gupta, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Since graphs can readily represent entities and relationships among them, they
are widely used to represent large volumes of data from domains ranging from
social networks to biological and brain networks. Mining of large graphs for
developing insights from data often takes the form of evaluating iterative graph
analytics queries that originate at different points in the graph and compute
global property values that are potentially dependent upon the structure of the
entire graph. Such algorithms are both compute- and data-intensive; optimizing
them is a challenge due to the large size and highly irregular structure of
real-world graphs. While many systems for evaluating iterative graph queries
have been developed, their focus is on minimizing the execution time of a single
query though in practice many queries need to be evaluated. The goal of this
research is to dramatically improve evaluation times of a group of queries by
synergistically evaluating them to exploit the observation that evaluating
individual queries involves graph traversals and computations that greatly
overlap with each other. This research helps discover novel techniques for
identifying and exploiting such overlap to reduce redundant costs and overheads
associated with parallel executions on single-machine and multiple-machine
platforms. Building such powerful systems accelerates new discoveries in fields
that employ graph analytics. In addition, broader impact also results from
training students in an area of national
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research develops both system
level optimizations and algorithmic innovations that work together to greatly
increase the scalability of simultaneously evaluating multiple iterative
queries. To guarantee versatility of techniques produced, the new optimizations
and algorithms are being realized both in the context of a shared-memory
multicore machine as well as a distributed cluster of multiple machines.
Versatility is also achieved by supporting different kinds of queries (point-to-
point and point-to-all) and different forms of graphs (fixed graphs and
streaming or dynamic graphs). Each query type and graph type pose unique
challenges to developing algorithms that are both correct and achieve high-
performance. To exploit the overlap of work performed during evaluation of
different queries, reuse-based algorithms are being developed while to update
the results of queries in response to changes in the graph, incremental
algorithms are being devised. These approaches are aimed at enabling high-
performance and high system utilization on a shared-memory machine. To further
scale performance to large batches of queries, distributed algorithms are being
developed to utilize the resources from multiple machines in a distributed
cluster. The evaluations utilize large graph data sets from public repositories
such as KONNECT and SNAP. The software developed is made available to other
researchers over the course of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.