* 2002400
* Digitization PEN: Integrating the unique collections of southern Illinois at SIU to improve coverage of the Southeastern US Flora in SERNEC
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Nancy Garwood, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 173,979.00

Through this award the Southern Illinois University (SIU) Herbarium will join
the SERNEC Thematic Collections Network (TCN). The SIU collections house an
estimated 90,000 specimens of plants, primarily representing the regional flora,
including many historically important specimens. While providing diverse data
useful to various basic scientific fields, this project be fundamental to the
greater understanding of plant sciences in southern Illinois and the surrounding
regions. It will also provide information for more applied fields, such as
natural area conservation, ecosystem restoration, and ecological impacts of
human activities. On a local level, the digital resources will be integrated
into courses at SIU, used in outreach activities at university sponsored events
and in a local nature recreation park, and promoted to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The herbarium at SIU will digitize the collection
to gather and provide label transcriptions, georeferences, and specimen imaging
online as part of the Southeast Regional Network of Expertise and Collections
(SERNEC). The flora of southern Illinois is closely allied to the southeastern
US floristically. This project will proceed with a pre-digitization check of
specimens, followed by barcoding, verification of label data, label
transcription, digital imaging, image editing, and georeferencing. Finally, data
will be transferred to SERNEC for public access, and added to the national
resource at iDigBio.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.