* 2002570
* EAGER: Fundamentals of Modeling and Control for the Evolving Electric Power System Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Marija Ilic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The main objective of this project is to formalize ground-breaking general
principles in support of investment planning and operating protocols for the
changing electric energy systems. Having this is crucial for assessing effects
of candidate hardware and software technologies and for creating an environment
in which flexible technologies are utilized by complementing each other’s
performance and by jointly meeting the societal needs. Since the performance of
many technologies of interest greatly depends on how well they are integrated
over time and stakeholders (system modules), an effective framework needs to
support decisions that are data-enabled and interactive over time and among
different system decision makers. In this project a complex dynamical systems
point of view is taken which recognizes such distributed nature of decisions and
introduces novel modeling, control and protocol principles in support of system
integration in time and space. In sharp contrast with the lack of theoretically-
provable performance in the evolving electric power system architectures, this
project explores fundamentals and takes major steps toward solving this long-
overdue problem. The most important impact will be on the way electric power
industry architectures evolve. In particular, the project will catalyze the
adoption of data-enabled decision making and automation. Notably, this approach
will help educate students to think about emerging electric energy systems as
complex dynamical systems for which much innovation is needed and possible.
Results of this research will be disseminated through a workshop on design and
control of complex energy systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The next generation
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) can evolve based on protocols
defined according to a dynamic monitoring, and decision system (DyMonDS)
framework envisioned in this project. Such framework is crucial for assessing
effects of candidate hardware and software technologies and for creating an
environment in which technologies are integrated and utilized by complementing
each other’s performance and by jointly meeting the societal needs. In this
project a complex dynamical systems point of view is taken which recognizes such
distributed nature of decisions and introduces novel modeling, control and
protocol principles in support of temporal and spatial system integration. The
main question is how to ensure stability and efficiency of these systems without
increasing complexity of information management and consequent implications on
cyber-security. Once principles for answering this complex question are
formalized, it becomes possible to support selection of “right” technologies and
for utilizing them based on data obtained through sensing, communications and
control. To establish such principles and not radically change the industry,
this project introduces a generalization of today’s Automatic Generation Control
by the Balancing Authorities (BAs) which is fundamentally cooperative in nature.
The interactions between BAs are managed by each area compensating its own Area
Control Error (ACE) which is the net power imbalance contributed by both
internal power deviations from schedules and by the tie-line flow deviations
into the BA. This is a great example of distributed control through cooperation
based on simple protocols of balancing ACE. In this project the ACE is
generalized into a notion of an interaction variable (intVar) associated with
each intelligent Balancing Authority (iBA). Notably, an intVar has a physical
interpretation in terms of power and rate of change of power, but it is not
restricted to the assumptions made by the industry today, and it allows for
different unconventional architectures, such as small iBAs nested within the
existing BAs. iBAs can be components or subsystems of diverse spatial and
temporal granularity, and are technology agnostic; their specifications,
modeling and interactive multi-layered control are in terms of an intVar common
to all. This project targets specifically principles for protocols and enhanced
standards for a general DyMonDS framework so that following this framework one
can catalyze performance enhancements based on the PI’s recent finding that the
intVar dynamics can be interpreted in terms of rates of exergy (potential to
perform useful work) and anergy (wasted work).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.