* 2002653
* Metal-Sensitive Functionalization and Self-Assembly of Bimetallic Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Dong Qin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 12/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Dong Qin and her group at the Georgia Institute of
Technology to develop tiny crystals called bimetallic nanocrystals. Their
bimetallic nanocrystals contain two metals whose chemical function and spatial
position within the nanocrystals are precisely controlled. Metal nanocrystals
play a vital role in enabling catalysis for energy conversion, environmental
protection, and organic synthesis. Despite some success, it remains a daunting
challenge to monitor the catalytic reactions in real time by spatially confining
the reactants to the catalytic sites while detecting the final and intermediate
products in situ. The research team addresses this challenge by developing
bimetallic nanocrystals in which one of the metals can serve as a catalyst while
the other can report the ‘chemical fingerprint’ (signals associated with the
reaction). The concepts, materials, and methods developed during this research
may find use in a broad range of applications related to solid-state chemistry,
catalysis, sensing, and photonics. This team recruits women and minority
students as well as those from community colleges and minority institutions for
summer research. This effort is carried out in collaboration with the National
Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure called the Southeastern Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Corridor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program, Professor Qin’s
team develops new design principles and methods to fabricate a novel class of
bifunctional nanoreactors from Ag@M (M: Pt, Pd, and Rh) core-frame nanocubes via
metal-selective surface functionalization and self-assembly. Specifically,
molecules bearing isocyanide groups at the two ends are used to selectively bind
to the M atoms on the edges of the core-frame nanocubes, serving as “clips” to
bring two nanocubes face to face for the generation of a dimer. The gap region
between the two nanocubes naturally presents a well-controlled nanoreactor, in
which the side faces can be orthogonally functionalized with the reactants while
the M atoms not coordinated by isocyanide will serve as the catalyst. Due to a
strong plasmonic coupling between the two Ag nanocubes separated by a gap of
only a few nanometers, the nanoreactor offers a unique capability to monitor
various types of important catalytic reactions by in situ SERS. The model
reactions include the hydrogenation of nitroaromatics for the production of
thermodynamically unfavorable products such as hydroxylamine and azo compounds,
as well as the bond-selective hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde, a catalytic
reaction pivotal to the production of fragrance, agrochemical, and
pharmaceutical compounds. This research not only enables real-time
characterization of heterogeneous catalytic reactions but also sheds light on
the rational design of new or improved catalyst
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.