* 2002928
* Development of Methods for Quantifying Speciated Peroxy Radicals by Chemical Ionization Mass Spectrometry
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Ezra Wood, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 429,097.00

The goals of this project are to develop new methods for quantifying reactive
species in the atmosphere and to improve the accuracy and reliability of the
calibration methods used in their measurement. The focus is on the measurement
of peroxy radicals, reactive species that participate in photochemical
transformations of organic compounds that can lead to the formation of the
secondary products, such as ozone and secondary aerosol. The results of this
study will lead to an improved ability to evaluate atmospheric chemistry models
that rely on a solid understanding of underlying radical
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two new methods for speciating peroxy radicals
include an atmospheric pressure transverse ionization technique using ammonium
or alkyl amine ions, and an indirect method in which peroxy radicals are
chemically converted to hydroperoxides and then subsequently detected using
iodide or bromide chemical ionization mass (CIMs) spectrometry. These new
techniques will be tested during field deployments in New York City and in a
forested area in New Jersey, spanning a wide range in nitrogen oxide (NOx)
concentrations and volatile organic compound (VOC) precursors. This effort also
includes the development of a new calibration source based on formaldehyde
photolysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.