* 2002840
* Collaborative Research: Physical Mechanism of Melt Pool Oscillation and Spatter Formation in Laser Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Lianyi Chen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2023
* USD 286,971.00

Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) is a widely used additive manufacturing process
that can 3D print complex metallic components that can not be produced by
conventional manufacturing technologies. Spattering, the uncontrolled eruption
of metal droplets, is a critical problem in LPBF systems and is a major cause of
poor quality in components printed using the process. In spite of this, the
fundamental reasons for spatter formation are not well understood and effective
approaches for reducing spatter in LPBF are not available. This award supports
fundamental research to understand spatter formation. The research team will
perform experiments and computer simulations to observe the dynamic process of
spatter formation and model the behavior of the molten metal pool to reveal the
spatter formation mechanisms. The outcomes of the research will provide
important guidance for optimizing the LPBF process to produce defect-free 3D
printed metal parts. This will significantly expedite the applications of 3D
printing in aerospace, biomedical, automotive, and other industries and will
strengthen the manufacturing capability and competitiveness of U.S. industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatter formation in LPBF is a highly transient process
with complex coupling of multi-physics. Due to a limited ability to observe and
measure the controlling parameters with adequate spatial and temporal
resolution, there is a lack of understanding of the fundamental physics of
spatter formation in LPBF. The objectives of this research are to: (i) test the
hypothesis that the spatter formation is caused by melt pool oscillation, (ii)
test the hypothesis that melt pool oscillation is caused by three physics
mechanisms (i.e., non-uniform laser absorption, random powder blocking, and
random powder merging), and (iii) evaluate the significance of the three
hypothetical mechanisms to melt pool oscillation and spatter formation. A
synergistic experimental and numerical investigation will be performed to
achieve the research objectives. On the experimental side, a novel two-view
high-speed imaging system, including synchrotron-based, side-view, X-ray imaging
and a visible-light camera at 45 degrees to the horizontal direction will be
used to provide 3-dimensional information on the dynamic behavior of the powder
particles, melt pool, depression zone, and spatters. On the numerical side, a
multi-physics model will be established to simulate the laser-matter
interaction, multi-phase thermofluidic flow, dynamic surface motion, and fluid-
solid interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.