* 2002461
* Laboratory Measurements of N2 Reacting with H3+ Isotopologues and Implications for Deuterated Astrochemistry
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Daniel Wolf Savin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 542,274.00

Molecular observations are important to understanding how the interstellar gas
is converted to molecular clouds, stars, and planets. This research project will
investigate the formation of the molecular ions N2H+ and N2D+, which are
commonly used to trace properties of prestellar molecular clouds and
protoplanetary disks. By means of a sophisticated laboratory experiment, the
investigators will accurately determine the production rates of the ions at the
very low temperatures relevant to interstellar clouds. Results from the study
will allow astronomers to accurately determine the abundance of these ions in
space and interpret observations of the earliest stages of star and planet
formation. This project will contribute to the training and professional
development of a postdoctoral scholar, provide research opportunities for
undergraduates, and engage the public through lectures on
astrochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a dual-source, merged fast-beams
apparatus, Savin and collaborators will measure accurate integral cross sections
(ICS) for six reactions of N2 with H3+ and its deuterated forms as a function of
the internal temperature of the reactants. The ICSs will allow the team to
generate reliable thermal rate coefficients for N2H+ and N2D+ formation for use
in astrochemical models. The measurements will also guide astrochemical models
of deuterated molecules for which laboratory data are unavailable, and they will
test the validity of approximations used to interpret branching fractions of
partially deuterated molecules in space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.