* 2002954
* Mechanistic Studies of Catalytic Multifunctional Globins Using Advanced Structural Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Reza Ghiladi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 12/31/2023
* USD 474,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Drs. Reza Ghiladi and Stefan Franzen from North Carolina
State University to investigate iron containing proteins, specifically heme-iron
proteins, from marine environments as models for understanding their function in
mammalian systems. Heme-iron proteins are found universally throughout nature,
and they perform important biological roles that are the foundation for nearly
all living systems. Notable examples of heme-iron proteins include the oxygen
carrier in blood, hemoglobin, and the detoxifying enzymes known as cytochromes
P450 found in the liver. While the importance of heme proteins has been
recognized by the chemical and biological communities for many years, it is
challenging to apply the latest emerging techniques to study their function. The
use of related but simpler marine hemoglobin provides an avenue to develop these
methods while also gaining a better understanding the diverse roles of heme
proteins in biology and chemistry. The proposed experimental procedures help
characterize at the atomic level how molecules will bind to these important
proteins and alter their function. This pursuit allows graduate students to
acquire specialized training in both high resolution X-ray and neutron
crystallography, as well as in time-resolved structural methods. The fast
timescale methods are cutting-edge techniques that push the limits of what is
experimentally obtainable for studying how enzymes perform their tasks within
living systems. This project is integrated with the "Creating STARS" outreach
program to provide rural middle school science classrooms with visits,
demonstrations, lectures, and lessons plans covering the chemistry/life
interface. The project is also engaging both domestic (Oak Ridge National
Laboratory) and international (University of Essex and the Polish Academy of
Science) partners in data acquisition and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project seeks to identify a unique set of structural interactions that
occur upon substrate binding to the enzyme dehaloperoxidase, thereby controlling
the kinetics and reactivity of the heme intermediates, and ultimately a
discrimination in enzymatic activity specific to the bound substrate. Rapid-
freeze-quench, caged O2-carrier photolysis, and CO flash photolysis techniques
are to be conducted to enable the trapping of intermediates and to initiate
time-resolved studies to characterize in unprecedented detail these
mechanistically important intermediates relevant to catalytic turnover. The
relationship of dehaloperoxidase to other hemoglobins, peroxidases and
peroxygenases establishes new paradigms of protein structure-function
relationships relevant to multifunctional proteins, complementing those
established for monofunctional enzymes. Information from this study has the
potential to advance the understanding of catalytic globins, determine the
structural features that lead to activity differentiation across heme proteins
(and across metalloenzymes more generally), and enable the comparison of the
structure-function correlation in enzymes of marine origin in relation to those
from terrestrial or bacterial sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.