* 2002750
* Evaluating the Atmospheric Dynamics of Nitrate and Sulfate in Southern New England in Response to Emission Regulations
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Meredith Hastings, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 485,674.00

Atmospheric particulate nitrate and sulfate concentrations have decreased
significantly during the last decades, yet, the processes that control their
production from emitted precursor gases remain ill-defined. The project seeks to
fill this knowledge gap by chemically and isotopically analyzing stored filter
samples collected between 2005 and 2018 at various locations in southern New
England. The 13-year record obtained through this study will help inform diverse
fields including atmospheric chemistry, ecology, health, climate and
policy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims at using a unique combination of
concentration and isotopic compositions to help constrain atmospheric mechanisms
of nitrate and sulfate formation. Archived filters will provide a seasonal
record that spans a period during which significant declines in emission of
nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide gases have led to associated, albeit non-
linear decreases in particulate nitrate and sulfate. The cause for non-linearity
is investigated by using fractionation of stable isotopes of (i) nitrogen and
sulfur for fingerprinting and source apportionment of emission sources, and (ii)
oxygen to inform production pathways for nitrate and sulfate. Novel data
generated from this work will impact fields beyond atmospheric chemistry by
inferring trends in ecological systems and global climate. The PI team will work
with staff at various facilities and supervise one graduate and several
undergraduate students to complete this labor-intensive analytical study.
Results will also be incorporated into the atmospheric chemistry curriculum and
shared in an annual outreach event for local elementary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.