* 2002516
* Collaborative Research: Probabilistic Debris Modeling in Coastal Storm Events: A Case of Complex Coupling Between Human-Built-Natural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Wesley Highfield, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2024
* USD 228,417.00

Natural disasters, like hurricanes, tropical storms, and flood events, can
generate massive amounts of debris, posing significant challenges to coastal
communities. Financial and logistical burdens related to debris removal account
for nearly a third of reimbursed recovery costs, and threats to public safety
range from impaired emergency response to health hazards. There is need for more
accurate models to estimate debris presence and quantities after, and preferably
prior to a storm, so communities can better prepare for and manage debris
burdens. Knowledge about what drives debris patterns is limited, so current
predictive models are not accurate enough to support planning or response,
particularly for multi-hazard storm events. In addition, coastal landscapes are
constantly changing, and as development patterns shift so do prospective debris
volumes and locations. This project addresses the need for integrative models
that reflect the complex coupling between human-built-natural systems that
underpin debris generation in storm events and the cascading impacts on coastal
communities. This project examines the drivers of debris patterns and also
develops models that couple those insights with infrastructure, socio-
demographic, and human health impacts, among others. Resulting insights can
inform policy decisions, coastal planning and risk mitigation, and debris
management. Synthesis of model outcomes and policy implications will be shared
via web hosted interactive story mapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
transform our understanding of debris generation from coastal storms and its
cascading consequences on communities by deriving coupled models of the
interactions between human-built-natural systems. New methods will be developed
for probabilistic modeling of debris presence and volumes, harnessing and fusing
empirical data from past events, storm simulations, and physics-based estimates
of fragility. A significant departure from traditional debris prediction models
will be afforded by introducing nested statistical surrogate models informed by
multi-resolution land use/land cover characteristics, physical vulnerability of
structures or vegetation, and multi-hazard storm intensities. As a result,
coupled models of development and debris potential are enabled for the first
time to explore current and future storm risks and policy scenarios. By
integrating models of the cascading consequences of debris with socio-
demographic characteristics, this project will also shed new light on
relationships between regional debris effects and social vulnerability that can
inform future planning, management and mitigation efforts. Knowledge co-
production and the practical viability of research methods will be advanced by
working with stakeholders in testbed communities, to increase the likelihood
that resulting models will be useful for future plans and
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.