* 2002621
* Travel Support for 5th Thermal and Fluids Engineering Conference (TFEC), 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Ankur Jain, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2022
* USD 40,000.00

This project supports partial travel for 40 U.S. students and early career
engineers/faculty to the 5th Thermal and Fluids Engineering Conference (TFEC)
organized by the American Society of Thermal and Fluids Engineers (ASTFE). In
addition, the funding will facilitate participation of 10 invited speakers and
panelists who would otherwise be unlikely to attend the conference. The Thermal
and Fluids Engineering Conference (TFEC) is an annual conference since 2015 that
has grown to become a leading platform for presentation and discussion of
research advances in thermal and fluids engineering. In 2020, the conference
will take place April 5-8, 2020 in New Orleans, LA. The annual TFEC conference
addresses the need for a platform for dissemination and discussion of research
results in the fields of heat transfer and fluid mechanics. A number of sessions
encompassing the breadth of thermal and fluid transport are currently being
organized for the conference. The proposed NSF support will enable a significant
intellectual benefit and professional development opportunity for a number of
students and early career engineers/faculty from around the country. The
participation of invited speakers and panelists enabled by the support will
enhance and broaden the technical content of the conference, thereby benefiting
all attendees. It is expected that this travel grant will focus research
collaborations in multiple areas related to heat transfer and fluids
engineering. The in-person platform offered by the conference is expected to
lead to interesting and fruitful technical conversations. It is expected that
this will lead to novel, collaborative approaches for addressing fundamental and
applied problems in thermal and fluids engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal and fluids engineering effects a very broad
spectrum of the industry and life in general. Advances in this field enabled by
the conference may help improve and optimize a large number of applications that
benefit the entire society in general. Some examples of applications to be
discussed at TFEC include wind turbines, fuel cells, industrial processes,
biomedicine, etc. Full papers and extended abstracts for TFEC are published by
Begell House in the form of a conference proceeding. This set of papers are
compiled and made available on the Begell House website. This will result in
broad dissemination of research results presented at the conference. Given that
the conference is being held in New Orleans, keynote presentations and other
activities will be organized to introduce the audience to local issues of
relevance to thermal/fluids engineering, such as water management of river,
flood, and hurricane-induced wave interactions between ocean, bayous, canals,
lakes, and waterways. Furthermore, the thermal-fluid science and engineering
community will be introduced to the success stories of various local
entrepreneurial efforts in bio-science/engineering in New Orleans area. By
striving to ensure significant representation of minorities and women among the
travel grant beneficiaries, the conference organizers will ensure that
minorities and women specifically benefit from the conference. Specific efforts
will be made to publicize the travel grant opportunity among women and persons
from traditionally under-represented groups and increase their participation in
the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.