* 2002933
* GOALI: CAS: Organocatalytic Reactions and Processes for Polymer Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Waymouth, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 744,787.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Robert Waymouth of the
Department of Chemistry at Stanford University and Dr. James Hedrick of IBM
Almaden Laboratories to develop and explore new catalysts and catalytic methods
for the generation of biodegradable, functional, and responsive polymers. These
polymers (large molecules containing many monomer units linked together with
chemical bonds) are targeted as alternatives to petrochemically-derived plastics
and as new families of biodegradable materials for biomedical applications. The
central focus is on the design and characterization of environmentally-benign,
metal-free catalysts that enable optimum polymer production under large scale
industrial conditions. Functional properties such as degradability and
biocompatibility of the polymers generated using these methods are also
investigated. The project effectively fosters academic and industrial
collaboration on both scientific research and training of students. The
collaboration improves academic-industrial interactions, which can have a very
positive educational impact on students and young researchers who are rarely
educated about the ways to efficiently transfer laboratory-generated knowledge
into the industrial realm. This project has the potential to advance new
strategies in polymer synthesis and create new technologies for the next
generation of renewable plastics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The academic-industrial
team of Waymouth and Hedrick develops new automated continuous flow reactors
designed to function optimally under a variety of polymerization conditions.
They design new catalyst families based on squaramides and indole carboxamides
and related structures. The team invents “catalyst switch” strategies relying on
rate differences associated with proton transfer to enable the scalable and
reproducible generation of block copolymer libraries in ring-opening
polymerization of polyesters and polycarbonates. They also integrate catalytic
strategies for both the synthesis of functional monomers and the macromolecules
resulting from their enchainment. Emphasis is placed on detailed mechanistic and
theoretical investigations to illuminate the mechanistic details of
organocatalytic polymerization reactions. Degradation pathways associated with
bio-mimicking poly(alpha-amino esters) in aqueous media are also investigated.
The organocatalytic platform associated with this award is spawning innovative
technologies for the generation of bio-active polymers and oligomers that can be
applied as anti-microbial agents, cell-transfection agents for the delivery of
drugs, fluorescent and luminescent probes and genetic
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.