* 2002909
* CAS: Environmental Degradation Pathways for Some Emerging Contaminants
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 545,001.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the NSF Division
of Chemistry supports research by Professor Barbara Finlayson-Pitts and her
group to address the environmental fate of emerging contaminants (EC), which are
chemicals that are not commonly monitored but may become widely distributed in
the environment. They can have adverse effects on human health and ecological
systems. This class of compounds includes some pharmaceuticals, pesticides and
munitions. Once in the environment, these compounds can undergo reactions that
either make them less, or in some cases, more toxic. Thus, understanding their
fates once released is important for understanding the health and environmental
risks as well as for guiding the future development of less harmful substitutes.
The research in the Finlayson-Pitts group is directed at understanding the
fundamental processes that occur when certain classes of EC are exposed to
sunlight or oxidants found in the atmosphere. This provides information on how
fast they will react in air and the nature of the products formed that can be
used to guide toxicology studies. The project provides research opportunities
for a postdoctoral student as well as several undergraduate students. The PI
also engages in a variety of outreach and training activities through the AirUCI
Institute which she leads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these goals, a
combination of experimental approaches is used to study compounds that contain
amine, nitro and in some cases, alkene groups. Thin films of the EC on infrared
transmitting crystals are irradiated, and the loss of the EC and formation of
products are followed in real time. Alternatively, the thin films are monitored
during exposure to gas phase ozone. The mixtures of unreacted EC and its
reaction products are extracted into solution and analyzed by a variety of
separation and mass spectrometry techniques. Kinetics modeling is applied to
determine the contributions of reaction and diffusion that occur in the gas-
solid reactions. Model compounds for the EC are also exposed to ozone, a strong
oxidant, in the gas phase. This provide insights into the factors that control
the oxidation and to find differences between similar reactions in the gas
versus the condensed phase. These data provide a fundamental understanding of
some of the degradation pathways that are likely to be important when these
compounds are released into the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.