* 2002652
* A microfluidic based approach to metabolically control cardiac maturation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Janeta Zoldan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 472,015.00

Stems cells differentiate into specialized cells and are a focal point for
treatments related to injured tissue. These treatments require understanding of
how stem cells differentiate into the types of cells and tissues that are needed
at the site of injury. Heart disease, which is the leading cause of death in the
United States, may be treated by generating cardiac tissue from induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). In this project, fatty acids will be delivered
into iPSCs to stimulate them to differentiate and mature into cardiac cells and
tissues. The hypothesis is that precise control of fatty acid delivery could
cause the cells to mimic the natural developmental pathway. If successful, such
control could potentially lead to the development of new approaches for tissue
and organ regeneration. Project-based learning activities will engage elementary
school students' interest in science. This will nurture their interest in STEM
topics lasting throughout their education as well as influence their career
decisions as adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomic sequencing and high-throughput
screening have enhanced our ability to understand specific intracellular
responses and regulatory pathways. Novel experimental designs are needed to
address the complex responses to various biological modulators of cells, leading
to tissue specification and lineage commitment. There is a metabolic switch from
glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation during cardiac development. Recently, a
link between energy metabolism and cell signaling and epigenetic regulation of
gene expression has been established. As a result, efficient delivery of fatty
acids that participate in the oxidative phosphorylation cycle could be a
powerful tool to exercise fine control over gene expression. This project will
utilize a unique microfluidic device to deliver fatty acids into the cytoplasm
of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). This should direct their
differentiation and maturation to cardiac lineages. The investigators
hypothesize that precise control over fatty acid availability will metabolically
switch iPSCs from glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation and thereby
consistently mimic the native developmental, metabolic conditions necessary for
cardiac differentiation and maturation. This project will play a key role in the
scalability of iPSC-derived cells in future clinical applications as well as
potentially lead to the development of new paradigms for metabolic induced
tissue and organ regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.