* 2002886
* Increasing Control Over Photoredox-Mediated Ring-Opening Metathesis Polymerization through Improved Mechanistic Understanding and Chain Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Andrew Boydston, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Andrew J. Boydston of the
Department of Chemistry at University of Wisconsin-Madison to investigate metal-
free ring opening metathesis polymerization. This research enables the synthesis
of precision plastics that are used in light-weighting of vehicles to improve
energy efficiency, ballistic impact resistant compositions, and even 3D
printing. In this research, systematic studies are performed to gain
understanding of how this reaction works. Factors needed to optimize
polymerization conditions to prepare plastics with properties that complement or
exceed specifications are also investigated. This research provides training and
education to undergraduate and graduate students in synthetic polymer chemistry
as well collaborative research opportunities with the Army Research Laboratory.
Outreach activities focus on workshops for middle school visitors at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, and at the Educators Open House to increase
interest in STEM at local high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
focused on the mechanistic understanding of photoredox-mediated ring opening
metathesis polymerization initiated by vinyl ethers. The technique provides
access to classes of polymers that are challenging to produce using metal-based
initiators. Key aspects of the envisioned mechanism, such as the dynamic redox
couple between the initiator and photoredox catalyst, kinetics and
thermodynamics of reversible chain end (de)activation, methods to improve
initiator efficiency, solvent effects, and practical methods for molecular
weight control via designer chain transfer agents are systematically
investigated. Mechanistic insights are distinct from any other currently
reported polymerization process, yet draw from photoredox catalyzed processes
across small molecule and polymer synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.