* 2002959
* Deformation-induced changes in segmental dynamics of polymer glasses prepared by melt stretching and stress aging
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 470,536.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer glasses are important
materials due to their high transparency, the low energy input required for
molding them into particular shapes, their stiffness, and their resistance to
breakage. Polymer glasses are used in applications as diverse as advanced
aircraft composites and eyeglass lenses. The planned research will investigate
how polymer glasses respond when they are subjected to large forces. In
particular, the experiments will use lasers and microscopes to measure how the
polymer molecules rearrange when a polymer glass is deformed. Current theories
and computer simulations have identified this molecular motion as a key quantity
that must be understood to determine if a polymer glass will stretch, deform, or
break. The polymer glasses to be used will be processed in special ways
(stretched at high temperature or deformed at low temperature) to critically
test these simulations and theories. The proposed experiments should lead to
more reliable models for the prediction of the mechanical properties of polymer
glasses. This in turn may have a significant economic impact because of the
broad potential of these lightweight materials. The students involved in this
project will learn how to characterize polymer glasses and improve the
properties of materials. All personnel supported by this grant will participate
in a program to increase the number of highly qualified students from
underrepresented groups that enter Ph.D. programs in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
deformation properties of polymer glasses are extremely challenging to predict
as a result of the nonlinear nature of the deformation and the nonequilibrium
nature of the glass. Here it is proposed to measure segmental mobility in
polymer glasses during deformation using an optical photobleaching method that
provides access to the rotational correlation function of an ensemble of dilute
probe molecules. Deformation can increase segmental mobility in polymer glasses
by more than a factor of 1000, and an understanding of this enhanced mobility is
a key requirement for accurate modeling of the mechanical properties of polymer
glasses. For the proposed work, polymer glasses will be prepared by melt
quenching so that subsequent mobility measurements during deformation can
disentangle the influences of yield and strain hardening on segmental mobility.
The proposed work will also test whether deformed polymer glasses can show
indications of overaging, i.e., physical aging that occurs at an accelerated
rate as a result of applied stress. Finally, the generality of the results
obtained in tensile deformation will be tested by performing optical
measurements of segmental mobility during shear deformation. The proposed
experiments can provide a molecular-level test of theoretical descriptions of
polymer glass deformation. The experimental results obtained, in comparison with
theory and simulation, should lead to an enhanced fundamental understanding of
the deformation of polymer glasses. All personnel supported by this grant will
participate in a program to increase the number of highly qualified students
from underrepresented groups that enter Ph.D. programs in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.