* 2002432
* Collaborative Research: Genealogy of Odonata (GEODE): Dispersal and color as drivers of 300 million years of global dragonfly evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Seth Bybee, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 05/31/2024
* USD 765,621.00

Dragonflies and damselflies, also called the Odonata, are colorful, fast-flying
insects that are easy to find and recognize. Their evolution stretches 300 Mya
and there are ~6200 known species found in nearly all parts of the world. They
are central to understanding the evolution of flight, as their ancestors were
among the first animals to fly. While flight evolved early, they are remarkable
aerial ambush predators serving a key ecological role in communities as
predators on other insects such as biting flies (e.g., mosquitoes). Odonates are
also one of a few animal groups that spend part of their life in freshwater and
another part on land, and so they are key indicators of healthy freshwater
systems. They have received much scientific interest, but information about
their genealogy, ecology, and distribution is not centralized in any one source.
This research is important because it will gather this information for nearly
all species and put it in an online database that is available to both the
public and researchers. This will be the first such database for an entire order
of insect. It will allow dragonflies and damselflies to be used more in
environmental, ecological, and evolutionary studies. The research will also help
educate the public in dragonfly, and more broadly insect, evolution, ecology and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this research are two-fold. It
will amass phylogenetic, ecological and geospatial data, making this available
for the wider scientific community via the OdonataCentral website. Secondly,
this data will be used to study the historical impact of mobility, habitat,
niche, color, and distribution on odonate diversification and diversity patterns
at the global level. The project will bring together leaders in Odonata
phylogenetics, ecology, biogeography as well as informatics and citizen science,
and will: (1) develop a robust, species-level molecular and morphological
phylogeny of extant and fossil Odonata; (2) amass ecological traits, especially
rich information about dragon- and damselfly color, and develop full global
distribution and environmental niche information; (3) test evolutionary
hypotheses regarding diversification of Odonata, especially the role of color
evolution; (4) develop visualizations, knowledge products and analyses that
dynamically integrate these three data layers while engaging the general public
through museum, web- and mobile-app based tools and outreach. Odonates are
dependent on freshwater, a habitat type that is broadly underserved by currently
funded research but that is crucial for human well-being. Our efforts will
provide tools for Odonata to become the standard as global bioindicators of
endangered freshwater habitats in the midst of global change and habitat
loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.