* 2002318
* Symposium on "Polymer Processing: Nanomanufacturing and Nanofabrication" at Spring American Chemical Society (ACS) National Meeting; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; March 22-26, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Yifu Ding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides travel support for students, post-docs and young faculty to
attend and participate in the Symposium on "Polymer Processing:
Nanomanufacturing and Nanofabrication" at the Spring American Chemical Society
(ACS) national meeting in Philadelphia, PA, in March 22-26, 2020. The symposium
focuses on new research in the field of polymer processing, nanofabrication and
nanomanufacturing. The students present through oral and poster sessions their
latest research results to the polymer processing, advanced manufacturing and
broader engineering communities. Priority is given to student participants who
are women or who come from underrepresented minority groups. This approach
promotes diverse participation at the conference, in the short term, and in STEM
fields, in the long term. This award benefits the nation through the education
of a skilled and diverse manufacturing workforce and a workforce better prepared
to provide transformative solutions the challenges in their chosen
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to benefit
the students' professional, scientific and technical development. Attendance at
the conference gives the students a broader view of the polymer processing,
advanced manufacturing and engineering profession and of state-of-the-art
research in their fields via access to several technical and professional
development talks by leading domestic and international speakers. Students
enhance their communication skills through oral and poster presentations, in-
depth discussions of their work with peers in their fields. This interactive
experience significantly broadens student education, increases their enthusiasm
for their research topic, acquaints them with expectations for scientific
careers, and exposes them to new approaches for innovative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.