* 2002287
* I-Corps:  Trackable Reasoning and Analysis Software for Collaboration and Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Jennifer Stromer-Galley, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software application that intelligence analysts can use to
improve the quality and accuracy of their analyses. Errors in critical reasoning
are detrimental to data analyses. Furthermore, the reports often do not provide
readers with a clear sense of the analyst's work, which can result in poor
decision-making. Past approaches to address these issues have had limited
success and do not cover each step in the analytical process. The proposed
technology offers a more flexible reasoning approach by identifying key
information, determining the best path forward, and composing a quality final
report that enhances the analysts' reasoning and provides decision-makers with a
clear sense of the analyst's process. By transforming the proposed technology
into a commercially viable application, the likelihood of intelligence failures
could be reduced as decision-makers access the necessary analyses to pursue
policies and strategies that promote national security. This application could
also serve as the foundation for additional research and commercial technologies
oriented towards helping analysts working in other fields, such as law
enforcement, forensics, corporate security, insurance, and
finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project builds from the team's prior
research on developing a state-of-the-art technology to help national
intelligence analysts engage in better reasoning and report writing.
Intelligence analysts often struggle to ensure that their research and reasoning
avoid critical errors, such as cognitive biases. Past approaches to address
errors have had limited uptake because analysts find them burdensome and
unappealing. Current approaches do not cover each step in the analytical
process. The proposed approach represents an end-to-end workflow solution, that
offers a more flexible reasoning approach by identifying key information,
determining the path forward, and composing a quality final report that provides
decision-makers with a clear sense of the analyst's process. This technology
offers report templates and several optional tools that help analysts process
and evaluate information, offload their memory and reasoning work to the
application, and share that reasoning effortlessly with
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.