* 2002521
* P2C2: Paleo-synoptic Changes as Recorded in the Mineral Dust in the Guliya Ice Cap, Northwestern Tibetan Plateau
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Zhengyu Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 435,592.00

This project seeks to develop an aeolian dust record for the Northern hemisphere
derived from an ice core (16-125 thousand years) from the Guliya ice cap in
Northwest Tibet. Specifically, the researchers will characterize the radiogenic,
geochemical and morphological properties of mineral particles preserved in the
ice core. These data will be compared with climate model simulations under
different climate scenarios to understand the paleo-dust record sensitivity to
climate variability on orbital scales and during abrupt climate events. The
proposed research goals are to 1) document the variability of the nature of the
aeolian dust throughout late Pleistocene, and 2) characterize the mechanisms
through which the dust emission sources, and transport are linked to westerlies
and the Indian Summer Monsoon systems (ISM). This project will provide new
knowledge on the regional lithosphere-atmosphere-cryosphere interactions over
the late Pleistocene and the Holocene in Northwest Tibet.&lt;br/&gt;The
potential Broader Impacts include the development of a new aeolian dust record
from the Tibetan Plateau that will fill a geographic data gap in mid-latitude
dust source variability and strengthen ice core geochemistry and
paleoclimatology research disciplines. Other Broader impacts comprise several
outreach activities including: 1) a video segment of ~5 minutes to highlight the
inception of the research question, deployment of laboratory techniques, and
methods; 2) A classroom lesson for use in high school and undergraduate
geosciences classrooms; 3) a presentation to discriminate the science and
findings of this project to the broader community through the Columbus Science
Pub outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the project will support
the training of one graduate student and an early career female scientist (Post-
doctoral researcher) in ice core paleoclimatology, mineralogy and
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.