* 2002923
* Migration and cultural change
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2020
* James Watson, Pacheco Fores, Sofia
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2020
* USD 37,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSFâ€™s Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. James T.
Watson at the University of Arizona, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports
an early career scientist examining migration and cultural change.
Archaeologists often cite migration as an explanatory factor for observed
patterns of cultural change. However, relatively few studies scrutinize the
purported relationship between changes in material culture and the biological
reality of migration. This project will directly test hypothesized migrations,
using a bioarchaeological approach to examine phenotypic variation in human
skeletal remains to reconstruct patterns of biological relatedness and likely
ancient migration patterns. Additionally, through targeted public outreach at
museums and schools serving primarily Latinx communities, as well through
collaborative workshops, the project will broaden participation of historically
underrepresented groups within archaeology and the social sciences.

This project will evaluate how and to what extent migration and cultural change
were linked in the past. To test models of migration based on observed material
changes in the archaeological record, the Fellow will collect dental and
skeletal phenotypic data from approximately 2500 individuals curated in museums
and repositories. Biodistance relationship (R) matrix and finite mixture
analyses will allow the Fellow to identify past migrations at multiple scales,
including large-scale population replacements, as well as small-scale individual
migrants. Results will allow archaeologists and anthropologists working on
similar topics to better evaluate how and to what extent migration and cultural
change were linked in the past. Moreover, the time-depth provided by
archaeological studies of migration provides scientists with a means of
contextualizing and better understanding the long-term consequences of on-going
migration processes today.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.