* 2002558
* Collaborative Research: A Big Data Approach to Fundamental Paleoclimate Questions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Chad Thackeray, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 151,560.00

This project seeks to apply a Big Data approach, harnessing emerging standards
for paleoclimate data, to address two fundamental questions in climate dynamics:
(Q1) the spatial extent of abrupt changes in hydroclimate; and (Q2) How can
knowledge of past temperature variations help reduce the spread of twenty-first
century climate projections. The potential Broader Impacts include building
capacity in Big Data analysis in the global paleoclimate community. All analyses
will be shared as open-source computational narratives to disseminate best
practices in paleo data science among early-career researchers, and to provide a
template for future analyses of this kind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the researchers will leverage recent paleoclimate data synthesis efforts, as
well as advances in the analysis of chronologically uncertain timeseries, to
explore fundamental questions in Holocene paleoclimatology. The proposed work
will also link paleoclimate data to future climate projections from the Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6) ensemble. The project will provide
training to early career scientists through three yearly workshops in data
management and analysis based on workflows and methodology developed as part of
this research. Additionally, the project will support one graduate student
working at the intersection between paleoclimatology, data science, and climate
modeling. Other Broader Impacts include outreach through the Young Researchers
program and Center for Knowledge-Powered Interdisciplinary Data Science to
expose high-school students and graduate students in data science to
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.