* 2002362
* RUI:  Terpenes as Versatile Building Blocks for Multivalent Polymeric and Nanoparticle Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Peter Iovine, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 295,200.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Peter M. Iovine of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of San Diego is transforming terpene
building blocks into sustainable polymers and nanoparticles. Terpenes are a
large and diverse class of natural compounds, produced by a variety of plants
(particularly conifers such as pine trees) and by some insects. In this
research, the team uses light to convert terpenes into defined nanostructures
upon interaction with DNA. Structure-function relationships between these
polymeric building blocks and the resultant nanoparticle stability, pH
dependence and structure are determined. The project has broader impact by
providing scientifically robust training opportunities for undergraduate
students. Participating students acquire diverse training in small molecule and
polymer synthesis, characterization, and nanomaterials development. Elements of
this research are also incorporated into existing chemistry courses at the
University of San Diego. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on the
synthesis of new polymer and nanoparticle systems derived from terpenes. The
innovation in the approach is two-fold. First, terpenes and terpene-containing
polymers are synthetically modified such that the products display clusters of
functional groups. These terpene-based building blocks are then assembled into
defined nanostructures through ionic and/or non-covalent interactions leading to
functional nanoparticles. The first thrust focuses on the creation of terpene-
derived polycationic polymers and the complexation of these polymers by DNA to
produce nanoparticles (polyplexes). The second thrust also starts with
functional terpenes but focuses on polyborylation instead of polycationization.
Once synthesized, polyborylated building blocks form complexes with Lewis basic
polymers to produce a new class of boron-rich nanoparticles (boraplexes). The
fundamental properties of terpene-derived. boron-rich nanoparticles are
systematically investigated, and various factors that affect their assembly
elucidated. This project has the potential to expand the utilization of terpenes
as a sustainable chemical building block for polymer constructs and
nanomaterials. The developed synthetic methodology could also impact development
in application areas such as sustainable polyols, surfactants, coatings, and
nanocomposites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.