* 2002887
* CAREER: Tissue Microstructure Characterization through Exchange Mapping with Magnetic Resonance Fingerprinting
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Nicole Seiberlich, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2022
* USD 305,774.00

PI: Seiberlich, Nicole E.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1553441
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissue microstructure properties have been shown to change
in the presence of disease, but these properties are difficult to measure
quickly and accurately in vivo. The goal of this project is to develop and test
a new technique, known as MRF-X, to probe in vivo tissue microstructure by using
standard Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanners to collect data in a new way.
After optimizing the MRF-X method, the properties of both skeletal muscle and
brain tissue will be measured, and differences between healthy and abnormal
tissue quantified. This technique will enable researchers to study how diseases
progress as well as allow physicians to examine tissue microstructure to better
diagnose disease in their patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this five-
year project is to develop, validate, and deploy novel techniques for in vivo
tissue microstructure characterization. These tissue microstructure measurements
will be performed by collecting Magnetic Resonance (MR) imaging data that have
been encoded to contain information about multiple tissue properties
simultaneously in a manner similar to the recently introduced MR Fingerprinting
technique. By optimizing the MR pulse sequence to be sensitive to variations
between tissue compartments, it will be possible to collect information about
microstructure which cannot currently be measured directly in vivo, including
water exchange rates between tissue compartments and intracellular/extracellular
volume fractions. The specific objectives of the proposal are to: 1) Develop a
technique (MRF-X) for rapid and robust in vivo quantification of volume
fractions and exchange properties, 2) Characterize and validate water exchange
rates and volume fraction in healthy skeletal muscle and brain tissue, 3)
Explore the use of water exchange as a biomarker for disease in the brain by
comparing properties of normal brain tissue and multiple sclerosis (MS) lesions,
and 4) Develop formal course work and laboratory experiences linking signal
processing and medical imaging for undergraduate and graduate students,
introduce K-12 students to biomedical imaging and engineering, and encourage
women and underrepresented minorities to pursue science and engineering. The
proposed research plan involves the development of new imaging techniques with
the goal of addressing fundamental questions about the nature of interactions
between tissue compartments and how they are modified under pathological
conditions. Using MRF-X, it will be possible to explore tissue structure and
function in healthy living tissue, and also to use these new biomarkers to aid
in the understanding and diagnosis of disease. The development of a robust and
rapid technique for in vivo tissue microstructure characterization will ensure
that the technique is immediately translatable for clinical use, potentially
leading to earlier and more accurate diagnosis of disease. Moreover, it will be
possible to probe the underlying mechanisms of various diseases, including but
not limited to Alzheimer?s disease and MS, using MRF-X. The education and
mentorship of K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students will be integrated into
the research to engage students, especially women and underrepresented
minorities, in biomedical imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
was made by the Biomedical Engineering program of CBET was co-funded by the
Mathematical Biology program of the Division of Mathematical Sciences.