* 2002935
* Convergent Paths Toward Universality in Complex Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Geoffrey West, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 11/30/2020
* USD 84,713.00

The workshop,"Convergent Paths towards Universality in Complex Systems", will
bring together scientists from very diverse disciplinary backgrounds, including
psychologists, physicists, ecologists, biologists, computer scientists,
mathematicians, information theorists, and others to articulate a convergence
approach to explore the recent discovery of universal or near-universal
properties of complex systems. The two-day workshop, to be held in the
Washington D.C. area will address universality in four primary areas:
Information Processing and Collective Computation, Adaptive Dynamics, Scaling
and Interactions and Energetics. The workshop will contribute new perspectives
on universality and will be an important and necessary step in the
identification of further research necessary for discovery in these converging
fields. The results of this project will achieve broad impact through the
workshop's contributions to increased insight into universality. Results of the
workshop will be distributed broadly to a wide range of audiences through peer-
reviewed reports, media announcements, and lectures at SFI's workshops and
schools attended by academics, policymakers, and other stakeholders. The
workshop will also be videotaped for dissemination via the SFI website and
YouTube channel as well as for use in SFI sponsored training. Invited workshop
participants will include a very diverse range of participants in order to
achieve diversity across a number of dimensions, including faculty rank, gender,
underrepresented groups and institutional diversity. This approach will
facilitate the scientific and professional development of early career
researchers as well as the inclusion of scientists from traditionally
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together
research leaders across diverse disciplines for intensive discussions aimed at
exploration of common mechanisms underlying a range of features of complex
systems. The recent widespread adoption of information-theory, scaling theory,
non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, and the theory of computation, in fields
that go far beyond their disciplinary origins suggests a significant convergence
that points toward universality. This meeting will focus on the most successful
examples of unification and seek to explore their basis and generalization. The
meeting will identify tools, models and theories that extend beyond the
boundaries of single disciplines, and thereby provide significant improvements
through novel approaches, to progress within any given
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.