* 2002270
* Collaborative Research: Resolving the relationships of Melastomataceae, one of the world's most diverse flowering plant radiations
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Walter Judd, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,108,780.00

The Melastomataceae are the eighth largest family of flowering plants on the
planet with more than 5600 species, most of which grow in the New World tropics.
It is not known why this family is so diverse, but some of its interesting
structural variants may have played a role. The family exhibits several unusual
traits, including special structures that house ants or mites, modified floral
parts, and wide variation in fruit type. The plants’ growth form also varies,
ranging from annuals to shrubs to trees, and even epiphytes or vines. This
project aims to explore whether any of these factors may have contributed to the
extreme diversity of Melastomataceae by using genomic data to build an
evolutionary tree for approximately 3000 species from the family. The
researchers will then test the geographic origin and subsequent movement of the
family across continents and environments, the evolution of morphological and
genetic features, and associated diversification rate shifts throughout the
worldwide distribution of Melastomataceae. This collaborative project represents
a model for tackling speciose and widespread tropical plant radiations and will
shed light on the origin and subsequent diversification of one of the largest
tropical plant families on the planet. Two postdoctoral scholars and a graduate
student will be trained, and the researchers will offer short training courses
to a variety of students. The project’s discoveries will be highlighted in
exhibits at the Florida Museum of Natural History and the New York Botanical
Garden, which have a combined annual visitation of over 500,000
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the generation of tropical angiosperm
diversity worldwide is often complicated by the lack of sufficient phylogenetic
data for major radiations. Given its broad geographic distribution, its
morphological diversity, and its size, the Melastomataceae is an ideal model for
developing a comprehensive phylogenomic dataset to test geographic origins,
morphological evolution, and diversification rates of a major tropical
radiation, a task currently intractable based on limited global datasets. Taking
a Hyb-seq approach, the project will produce phylogenomic datasets using 384
nuclear loci and entire plastomes to reconstruct the phylogeny of at least 3000
species across all major lineages of the Melastomataceae. The five principal
goals of the project are to: 1) generate a robust phylogenetic hypothesis of
relationships among all major groups; 2) estimate the timing of key evolutionary
events and diversification rates across the family, including correlations with
morphological evolution; 3) analyze biogeographic scenarios and determine the
origin of the family, as well as correlations between diversification rates and
major biogeographical shifts; 4) estimate the degree of polyploidy across the
family using allele frequencies from our nuclear loci to infer chromosomal
evolution across the tree; and 5) develop robust classifications based on our
phylogenetic hypotheses, incorporating morphological characters delineating
major lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.