* 2002328
* P2C2: Monsoon 21K--A Global Monsoon Synthesis, Reconstruction, and Data-Model Comparison
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 443,211.00

This project aims to conduct a major new proxy synthesis, reconstruction, and
data-model comparison for global monsoon systems from the Last Glacial Maximum
(LGM) to the present. Specifically, this project will synthesize hydroclimate
records from global monsoon regions, reconstruct monsoon variability over the
past 21,000 years, and form the basis of a data-model comparison. This effort
will help characterize monsoon responses to changing global energy balance,
develop a community database resource, and build a testbed for model
improvement. This database of monsoon records (from regional to global scales)
will enable the researchers to reconstruct the monsoon strength and extent, to
test hypotheses linking hemispheric temperature and circulation with tropical
hydroclimate, and to test how well past monsoon variability is simulated in
models. These reconstructions will be used to then investigate how monsoon
systems responded to the collapse of Northern Hemisphere ice-sheets, and changes
in latitudinal temperature gradients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
Broader Impacts include developing and curating a global monsoon database for
the past 21 thousand years and advancing the understanding of past and future
monsoon dynamics. The database will be made publicly available to the wider
paleoclimate community. Other potential Broader include developing a teaching-
kit and holding a teacher-training workshop to engage k-12 classrooms and
teachers on local tribal nations (in Northern Arizona). The project would
support two early career scientists and one PhD student that the PIs will
recruit from underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.