* 2002829
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multi-Scalar Analysis of Environmental Variability Adaptation Projects
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Diana Liverman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 17,984.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project analyzes the long-term
impacts of projects that address adaptation to environmental variability. The
goal of these projects is to assist communities to respond to the impacts of
current and future environmental variability, safeguarding livelihoods and
economic development. However, there have been few evaluations done of their
long-term impacts. This research integrates political ecology with adaptation
impact studies to examine the long-term impacts. The research links the
transnational scale of climate finance to national adaptation governance and
local outcomes of related projects, and will provide critical insights into the
efficacy of adaptation projects. Findings will be disseminated via research
publications, reports to local communities that have benefited from investment
in adaption projects, and via curriculum development for graduate studies in
adaptation research. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
project will provide critical support to a young scholar as they develop their
independent research profile. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research poses the
following questions: (1) At the national level, how do the organizations
designing and implementing adaptation projects define and measure the success of
these actions and translate lessons to future projects? (2) At the local level,
what are the enduring impacts of internationally funded adaptation projects on
the adaptive capacity of recipient communities? and (3) What alternative
evaluation methodologies can provide additional insight into the long-term
outcomes of adaptation projects? To answer these questions, this project uses
mixed methods, integrating data derived from a systematic analysis of adaptation
documents, semi-structured interviews with key informants, and participant
observation, to build an institutional ethnography of adaptation governance to
environmental variability. The project also advances a methodology by
contributing to understanding the methods and analysis necessary for assessing
the multi-dimensional outcomes of adaptation projects over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.