* 2002860
* Entropy and Phase Transformations in Stable Nanocrystalline Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Christopher Schuh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2023
* USD 425,518.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Nanocrystalline alloys are next-generation
materials that are composed of many very small crystal grains, adhered together
at disordered "grain boundaries". These materials have a variety of exceptional
properties like extreme strength and wear resistance. They are also beginning to
transition from laboratory curiosities to widely-adopted engineering materials
thanks to a critically enabling concept: the stabilization of their grain
boundaries by adding alloying elements. Traditional alloy science ignores the
effect of grain boundaries, but these cannot be ignored in nanocrystalline
metals where they are so prominent. Therefore, new alloy science is needed for
these materials, with a focus on integrating the interactions between grain
boundaries and alloying additions. This project studies the alloy science of
nanocrystalline materials, with a special focus on the effects of temperature
and maintaining stability at high temperatures. The project uses computer
simulations at the atomic scale to explore the stability of various alloys in
nanostructured form, and identifies limits to the compositions and conditions
under which nanocrystalline structures can be formed. Experiments are conducted
to make and test these new theoretical advances, and to produce the first
prototype samples of new nanocrystalline alloys. These developments are expected
to lead to a predictive scientific toolkit for the future design of new families
of nanocrystalline alloys, for use in a wide array of applications ranging from
electronics, to machine components, to 3D printing. The research in this project
is carried out by undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students at MIT as
part of their training in materials science. The project team also engages with
industry scientists to focus the work on relevant materials and applications,
and to align the research for impact through future technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merits of this research program center on resolving the role of entropy in
nanostructured alloys. Specifically, the project is developing a full view of
configurational and vibrational entropy on grain boundary segregation in
polycrystals, through atomistic computations that can separate these two
contributions in a system with a full polycrystalline spectrum of grain boundary
sites. This information in turn enables a full analysis of the free energy
competition between bulk phases and nanostructured states, including details
like boundary structural transitions (or complexion transitions) and allotropic
phase transformations in the bulk. The overarching goal of the project is to
achieve sufficiently quantitative thermodynamic calculations to be able to
predict alloy phase diagrams complete with equilibrium and metastable
nanocrystalline structures, and then to provide experimental tests of those
predictions. The broader impacts of this program comprise a variety of training,
outreach and dissemination activities. Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers are trained on topics at the intersection of classical materials
science core concepts (alloy thermodynamics, phase equilibria) and new topics in
nanoscience (nanostructure stabilization). The research results are published in
the open literature and also disseminated widely to industry through the
outreach activities of the PI. In particular, industrial interactions are used
to guide the research efforts towards relevant materials and temperatures of
interest for practical purposes, facilitating future technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.