* 2002320
* I-Corps: Wearable Intraoral Neuromodulation Device to Treat Swallowing Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Hangue Park, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
development of a wearable device to treat swallowing and speech disorders. The
goal of this technology is to address swallowing and speech related problems,
such as Dysphagia (i.e., swallowing problems). The occurrence of Dysphagia is as
high as 22% in people over 50 years of age and as many as 30% of them receive
inpatient medical treatment. In addition, 8-9% of young children have a speech
disorder and about 50% of the US children (3-17 years of age) receive
intervention services for a voice, speech, language, or swallowing disorder.
Further, the swallowing and speech problems result from other illnesses such as
stroke, spinal cord injury, head neck cancer, and Parkinsonâ€™s disease. The
proposed device will be powered through a wireless system connected to a battery
worn in a necklace-like non-invasive device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a wearable intraoral neuromodulation
system to solve problems with intraoral sensorimotor loop operation that cause
swallowing and speech disorders. By monitoring and stimulating the intraoral
organs, this technology will provide high spatiotemporal resolution to favorably
intervene in intraoral sensorimotor loop operations. For example, the technology
is designed to monitor the beginning of the pharyngeal phase of swallowing and
modulate the activity of pharyngeal muscles for swallowing by stimulating the
soft palatal nerves. In another example, the technology will monitor the tongue
movement during speech and modulate the movement or posture of the tongue by
applying stimulation at specific times and specific locations of the tongue.
This device also has a unique feature using real-time wireless power transfer
between the intraoral coil and necklace coil, which can be easily maintained.
The necklace electronics have a battery capacity that is able to power the
intraoral electronics for a full day. This real-time power transfer may
significantly reduce (or eliminate) the size of the battery for the intraoral
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.