* 2002936
* Collaborative Research: Optical Transitions in Metallic Nanoclusters at High Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Xun Wendy Gu, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 375,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This research program contributes to innovations
in nanomaterials that are useful in biomedical therapies, sensing, and
catalysis. Nanoclusters that consist of fewer than ~200 metallic atoms are of
interest due to their luminescence in near-infrared light, bio-compatibility and
ultra-small size. The relationship between the structure and optical properties
of these nanoclusters remains unclear, which prevents the design of nanoclusters
with optimized performance. This program uses pressure to modify the structure
of nanoclusters, in order to learn about the electronic transitions that are
responsible for light absorption and luminescence, as well as the stability of
nanoclusters under external stimulus. This research is closely tied to our
educational plans through the training of postdocs and graduate students, by
supporting underrepresented groups at the K-12 and college level in science and
technology, and by supporting science teachers in the community. In addition,
modules that explain the influence of mechanics on optical behavior will be
incorporated into undergraduate courses during this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is concerned with characterizing the properties of atomically precise clusters
composed of gold or silver plus ligands using diamond anvil cell techniques to
apply high pressure, and with optical measurements (both absorption and
emission) to study excited states. The experiments will be modeled using
electronic structure theory, including ground state calculations to determine
structures, and excited state studies to determine optical properties, and
including methods development based on second linear response theory and domain-
separated density functional theory. The research is aimed at identifying
optical properties such as plasmon to exciton transitions, and an increase in
luminescence efficiency with increasing pressure; both properties are of
interest to using the clusters in practical applications. The research includes
three research objectives: (1) study of energy transfer responsible for broad
absorption &amp; near-infrared luminescence of the cluster material under
pressure, (2) determine the source of anomalous multiple emissions of the
nanoclusters, and (3) studies of 2-3 nm nanoclusters to characterize the
transition from plasmonic to excitonic states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.