* 2002541
* P2C2: Collaborative Research: Transient forcing of the Local Last Glacial Maximum in the tropical Peruvian Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Nathan Stansell, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 229,506.00

The geological history of tropical glaciers can provide scientists an important
perspective from the past on how Earth’s climate system responds to human
activity. This project will look to the geological record of tropical glaciers
in the Andes Mountains for a perspective on past changes in the glacial ice
extent and how these changes may relate to records of changes in the atmospheric
conditions during periods of abrupt climate change. These records of glacial
activity will help place the current state of rapidly retreating ice margins in
the tropics in a longer-term context that extends well beyond the instrumental
record. Finally, by integrating multiple archives of past climates and modeling
the causes of tropical high elevation climate changes, this work will improve
our understanding of abrupt global climate changes because these regions had
much larger glaciers in the past. By determining ages on the rocks that were
transported by the ancient glaciers and combining analyses of lake sediments
deposited continuously below the glaciers, this research will provide a detailed
record of how much the glaciers changed and when. The research team will
incorporate climate model simulations to test the causes of tropical climate
changes and how they relate to high latitude warming and cooling events. This
project will train 3 graduate students, and at least 4 undergraduate students.
The project team will improve K-12 science education and engagement by exposing
teachers and students (both local and abroad) to research through the GLOBE
program (Global Learning and Observation to Benefit the Environment). The team
also will partner with INAIGEM in Peru to broaden project impact, and help with
the mission of educational capacity building.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will evaluate tropical glacial variability during the local Last Glacial Maximum
(LLGM) to better understand how low latitude temperature variability and the
hydrologic cycle were modulated by ocean and atmospheric processes. This
research has the following objectives: 1) determine robust ages of moraines
using terrestrial cosmogenic radionuclide (TCN) dating methods to provide
information about both the timing and extent of multiple LLGM ice limits; 2)
rigorously evaluate centennial-scale records of glacial flour flux using high-
resolution geochemical archives from the recently acquired Lake Junín drill-core
record; 3) test the scale and climatic forcing of LLGM climate variability using
climate model simulations; 4) test the scale of LLGM glacier variability
responses to climatic forcing using energy and mass-balance models. This
research will produce multi-proxy, centennial-scale records of mountain
glaciation in Peru spanning the LLGM, at a scale and resolution that has not yet
been achieved. This resolution will be sufficient to make comparisons with ice
cores from Greenland, Antarctica, and the tropical Andes, as well as decadal-
scale speleothem-based stable isotope records of hydroclimate changes from the
same (Lake Junín) catchment. This will allow for a collective evaluation of
mountain glacier archives and other regional records of past atmospheric
variability that will improve our understanding of the role of the tropics in
abrupt global change events on millennial timescales. These records will provide
insight on the sensitivity of tropical glaciers to a range of climate
conditions, both atmospheric and oceanic, and particularly how the tropical
climate system responds to meltwater forcing. Ultimately, these records will
inform how the tropical hydrologic cycle drives glacial-interglacial cycles in
both the low and high latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.