* 2002307
* Collaborative Research: Dry-Wet Phase Inversion Pathway of Graphene Oxide (GO)-Based Mixed-Matrix Membranes for Mineral Ions Separation by Membrane Distillation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Lucy Mar Camacho, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,043.00

Increasing pollution and water scarcity have created the need to access and
recover unconventional water sources. One such source is high-salinity produced
water, which surfaces from underground during oil or gas production. Produced
water has an excess concentration of minerals and does not meet the regulatory
standards of acceptable quality for drinking water. However, by removing these
undesirable constituents, the produced water can be reused for agricultural
applications such as irrigation, livestock watering, and aquaculture. Therefore,
identifying a process to desalinate produced water is of great societal
importance. Reverse osmosis is a pressure-driven membrane process used to
desalinate water containing relatively low mineral concentrations, such as
groundwater. The mineral concentrations of produced water are sufficiently high
that reverse osmosis is unsuitable for desalination. Membrane distillation is a
promising alternative technology capable of separating minerals from high-
salinity water due to its unique thermal-membrane characteristics. Graphene
oxide-based membranes, with their efficient antifouling properties, are expected
to enhance the membrane distillation process. Graphene oxide-based membranes are
fabricated using a state-of-the-art method called phase inversion. Phase
inversion produces these membranes by integrating graphene oxide directly into
the polymeric materials. This project sets out to develop a detailed fundamental
and mechanistic understanding of the role that graphene oxide plays in a novel
dry-wet phase inversion synthesis to produce membranes for membrane
distillation. This project will also combine research and education activities
to train a new generation of experts in the versatile area of membrane
technology, particularly as applied to water
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane technology for water desalination and
treatment of produced water has the potential to fundamentally alter the way
society views water reuse. Augmenting water treatment capacity will allow rural,
arid, and isolated regions with limited access to water, to have portable and
reliable membrane systems for treating water. Advancing promising membrane
separation processes for desalination, such as membrane distillation, requires
access to fundamental knowledge of functional materials and structure-property
relationship to engineer effective membranes. Membrane distillation is an
energy-efficient alternative to multi-stage flash and multi-effect distillation
processes and can be configured to concentrate brines. However, application of
membrane distillation at scale is limited by the lack of suitable membranes
exhibiting high permeate flux, water recovery, and resistance to scaling. The
goal of this project is to establish and understand the dry-wet phase inversion
membrane development approach to overcome these limitations in utility for
produced water purification. Graphene oxide is a versatile anti-fouling
nanomaterial that will be used in the synthesis of mixed-matrix membranes with
properties specific to application in membrane distillation. Three research
objectives are defined to provide fundamental insights into the dry-wet phase
inversion process. In the first objective, the investigators will establish the
role of graphene oxide sheet pH on pore formation and hydrophobic properties and
determine the mechanism of dispersion of graphene oxide. The second objective
examines ion retention on dry-wet phase inversion graphene oxide-based membranes
during membrane distillation. And the third objective focuses on characterizing
of the chemical, thermal, and mechanical stability of the dry-wet phase
inversion graphene oxide-based membranes. Together, this knowledge will form a
foundation for advancing membrane distillation for high-salinity water
purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.