* 2002763
* IIBR Multidisciplinary: RUI: Cross Departmental Development of an Automated Species Identification System for the Phylum Tardigrada found on Birds.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Lynn Kimsey, Baker University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 12/31/2023
* USD 273,565.00

Tardigrades, also known as water bears, comprise a microscopic aquatic animal
Phylum famous for their ability to withstand extreme environmental conditions
and rapid changes in their environment by undergoing cryptobiosis, a process
that allows them to desiccate with their environment and survive exposure to
temperatures of near absolute zero, 6,000 atmospheres of pressure, and high
vacuums. Recently water bears have gained global media attention for their
ability to survive exposure to outer space. While the underlying molecular
biology and physiology of tardigrades produced exciting applications in organ
transplants and insights into ultra-violet radiation on the skin, little is
known about the global diversity and distribution of this group. Tardigrades are
found all over the world, from the bottom of oceans to the tops of mountains,
but little is known about which species is where and how it got there. The
project aims to unfold tardigrade dispersion, distribution, and diversity. An
automated robotic system to sequester, preserve, label, and image specimen
tardigrades on laboratory slides for permanent storage will be developed. These
images are then used to develop and “train” artificial intelligence software to
identify species. The potential discovery and description of new, rare, and
common morphospecies will expand regional knowledge of phenotypic diversity. The
development of a new regional alpha taxonomic voucher collection at a major
museum will be accessible worldwide, an invaluable tool in species
identification which will promote the inclusion of tardigrades in global
environmental and biogeographical analyses. The prepared specimens and the
automated system for preparation and identification of specimens, stored at the
Bohart Museum at the University of California, Davis, will be available for
students, researchers, and museums world-wide to access in the future. To this
end, highly qualified students from diverse ethnic, gender, and ability
backgrounds begin by working in the field under the mentorship of Baker faculty
at the Baker University Wetlands to collect samples from the local forested
habitats and their resident bird populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
three-year project to modernize two of the fundamental infrastructure processes
necessary for research into the phenotypic biodiversity of Phylum Tardigrada by
a collaboration among three STEM departments (Biology, Physics &amp; Computer
Science) at a small undergraduate school (Baker University) with support from
the Bohart Museum (University of California, Davis). Baker University faculty
supervise undergraduate workshops to identify the biodiversity of tardigrades
recently discovered on birds by first automating the 100+ yr-old process used to
make slides and images of specimens by designing and building a microscope slide
preparation, labeling and imaging system intended to reduce time, labor and
cost. Second, faculty and student researchers automate the phenotypic
identification of specimens to species by developing image/pattern matching
software using a new image reference library built with artificial intelligence
for students, researchers and museums. The products of this research will yield
papers, chapters, and articles written by the students and faculty PIs. The
design and directions for use of these technologies will be published such that
students, researchers, and teams at universities and museums can build their own
systems. This project will demonstrate that collections management, tabletop
robotics, artificial intelligence, and computer identification of specimens are
some of the infrastructure arenas requiring modernization for rigorous
scientific research into invertebrate phenotypic diversity and ecology. Finally,
the results of this multi-dimensional ecological study into the lives of
tardigrades on birds will spread light onto a dark area of the tree of life.
(http/: “mywaterbears.com”)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.