* 2002900
* RUI: Biomimetic Self-Assembly: Physical State and the Barrier Function to Water Permeation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Sunghee Lee, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 11/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division at the National Science Foundation supports Professor Sunghee Lee of
Iona College to study how supramolecular self-assemblies at micrometer-sized
liquid-liquid interfaces control the passage of water. The study promotes our
understanding of how living cells can selectively retain and release their water
content. Such water controlling mechanisms are essential to understanding not
only life's origins but also the functions of major organs such as the skin and
kidneys. More broadly, the project has a potential to contribute to human health
and clean water applications that rely on the retention and elimination of water
and waste. The research enables training for a large number of undergraduate
research participants in the project. The research team further broadens the
impact of their work by developing outreach seminars and science symposia for
high school students and teachers that inspire and engage students to enter
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, particularly
those from underrepresented groups. Professor Lee and her students travel to the
University of Tokyo in Japan to conduct experiments on high-throughput device
fabrication obtaining a global perspective on science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on elucidating how supramolecular
self-assemblies at micron-sized liquid-liquid interfaces can serve as
controllable barriers for the passage of water. The team of researchers,
Professor Lee and undergraduate students at Iona College, will investigate the
directionality of the water movement, and balance between permeability and
stability in protocell models through experimental activities strategized to
determine the water permeability parameters and energy of activation for osmotic
flow, electrical properties of capacitance and leakage current, diffusional
water permeability, and adhesion energy. Upon successful completion, this
research could provide fundamental insights into how lipid asymmetry plays a
role in organismal water homeostasis, and the balance between stability and
permeability in prebiotic cellular models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.