* 2002141
* Travel Support for North American Summer School for Logic, Language, and Information (NASSLLI)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,012.00

This project provides travel and lodging support for graduate and advanced
undergraduate students to participate in the 10th biennial North American Summer
School in Logic, Language, and Information (NASSLLI) at Brandeis University in
July 2020. NASSLLI is a unique educational opportunity for students interested
in the interfaces between logic, computer and information science, linguistics,
psychology, and philosophy. It brings faculty and students in these disciplines
together in courses and workshops, with the goal of furthering our understanding
of how minds and machines represent, communicate, manipulate and reason with
information expressed in natural language. It also seeks to broaden the research
and development communities that are concerned with these issues to achieve
gender equity among its practitioners, and become more inclusive of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of NASSLI 2020 is on
computational modeling of pragmatics and dialogue, and is the first NASSLLI
event that focuses on the implementation of human and machine interactions using
natural language. This more practical focus complements NASSLLIâ€™s traditional
theoretical concerns in the computer, information and cognitive sciences to
include a range of questions in both human and machine intelligence that will be
attractive to students. To facilitate the success of students in the week-long
intensive courses and participation in the workshops that follow, intensive
training in a set of foundational topics is provided during the weekend prior to
the start of courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.