* 2002751
* Accumulation and transformation of micro- and nano-plastics within the sea surface microlayer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Geoffrey Bothun, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 440,351.00

Microplastic and nano plastic particles enter the environment directly through
consumer personal care products and are formed in the environment as commercial
products such as plastic packaging weather and degrade. Oceans and coastal
ecosystems are major sinks for plastic pollution. Plastics have been shown to
accumulate in and negatively impact the health of marine life, which in turn
places added stress on ecosystems as well as marine industries reliant on the
health of these ecosystems. The ultimate fate and adverse impacts of these small
plastic particles depends on how they interact and are transported in nature. A
critical natural component of oceans and a point of initial exposure to plastic
pollution are sea surface microlayers, which are ubiquitous globally and are
comprised of natural molecules, particulate matter, and microorganisms. These
microlayers act as an “ocean skin” that influences the exchange of mass and heat
between the seawater and the atmosphere. They are also sites for microplastic
and nano plastic accumulation. This project will study how microplastics and
nano plastics interact with model sea surface microlayers, how these
interactions cause them to accumulate and transform at the sea surface, and to
what extent microplastics and nano plastics will alter the properties of sea
surface microlayers. The goal is to provide fundamental insight into interfacial
and colloidal properties leading to microplastic and nano plastic accumulation
that can contribute broadly to determining environmental risks of plastic
pollution and to devising strategies for remediation. Participation will be
broadened by partnering with the Northeast NSF Louis Stokes Alliances for
Minority Participation program to provide research experiences to two supported
underrepresented students. These students will also lead a new middle school
outreach activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea surface microlayers,
which range from 1 to 1000 micrometers thick, are ubiquitous globally on ocean
and coastal waters, regulating the exchange of mass and energy between these
waters and the atmosphere. Sea surface microlayers are also a site of
accumulation for heavy metal, organic, and particulate pollutants including
micro- and nano-plastics. This project is motivated by the following needs:
Representative and commercially relevant micro- and nano-plastics enabling
laboratory studies, suitable microlayer systems that are broadly applicable and
enable actionable results relating to fate, transport, and nanoscale
interactions, and microscopy techniques needed to characterize sea surface
microlayers containing particulate matter. Well-characterized and size-
fractionated model micro- and nano-plastics will be created by mechanical and UV
degradation (Aim 1). Phytoplankton sea surface microlayers will be prepared in a
modified Langmuir trough (Aim 2) and used to quantify the accumulation and
transformation of micro- and nano-plastics as a function of their physical
properties and composition (Aim 3). To realize the broader impact of the project
to education, outreach, and diversity and inclusion, underrepresented students
will be engaged in research activities and a new middle-school outreach
initiative will be created. Marine plastics provide a versatile and timely
platform to engage students in STEM activities. The transformative aspects of
this work derive from the limited understanding of the role of the sea surface
microlayers in micro- and nano-plastic accumulation and include identifying
currently unknown mechanisms of interaction and transformation, demonstrating
the ability to utilize complex field samples to study micro- and nano-particle
interactions with bio-environmental interfaces, and creating a new experimental
framework that can be broadly applied to different ocean and coastal regions.
Participation will be broadened by partnering with the Northeast NSF Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation program to provide research
experiences to two supported underrepresented students. These students will also
lead a new middle school outreach activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.