* 2002515
* Seasonality of Abrupt Climate Change over Greenland: Direct Tests for the Younger Dryas and 8.2 ka event using Paleolimnology
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yarrow Axford, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 08/31/2024
* USD 640,580.00

The Younger Dryas (YD) is the best documented example of abrupt climate change
in Earth’s history, yet fundamental traits of the YD remain enigmatic. Greenland
sat at the epicenter of YD climate change, with intense cooling registered in
ice cores, but nevertheless the Greenland Ice Sheet retreated during the YD. An
influential hypothesis suggests that North Atlantic abrupt climate changes were
characterized by extreme seasonality, with mild summers that explain
counterintuitive YD glacier retreat. Resolving seasonality is crucial to
understanding the impacts of past and future climate change on all aspects of
the Arctic system – including the ice sheet, because summer temperatures drive
surface melt. This study will directly assess seasonality of the YD on Greenland
for the first time by developing quantitative summer and winter temperature
reconstructions. This study will also assess seasonality of the major cold snap
over Greenland 8,200 years ago. Intriguingly, despite being shorter and smaller
in annual magnitude than the YD, that event drove glacier advances around
Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will clarify how abrupt climate
change affects the Arctic/subarctic North Atlantic region, especially Greenland
and its ice sheet. By resolving seasonality of air temperatures during the YD,
when the ice sheet retreated despite evidence for extremely cold (annual) air
temperatures, this study will also clarify the competing roles of precipitation
and ocean temperatures in driving past ice sheet behavior – with implications
for projections of future ice sheet mass loss. This study will test whether the
Holocene 8.2 ka event was essentially a mini YD, or fundamentally different. The
latter could make the YD a poor analog for future abrupt climate change, which
would unfold in an interglacial world. The 8.2 ka event has been described as an
ideal target for testing climate models, but the quantitative reconstructions of
associated terrestrial climate changes needed to optimize such tests are
rare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another major contribution of this work is
calibration and advancement of season-specific methods for reconstructing arctic
climate. Such methods are needed to address questions about seasonality on
diverse Quaternary timescales, providing essential tests for climate models. The
proposed work will also enable more sophisticated interpretations of stable
isotope records and paleotemperature reconstructions from the Greenland ice
cores by providing direct comparisons. This may yield new insights from those
iconic records, once seasonality of the climate changes they capture is
clarified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize classic sites that
preserve rare, readily dateable YD lake sediment records. Multiple calibrated,
season-specific proxies in sediment cores – including insect and pollen
assemblages, terrestrial leaf wax δ2H, and aquatic insect δ18O – will test and
complement one another and provide new comparisons to annually integrated
records from ice cores. This work will build upon the research team’s experience
calibrating and applying these proxies in Greenland. A new calibration study
will verify the seasonality of leaf wax δ2H in a range of Greenland
climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The possibility of future abrupt climate change
is a major societal concern. As evidence accumulates for recent and ongoing
changes in North Atlantic Ocean circulation, past abrupt changes in the subpolar
North Atlantic are increasingly relevant to the future. This project will train
two Ph.D. students and at least six undergraduates. In addition to conducting
research during the academic year, students will participate in mentored summer
research institutes to build research and communication skills. To share science
beyond academia and hone outreach skills, students will conduct outreach (a) in
Greenland near the study site, and (b) in a Chicago area high school serving a
diverse population of &gt;3200 students, in partnership with teachers who
participated in the PI’s 2018 climate science workshop for high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.