* 2002917
* I-Corps:  High productivity micro-reactors for large scale hydrocarbon and CO2 processing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Debasish Kuila, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
highly efficient, cost-effective system for direct conversion of CO2 to useful
chemicals, while minimizing waste and emissions. The potential impacts include,
but are not limited to, new cost-effective utilization of the abundant CO2 both
within the atmosphere and from point source emissions, such as power plants, for
the production of value-added chemicals. The heart of this technology is a
'microreactor' that allows process intensification and thus increased
productivity compared to a conventional reactor. Microreactors offer enhanced
productivity, safety, and robustness. The proposed unit can be developed as an
easily deployable, standalone unit or to retrofit existing plants. Moreover,
this project will deliver major benefits to the chemical process industries by
accelerating response to market changes, simplifying scale-up, enabling rapid
development and deployment of new products, simplifying on-site gas treatment
and processing, and reducing the environmental impact and safety risks inherent
to pipeline transportation to a central facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on designing and building a standalone highly
intensified unit to leverage the high productivity of microreactors in
developing small scale Gas-To-Liquid (GTL) plants converting CO2 into value-
added chemicals. A microreactor containing microchannels is ideal for process
intensification in chemical engineering as it (1) enhances the heat and mass
transfer processes; (2) allows precise adjustment of the initial and boundary
conditions, as well as the residence or contact time for continuous chemical
reactions; and (3) represents inherently safe plant operation. The decrease in
the physical dimensions (miniaturization) of a unit leads to enhanced mixing and
heat exchange, thereby improving the surface area per unit volume and subsequent
mass and heat transfer rates. The proposed system will be a highly intensified
standalone plant consisting of catalytic microreactor
units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.