* 2002104
* Networking Microbiome Research: A Symposium for a Microbiome Center Consortium
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Catherine Pfister, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 38,608.00

Microbes inhabit all of Earth’s environments from the human body to oceans and
soils. They are comprised of bacteria, archaea, viruses, and single-celled
eukaryotes. Microbiomes reside in every known ecosystem around the globe,
including many plants and animals that also host microbiomes. Microbiome
research is an area of deep interest and rapid discovery across multiple
institutions in the USA. As a result, microbiome centers have been established
at universities, research institutes, and national labs supporting local
research and education. Microbiome research is interdisciplinary in nature,
cutting across ecosystems and species and scaling from microscopic entities to
human health to global cycles. It also encompasses a diversity of disciplines
including computer science, chemistry, organismal biology, molecular biology and
more, making communication and synthesis challenging. In order to better connect
both microbiome researchers and microbiome centers, a consortium of centers is
proposed. This award will be used to host a conference at the University of
Chicago on 16-17 Jun 2020 to begin to network microbiome centers nationally,
leveraging the network for increased progress in microbiome research and its
application to education and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goal
of networking microbiome centers nationally, the conference will focus on
defining a microbiome center consortium, discussing the objectives of the
consortium, and developing a plan to sustain a consortium into the future. Key
areas where conference proceedings will focus include: (1) Prepare researchers
for the field’s rapid methodological advances by addressing where microbiome
research needs new methodologies, and where existing methods require
standardization and interpretation. (2) Discuss the bioinformatic challenges
facing microbiome researchers to accelerate discovery and application in
microbiome research. Microbiome-related data presents investigators with unique
analysis challenges, both in terms of the quantity and the disparate types of
data from DNA sequence data to spatial images. (3) Develop strategies for
networking microbiome centers through a session with successful networked
organizations that already exist in biology. Finally, the conference will seek
to engage the next generation of leadership through both an undergraduate and a
graduate student internship as part of the conference, as well as direct
invitations to junior faculty leadership at existing microbiome
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.