* 2002885
* Non-Heme Iron-Nitroxyl Complexes: Key Intermediates for Nitrogen-Nitrogen (N-N) Bond Forming Reactions in Nature
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Nicolai Lehnert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 12/31/2023
* USD 524,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Nicolai Lehnert from the University of Michigan. Nitric
oxide (NO) is a very important molecule in human physiology. It is, for example,
a key immune defense agent released by cells from the immune system in response
to encounters with bacteria that cause diseases. However, pathogenic bacteria
have evolved defenses against NO. These bacteria use enzymes called flavodiiron
NO reductases (FNORs) to efficiently remove NO by transforming it into the less
toxic molecule N2O. As a result, harmful bacteria can proliferate in the human
body and can cause hard to cure infections. The research in Dr. Lehnert’s
laboratory contributes to the elucidation of the mechanism of catalytic
reactions by which FNORs break down NO by using molecules that mimic the active
site of FNORs. Understanding the chemistry of FNORs can accelerate finding new
cures against bacterial infections, in particular those caused by drug-resistant
strains. The graduate and undergraduate students who do the research acquire
knowledge and skills in advanced chemical synthesis, analytical and advanced
spectroscopic methods, and become versed in how to approach and solve scientific
problems. These skills help the students to successfully compete in the job
market. Finally, outreach with Cass Technical High School in Detroit is
integrated in this project. Here, underrepresented minority high school students
participate in real research in the Lehnert laboratory over the
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is aimed at using model
complexes to gain insight in the active site of flavodiiron nitric oxide
reductases (FNORs). The focus is on the elucidation of the structural and
electronic properties of the diiron active sites of the enzymes that influence
the catalysis of the NO reduction to N2O. In previous work, Dr. Lehnert has
synthesized model complexes that represent all three mechanistic possibilities
of how FNORs could bind and activate NO. Next generation model systems are
developed to investigate how the redox potential and the second coordination
sphere of the diiron core of these enzymes affects the reactivity of the enzyme,
and to determine the mechanism by which NO is bound and activated. According to
DFT calculations, the key intermediate following N-N bond formation in FNORs is
hyponitrite, but so far, researchers have not been able to trap these (or any)
intermediates of the reaction. Here, model complexes are used to investigate the
coordination chemistry of hyponitrite with non-heme iron centers and to
establish relationships between the hyponitrite binding mode and the ability of
the iron complexes to mediate N2O generation. Finally, previous work has shown
that non-heme iron sites can form NO complexes in three different oxidation
states, FeII/III/IV-NO(-). The corresponding FeIV-NO(-) species have recently
been invoked as intermediates in biosynthetic pathways for natural products that
contain the N-nitroso group. Dr. Lehnert uses the only known model complex for
this species to investigate the biologically-relevant reactivity of FeIV-NO
type intermediates in N-N bond forming reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.