* 2002941
* Shape adaptable, non-centrosymmetric viral scaffolds for assembly of self-propelled nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Elaine Haberer, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 342,038.00

Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic swimmers have been
increasingly explored. These remarkable self-propelled materials can convert
chemical or light energy into locomotion, increasing mixing and accelerating
chemical reactions. Asymmetry in particle composition enables movement through a
local build-up of reaction products, whereas particle size and geometry control
speed and directionality. While motors with dimensions of 100s of nanometers or
microns have been widely studied, sub-100 nm devices have been largely neglected
because they are harder to make. This research will use the expert manufacturing
capabilities of viral biomaterials to overcome these fabrication challenges. The
development of such an assembly strategy will enable the spatial and
topographical control essential for important biomedical, sensing, and
environmental remediation applications. This research will support both
mentoring and outreach activities to inspire, recruit, and train a diverse group
of scientists and engineers. These activities will strengthen the education of
graduate, undergraduate, and middle students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viral nanoparticles are monodisperse, self-
assembled biomaterials. Their structure and chemistry, including exact shape and
site-specific functional groups, is genetically encoded and known with
precision. The project objective is to create a shape-changing viral template
with broken symmetry that is capable of serving as a platform with which to
design and synthesize asymmetric functional nanomaterials. The proposed work
will focus on using the size and shape of the transformed viral templates to
manipulate the motion of viral nanoparticle-based nanoswimmers. Viral geometry
will be converted from filament to rod to spheroid through brief organic solvent
exposure. Following these extreme dimensional changes and sidechain packing
transitions, differences in surface exposed residues will be evaluated. In
addition, the effect of N-terminal amino acid sidechain character on solvent-
based transformation, as well as the size and stability of the shape-modified
scaffold will be studied. The reduced surface chemistry homogeneity of the
shape-changed viruses will be used to synthesize or assemble non-centrosymmetric
self-electrophoretic and light-induced self-electrophoretic nanoparticle-based
nanoswimmers. Viral-templated nanoparticle trajectory will be explored,
rotational and translational diffusion coefficients measured, and motion
correlated with nanomaterial size and shape. The proposed studies will improve
fundamental understanding of the structure-function relationship associated with
geometric tunability of the filamentous virus and particle motion; advance
knowledge of biomolecule interactions with and control over non-centrosymmetric
nanostructure formation; and enhance viral-templated nanoparticle motion through
precise control over template size and shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.