* 2002657
* Ultra-Low Phase Noise, Ultra-Wide Band Silicon Photonics Millimeter-wave Signal Generators With Automatic Calibration
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Kamran Entesari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 397,587.00

Millimeter-wave (mm-wave) signal generation with ultra-low phase noise, ultra-
wideband and high-resolution is an essential challenge for many applications
including modern instrumentation, software-defined radios for wireless
communications, radars, and warfare systems. While it is extremely challenging
with conventional electronic signal generation technology, mm-wave silicon-
photonics technology has the potential to provide mm-wave signal generators with
simultaneous ultra-wide bandwidth, ultra-low phase noise, high frequency
resolution and small footprint. Utilizing photonics modulators, filters and
delay elements along with integrated electronics will allow the use of mm-wave
silicon-photonics to fulfill these requirements. This project will demonstrate
ultra-low phase noise, ultra-wideband, and high-resolution mm-wave silicon-
photonics signal generators to advance wireless technologies for applications
such as modern instrumentation, software-defined radios, radars, and warfare
systems. The research has the potential to revolutionize the future of
instrumentation and wireless industries and provide further technological
diversification for the semiconductor industry. In addition to the
aforementioned technical impacts, the project also promotes outreach activities
to increase participation of under-represented groups in science and
engineering, including annual summer camps for high school students. The
research and educational results of this work will be disseminated to academic,
industrial and government sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
project is to develop novel chip-scale mm-wave silicon-photonics signal
generator architectures with ultra-low phase noise, ultra-wideband, continuous
tuning range, and high-resolution capabilities implemented using hybrid Silicon-
on-Insulator (SOI) photonics and Complementary-Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS)
chips. The emergence of silicon-photonics technology has enabled the potential
of realizing silicon-photonics optoelectronic oscillator (OEO) to achieve
microwave signal generation within the size and power consumption of small form-
factor systems. However, the potential realization of existing silicon-photonics
OEOs has two main challenges; first, the tuning range and phase noise are
limited due to poor OEO architectural choices and, second, the photonics
componentsâ€™ initial responses are significantly distorted due to the process
variation of silicon-photonics technology, so an automatic calibration
methodology of these initial responses is missing. CMOS electronics can be
employed along with the silicon-photonics OEO to perform phase/frequency
locking, laser phase noise reduction, and automatic calibration of silicon-
photonics components. Employing electronic control circuitry implemented on CMOS
chip allows for the signal generator phase/frequency locking, laser phase noise
reduction, and compensation of severe process and temperature variations in
silicon-photonics. The research objectives are: (1) architecture definition of a
mm-wave silicon-photonics signal generator based on an integrated
phase/frequency-locked OEO with laser phase noise cancellation along with
performance analysis, (2) development of a novel silicon-photonics OEO
architecture and its components including modulator, filter and delay element,
and algorithms/hardware for their automatic tuning, (3) implementation of novel
CMOS prototypes which include the OEO electronic circuitry, laser phase noise
reduction, phase/frequency locking loop and automatic tuning hardware, and (4)
hybrid integration of silicon-photonics and CMOS chips and perform the required
tests for the entire unit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.