* 2002268
* Ham Radio Science Citizen Investigation (HamSCI) Workshop 2020; Scranton, Pennsylvania; March 20-21, 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Mohammad Maktoomi, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,944.00

This award is to organize a 2-day Ham Radio Citizen Science Investigation
(HamSCI) meeting at the University of Scranton, Pennsylvania, on March 20-21,
2020. The meeting aims to foster collaborations between amateur radio operators
and the science community for the purpose of advancing scientific research and
understanding of the ionosphere by leveraging radio propagation experiments,
encourage development of new technologies to support ionospheric research, and
provide educational opportunities for the amateur community and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2020 HamSCI Workshop theme will be "The Auroral
Connection," and will feature prominent leaders in Auroral Citizen Science,
Auroral Radio Science, and Auroral Amateur Radio Operations. Additionally, the
2020 workshop will continue to make headway on topics of past HamSCI meetings,
including the use of amateur radio techniques for observing and understanding
the physics behind traveling ionospheric disturbances, Sporadic E, the
ionospheric response to solar flares and geomagnetic storms, and space weather
effects on radio wave propagation. This year's meeting will also serve as a
development meeting of the HamSCI Personal Space Weather Station (PSWS).
Development of the PSWS will lead to a vast improvement of the scientific
quality of citizen science observations currently made by the amateur radio
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.