* 2002714
* Collaborative Research: Investigating aerial maneuvers in bat flight using experiments, mathematical modeling, and robotic mimicry
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Z. Jane Wang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 344,541.00

Bats are known for their aerial acrobatics skills that enable them to maneuver
in dense vegetation, to catch preys, and find nutrients. Accomplishing these
multitude of functions requires the bats to control, adapt, and coordinate their
wing motions, body posture, and internal actions that they engage in while
airborne. This project seeks to understand how bats master the integration of
kinematics, aerodynamics, and control in such complex aerial behaviors. This
would shed light on underlying fluid dynamics and kinematic controls in biology,
and also impact the ability for engineers to replicate such abilities in
technical systems in the next-generation multiple-functioning drones with
flapping flight. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand
aerial multi-tasking by bats based on comprehensive experiments and mathematical
models. The project will obtain experimental data from two different approaches:
The morphing wing kinematics of the bats during demanding flight maneuvers and
behavioral multi-tasking situations will be recorded with an array of
synchronized high-speed cameras and processed with deep learning methods. These
biological data will be complemented by experiments with a biomimetic robotic
system that will be implemented to mimic the bats' morphing wings and will be
used to explore a larger parameter spaces than would be possible with
observations of the animals. This will provide insights into the effects of
different kinematic patterns. In parallel, mathematical models of flapping
flight will be developed to extract the key physics in the sophisticated
maneuvers seen the in the experiments. The simulation of flapping flight will
further elucidate the trade-off between the energetics and stability of flight.
Throughout the project, we will actively disseminate our findings to educate
K-12 students and the general public. Since the bat experiments will be
performed at the University of Brunei, the project will give participating
undergraduate and graduate students unique exposure to the outstanding
biodiversity of Borneo's rainforests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.