* 2002908
* Collaborative Research: MLWiNS: Deep Neural Networks Meet Physical Layer Communications -- Learning with Knowledge of Structure
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Lizhong Zheng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2023
* USD 269,854.00

Machine learning techniques are expected to be the main driving force for
performance gains in future wireless networks. In practice, the difficulty in
applying learning algorithms in communication systems comes from a paradigm
shift in the methodology: From conventional model-based analytical solutions to
data-driven empirical-result-based approaches. While learning algorithms offer
better flexibility and efficiency in using computational resources, the lack of
guarantees in the performance, robustness and security raise issues when
adopting into engineering designs. The goal of this project is to combine
learning-based data-driven approaches with conventional model-based analysis, to
design novel learning algorithms that can utilize the structural knowledge of
engineering systems, thus reaping the advantages of both
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the physical layer of
wireless networks, where analytical solutions, clearly defined performance
benchmarks, as well as clearly isolated modeling deficiencies are usually
present. They key challenge is to utilize the analytical results whenever
possible, and focus the learning power on those parts of the system where the
conventional approach fails, including non-linear, non-Gaussian, and non-
stationary elements. Three problem areas are identified to test such new hybrid
design methods, including 1) symbol-detection for MIMO fading interference
channels, 2) massive MIMO with low resolution analog-to-digital converters, and
3) MIMO-OFDM waveform analysis in non-linear radio
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.