* 2002688
* Collaborative Research: Fuel Treatment Planning Optimization for Wildfire Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lewis Ntaimo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 287,200.00

This award contributes to the welfare of the nation by addressing important
challenges in reducing economic losses due to wildfires. Increased development
and urbanization in fire-prone areas, coupled with evolving climate changes,
have significantly increased the vulnerability of human communities and
ecosystems to wildfires. Even with large expenditures for fire suppression
efforts, annual economic losses, as well as loss of human life, due to wildfires
remain high. This award supports research efforts to reduce wildfire activity by
developing cost-effective methods to reduce risk through fuel treatment. Fuel
treatment involves removing vegetation (i.e., fuel) from a landscape to reduce
the potential and severity of large-scale fires. Fuel treatment, which forms a
first line of wildfire defense, may include any combination of controlled
burning, grazing, and various types of mechanical thinning. This award will
contribute to better understanding of what types of fuel treatment options and
associated decision-making strategies are more appropriate for particular fire-
prone regions. This project will involve both graduate and undergraduate
students as well as development of courses that expose students at all levels to
quantitative methods to address large-scale societal
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support research into new
sequential mixed-integer optimization methods to determine the appropriate
location, timing and type of fuel treatments over multiple seasons in order to
minimize the expected losses from wildfires in a region. The optimization
framework will involve formulating and solving non-linear mathematical
programming models for fuel accumulation and reduction under resource
constraints. To take into account the inherent uncertainties with respect to
fire ignition, the approach employs robust optimization techniques. The project
will investigate analytical results that describe important structural
properties of the models and will develop specialized numerical algorithms to
solve realistically-sized instances of the problem. The algorithms will leverage
and extend modern techniques at the intersection of robust and combinatorial
optimization. The models will be calibrated and validated using historical data
from the Texas A&amp;M Forest Service, a state agency charged with overseeing
forest management in the state of Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.