* 2002460
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Unravelling the Signals in Tropical Pacific Lake Archives: Towards Improved Holocene Hydroclimate Reconstructions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Diane Thompson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 547,191.00

This project aims to use a new interdisciplinary toolbox to resolve inter-site
uncertainties by synthesizing existing lake sediment cores records with existing
global climate models to simulate atmospheric moisture transport, build proxy-
system models, and ultimately improve the understanding of tropical
precipitation variability and change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The largest single
cause, globally, in interannual precipitation variability is associated with the
El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon. Large uncertainties remain
regarding the magnitude and direction of the projected precipitation response
with ENSO. Numerous lake sediment paleoclimate reconstructions have been
developed from the Amazon, Andes, and Galapagos Archipelago with the goal of
understanding the response of ENSO and tropical hydroclimate (i.e.,
precipitation amount, intensity, and seasonality) to past climate changes.
Disagreement between these records, however, complicates the ability to prepare
for climate risks and hydroclimate extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
specifically aims to: (i) improve the interpretation of tropical lake sediment
archives and facilitate proxy-model comparisons using high-resolution moisture
tracking simulations with a comprehensive climate model; (ii) constrain the
sensitivity of tropical paleo-climate records from the early-Holocene to
present; and (iii) synthesize climate reconstructions from lakes with climate
model simulations to understand tropical hydroclimate variability across spatial
and temporal scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include
improved understanding of the magnitude, timing, and drivers of tropical
hydroclimate variability over the Holocene. The project will also provide
support for two early-career researchers, a postdoctoral fellow, two graduate
students, and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.