* 2002382
* RAPID: Evaluation of Pre and Post Blast Liquefaction Soil and Site Parameters
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Jonathan Hubler, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 11/30/2022
* USD 49,447.00

Soil liquefaction is a phenomenon that can occur in saturated, loose sand and
silt sediments during earthquake shaking which causes these soils to behave as a
viscous fluid. This results in loss of strength and stiffness, often causing
significant damage to civil infrastructure, such as buildings, bridges, and
dams. Advances in soil liquefaction engineering have aided engineers in
prediction of the initiation of liquefaction (triggering) and its consequences,
thereby reducing casualties and damage to infrastructure. However, changes in
soil properties both during and following liquefaction, and the affect that
these changes can have on soil stiffness and settlement require further study to
improve prediction of both post-liquefaction response and behavior during future
earthquake events. This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will
leverage existing field-testing equipment available from the Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) RAPID facility and blast testing
already occurring as part of another NSF award to measure changes in soil
parameters as a result of liquefaction. Measurements will be taken before,
during, and after blast-induced liquefaction tests that are scheduled in New
Zealand. The blast-liquefaction testing will occur at two locations: one with
natural soils and one with soils that have been improved by resin injection. The
site offers the opportunity to evaluate both native soils that liquefied during
the 2010-2011 Canterbury Earthquake Sequence, as well as improved soils that
represent a promising ground improvement technique to mitigate differential
settlements and surface manifestations of liquefaction. The results have
immediate application to regions of the United States which are prone to
liquefaction. This project will enhance international collaboration among
scientists and will involve students in an international research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this RAPID project is to
further understand liquefaction effects on soil (e.g., shear wave velocity [VS],
settlement) and site (e.g., fundamental frequency, amplification, vulnerability
index) parameters by utilizing equipment from the RAPID facility to measure
properties during blast-induced liquefaction testing occurring in New Zealand.
Equipment that will be utilized from the NHERI RAPID facility includes:
Seismometers, an instrumented dynamic cone penetrometer (DCP), multi-channel
analysis of surface waves (MASW), and a 3D terrestrial laser scanner. The
outcomes of this research will result in measurements of: (1) fundamental
frequency and amplification factors before, immediately following liquefaction
as the pore pressures dissipate, and after liquefaction when pore pressures have
fully dissipated, (2) VS and DCP resistance before, immediately following, and
after liquefaction, and (3) spatial ground deformations (i.e., settlement and
lateral movement) at the liquefaction site using lidar scanners. A unique
dataset of soil and site parameters will be created for pre and post
liquefaction scenarios at two varying sites, enabling evaluation of changes in
soil and site parameters as a result of liquefaction and improving our
understanding of the effect of these changes on design of earthquake resilient
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.