* 2002910
* RUI: Crystallography-Guided Synthesis of DNA-Encapsulated Silver Clusters Chromophores
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Dickson, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program along with the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Chemistry Division supports
Professor Jeffrey T. Petty at Furman University to control and fine-tune the
colors and emissions of nanoscale metal chromophores (color-producing molecules)
using DNA strands as scaffolds. This research impacts the burgeoning area of
metal-linked DNA constructs that expand the genetic code of DNA for optical
sensing and imaging applications. Metals are widely used in society due to their
high conductivity, malleability, and reflectivity. As metal particles shrink to
nanometer dimensions of 1000 times smaller than the thickness of a human hair,
their electrons reorganize and new properties emerge. For example, although bulk
silver is highly reflective, clusters of a few-atoms of silver have diverse
colors that depend on the cluster size, shape, and charge. Through the combined
expertise of Professor Petty at Furman University along with Professors Raquel
Lieberman and Robert Dickson at the Georgia Institute of Technology, atomic-
resolution structures of nanoscale DNA-silver clusters are measured with X-ray
diffraction. The electronic organization of the nanoscale structures are probed
over nano- to milli-second time scales with laser-precision. The educational
broader impact of the project centers on the mentoring and training of
undergraduate students at Furman University, a primarily undergraduate
institution, through a comprehensive research experience. Furman undergraduate
students spearhead their individual research projects through close
collaboration with graduate students and faculty from major research
universities such as the Georgia Institute of Technology and the University of
Münster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program and the Chemical Measurement and
Imaging Program, Professor Petty’s team at Furman University develops DNA-silver
cluster chromophores using a structure-guided approach. Silver clusters with ~10
atoms are stabilized by DNA strands, and the spectra and photophysics of these
adducts are encoded via the DNA nucleobases. To date, DNA-silver cluster
chromophores have been empirically developed for specific sensing and imaging
applications. A recent atomic-level structure of a DNA-silver cluster complex
identifies three structural motifs that show how the silvers and DNA are
organized. A DNA dimer with two A2C4 strands traps eight silver atoms that are
arranged as in the Big Dipper asterism. A subset of five silver atoms mimics the
dipper because they have a trapezoid shape. These are separated by metallic bond
distances and are likely the chromophoric core of the green-emitting complex.
The three other silver atoms resemble the dipper handle because they disperse
between pairs of cytosines and join the DNA strands. These three bonding motifs
are selectively modified by borrowing tools from chemistry and biochemistry. The
modification tools are for chemically modifying nucleobase heteroatoms,
enzymatically excising nucleobases, and synthetically linking DNA strands. The
electronic environment of the resulting clusters is comprehensively
characterized via steady-state, time-resolved, and chirooptical spectroscopies.
DNA-cluster conjugates with distinctive spectra are characterized by mass
spectrometry to determine the numbers and distributions of silver atoms within
the complex. These species are then screened using a wide range of solution
conditions to form crystals and analyzed by X-ray diffraction to establish the
relationship between the DNA-silver bonding and silver cluster
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.