* 2002853
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Embedded System Design Optimization and Adaptation using Compact System-Level Models
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Marilyn Wolf, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2022
* USD 137,038.00

This project will develop new techniques to help advanced computing systems for
signal processing better adapt to the environments in which they operate. This
project is important because signal processing is everywhere (cell phones,
computer networks, manufacturing systems, agriculture, etc.). Adapting to the
environment helps these systems to operate more reliably by, for example,
adapting to changing radio interference or the challenging radio environments
presented by clusters of tall buildings. Many of these communication systems are
also battery-operated or must run on limited energy; adapting to their operating
environments helps to reduce their energy consumption and improve battery life.
These techniques are particularly useful for cognitive radio, an emerging
technology that allows devices for wireless communication (such as cell phones)
to more efficiently use radio spectrum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop new methods for creating software that can be reconfigured at run time.
Typical software is created to operate in a particular mode; changing the
software?s operating conditions requires redesigning the software itself. New
mathematical models and algorithms will allow system designers to create
software that is designed to adapt itself dynamically to its environment. The
project will address both models specifying the behavior of the software and for
translating that specification into an efficient implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators will collaborate with
colleagues at the Institut National des Sciences Appliquées (INSA) in Rennes,
France, and National Chiao Tung University in Hsinchu, Taiwan. The collaborators
in France and Taiwan will provide expertise in cognitive radio algorithms and
hardware that complements the principal investigators? expertise in software
design. The collaboration will also provide valuable international experience
for the student research assistants involved in the project. Cognitive radio
will be used a driving example in coursework for undergraduate and graduate
students to integrate research results from this project into education. The PIs
will actively recruit underrepresented minority students for this project.