* 2002448
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the sea-surface temperature pattern effect for Last Glacial Maximum and Pliocene constraints on climate sensitivity
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Natalie Burls, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 87,880.00

Predictions of future climate change are based in part on changes seen in
geological records of times with different climates. Such times include the Last
Glacial Maximum (LGM) 21 thousand years ago (a colder time with lower
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels) and the Pliocene Epoch 5.3 to 2.6 million
years ago (a warmer time with higher carbon dioxide). These periods can be used
to estimate the sensitivity of climate to changes in greenhouse gases such as
carbon dioxide. Those sensitivity estimates help predict the amount of global
warming we should expect to see in response to future greenhouse gas emissions.
However, recent work has shown that the climate’s sensitivity to greenhouse
gases depends not only on the average surface temperature change but also on the
geographic pattern of that change. Thus, use of geological paleoclimate records
to estimate future warming must account for how the spatial pattern of
temperature changes in the past differs from that expected in the future. This
project will combine information from paleoclimate data and climate models to
evaluate the spatial pattern of surface temperature changes during the LGM and
Pliocene. It will then develop methods to account for temperature pattern
differences when using data from these past periods to help estimate future
global warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth’s equilibrium climate sensitivity
(ECS) is the change in average surface temperature associated with a doubling of
the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration (CO2) relative to the pre-
industrial atmosphere. The ECS is set by the radiative feedbacks that link
surface warming to changes in the amount of radiation leaving Earth’s
atmosphere. Recent studies have shown that global radiative feedbacks depend on
the spatial pattern of sea-surface temperature (SST). Estimates of ECS based on
the proxy record of past climate changes – such as those during the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM) and Pliocene – have traditionally been based on global mean energy
budget constraints and thus do not account for how SST patterns in those states
may be different from those in the future. This research will use recently
developed data assimilation techniques, combining information from climate
models and proxies, to reconstruct gridded SST fields for the LGM and Pliocene
that are dynamically consistent with available proxy data. These SST fields will
then be compared against those projected by global climate models under CO2
forcing. The sensitivity of radiative feedbacks to differences between LGM /
Pliocene and CO2-forced SST patterns will then be quantified using a suite of
atmospheric general circulation models and Green’s functions that link warming
patterns to radiative feedbacks. By producing estimates of LGM and Pliocene
surface temperature patterns and quantifying the impact of temperature pattern
differences on radiative feedbacks, this research will improve our understanding
of ECS derived from those past climate states. This work will further facilitate
researchers’ participation in activities aimed at introducing high school
students to climate science, through Current Climate Science workshops for high
school teachers facilitated by the University of Washington’s Program on Climate
Change and through George Mason University’s Aspiring Scientists Summer
Internship Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.