* 2002350
* Improving Student Learning in Mechanical Engineering Using Low Cost 3D Printed Laboratory Devices in Active Learning Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Tristan Utschig, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 11/30/2023
* USD 297,262.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating active learning
exercises that help students learn abstract concepts in mechanical engineering.
The project focuses specifically on concepts related to vibrations and control.
Learning abstract concepts can be enhanced through guided explorations that
involve real world phenomena. Such explorations often occur in the laboratory,
where students use special equipment to explore applications of the concepts.
Unfortunately, engineering laboratory equipment is not usually portable for use
outside of the lab and can be expensive. This project will develop 3D printed
laboratory devices that support student learning of mechanical engineering
concepts and that are also inexpensive, compact, modular, and portable. The
devices can be used in the laboratory, but also in classroom demonstrations and
at home. Analogous to engaging in undergraduate research experiences, an
undergraduate Research Design Group will plan, print, and evaluate the new
devices. Thus, undergraduates will be involved in design and production of
laboratory devices that are intended to support the learning of other students.
The devices will be bundled with ready-to-use learning activities designed using
a learning sciences approach. An online repository containing device plans and
associated learning activities will enable other engineering programs to adopt
this approach. The results of this project may present a new approach for
improving engineering education while decreasing the cost of
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve student
learning in core mechanical engineering courses, namely, dynamics, vibrations,
machine design, and control theory. The devices and classroom activities will be
designed by adapting Hanson’s Activity Design Methodology and will focus on
demonstrating fundamental concepts of vibrations such as natural frequency, free
response to an initial disequilibrium condition, and forced response to an
external input applied to a system. The project will address two research
questions: (1) What types of devices will enhance student learning by measuring
key physical behaviors of mechanical, electrical, and electromechanical systems?
(2) What is the impact on learning for students using these devices in classroom
learning activities and for the students who design these devices? Student
learning and professional outcomes will be assessed in lecture and laboratory
courses, comparing the results of students who used the devices in the learning
activities to a control group that did not have the learning activities. Student
learning will be assessed using exam questions, homework, and reflective
writing. Students’ professional development will be assessed using established
instruments for growth mindset, motivation, and engineering identity. Given the
low cost of producing these devices, this approach could be widely adopted in
the mechanical engineering education community to improve student learning. This
project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources Program, which supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.