* 2002932
* Collaborative Research: MLWiNS:Physical Layer Communication revisited via Deep Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Pramod Viswanath, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 222,334.00

Reliable communication is a workhorse of the modern information age. The
disciplines of communication, coding, and information theory drive the
innovation by designing efficient codes that allow transmissions to be robustly
decoded. Progress in near optimal codes is made by individual human ingenuity
and breakthroughs have been, befittingly, sporadic, spread over several decades.
Deep learning has recently shown strong promise in problems where the space of
algorithmic choices is enormous (e.g., Go). This scenario likewise characterizes
communication theory. Deep learning methods can play a crucial role in achieving
the aforementioned goals. All resulting algorithms will be maintained on an
online repository with full source code and documentation. The practical
applications of the new codes will be explored in the context of wireless
deployments. The research outcomes will be used to develop new undergraduate and
graduate curricula. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fundamental nature of the
research spans two areas of independent scientific and technical interest:
finite block length information theory and the mathematics of deep learning.
This project aims to bring the tools of deep learning to design a new family of
encoding and decoding methods for canonical communication models; the codes so
generated are naturally built for finite block lengths. In parallel, the
viewpoint of neural network architectures as encoding and decoding procedures
provides a unique vantage point to study their mathematical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.