* 2002352
* NSFGEO-NERC: Adjoint tomography of mantle viscosity using deglacial sea level observations
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Jacqueline Austermann, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 408,003.00

Future sea level change in response to ongoing warming is of societal concern.
Adapting to rising seas is a pressing challenge for public health, coastal
infrastructure, and economic stability. Sea level today and in the past changes
due to the addition of meltwater to the ocean basins, but also due to uplift or
sinking of coastlines. One reason for the warping of Earth’s surface is that
major ice sheets during the last glacial maximum have pressed down on Earth’s
surface and released it as they melt. The investigators will use computational
modeling to simulate how sea level and the solid Earth change in response to
changing ice sheets over the past 25,000 years when Earth transitioned out of a
glacial maximum. To calibrate their model, the team compares their predictions
to more than 13,000 sea level observations from the geologic record. That allows
them to improve the model and in particular better understand Earth’s internal
viscosity, which is a key parameter in these sea level models. This work will
allow the team to answer fundamental questions about how fast or slowly Earth’s
interior deforms, but also how much solid Earth deformation contributes to sea
level change along coastlines today. This is particularly relevant for cities
along the U.S. East and West coast in which solid Earth deformation contributes
a similar amount of sea level rise compared to warming oceans and melting ice
sheets. This project will train two postdoctoral research scientists and one
graduate student in an international and highly interdisciplinary setting to
understand Earth's internal structure, its climatic history and the pace and
magnitude of global change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The viscosity of Earth's mantle
varies radially and laterally as a result of its complex thermal structure.
While it is known from seismology, geodynamics, mineral physics, and sea level
observations that these variations exist, they are difficult to constrain.
Through glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) -- the viscoelastic response of the
Earth to waxing and waning ice sheets -- this incomplete knowledge propagates
into questions of past ice sheets and sea level change. This proposal
constitutes an effort to better understand Earth rheology and its implications
for cryosphere evolution. The novel aspect proposed here is to invert sea level,
geodetic, and gravitational observations for rheology and deglacial ice sheet
changes using gradient-based optimization. Model gradients will be efficiently
calculated using the adjoint method. This framework allows the investigators to
move beyond a limited set of forward simulations and enables them for the first
time to efficiently assimilate sea level data and other GIA observations into a
3D GIA model. The international team will use a newly compiled dataset with over
13,000 datapoints of deglacial sea level to produce the first tomographic image
of Earth's internal viscosity structure. They will furthermore use this approach
to produce ice sheet reconstructions that are consistent with 3D Earth models.
In addition to exploring trade-offs between the Earth and ice structure, the
team will develop and implement second-order adjoint equations to assess
uncertainty propagation. The model output will allow the investigators to
address two targeted research questions, (1) the amount of melt or re-advance of
different ice sheets during the Holocene and (2) the present-day contribution of
GIA and its uncertainty to sea level change in major coastal
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project that is jointly funded by the
National Science Foundation’s Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the
National Environment Research Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via
the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint
US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose
investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon successful joint
determination of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of the budget and
the investigators associated with its own investigators and component of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.