* 2002096
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2019 ACM CoNEXT Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Flavio Esposito, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 10/31/2023
* USD 10,780.00

The 15th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and
Technologies (CoNEXT) will take place from December 9 to December 12, 2019 in
Orlando, Florida. This award assists 15-20 US-based graduate students to attend
this conference. Participation in conferences such as CoNEXT forms a central
part of the graduate school experience as it provides students with an
opportunity to interact with more senior researchers and exposes them to
leading-edge research in the field. ACM CoNEXT emphasizes interactions among
networking researchers at an international level and attending CoNEXT presents
an excellent opportunity for US graduate students to connect with a thriving
international research community. As in past years, CoNEXT 2019 will include a
special student workshop that will enable students to present and obtain
feedback on their work in progress. This award enables students to attend the
main conference and associated CoNEXT 2019 workshops and includes an N2Women
(Networking Networking Women) event. The program and workshops will expose
students to new ideas and allow them to interact with other researchers. These
students would otherwise be unable to attend the conference. The travel grant
chair is committed to the participation of women and other underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates research and education
of students through exposure to a premier technical meeting in computer networks
and communications. Students will have the opportunity to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field both in the main
conference and the associated workshops. In particular, the student workshop
focuses on providing students an opportunity to present their work in progress,
receive feedback on their work, and obtain valuable experience in writing and
presenting technical papers thus having a positive impact on the quality of
their research. The CoNEXT conference has developed into a top-tier
international conference, presenting a tremendous opportunity to students to
expand their breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.