* 2002329
* WORKSHOP: The Future of the Correlated Electron Problem Workshop
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Norman Armitage, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,226.00

Nontechnical abstract: After decades of intensive research, our predictive power
in systems with correlated electrons is still very small. The problem of
correlated electrons is recognized as painful, because our ability to model
strongly correlated systems is needed to design new materials such as
superconductors. This workshop is devoted to enabling structured discussion
between the founders of the field (speakers) and early career researchers
(participants). Brainstorming between the participants in order to identify what
did not work so far is expected to lead to specific novel ideas, helpful in
solving the problem of electron correlations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract: The model of non-interacting electrons is well established throughout
many areas of solid-state physics. However there are material systems whose
properties emerge from strong interactions. Such strongly correlated systems
host a tremendous variety of fascinating macroscopic phenomena including high-
temperature superconductivity, metal-insulator transitions, fractionalized
topological phases, and strange metal phases. Despite many years of intensive
work, the essential physics of many of these systems is still not understood,
and we do not have a unified perspective on strong electron correlations. This
workshop will mix — in a unique format — early career researchers and a number
of distinguished senior scientists with the aim of making progress on the
correlated electron problem. On Day 1, six senior scientists with broad
perspectives on the correlated electron physics will give a series of lectures
to approximately 45 early career scientists. These senior scientists will
present what they consider to be the important aspects of the correlated
electron problem and what they consider to be possible ways forward. On the
morning of Day 2, the senior people will depart. Then during the day of Day 2
the early career scientists will have a number of roundtable discussions,
working groups, and brainstorming sessions on this physics and clarifying their
thoughts on how to make progress. These thoughts will have been informed by the
lectures of Day 1. On Day 3 the early career scientists will write up a report
summarizing the outcome of the discussions. Report will be publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.