* 2002980
* Multi-Scale Magnonic Crystals and Fractional Schr?dinger Equation-Governed Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 505,288.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the design of advanced
materials utilizing the geometries of nature. Nature, unlike geometry class in
high school, is not composed of smooth lines, planes, and spheres, but rather
bumpy, wrinkled, jagged curves like DNA wrapped up in the cell, surfaces like a
mountainous landscape, and volumes like the porous nature of soil in the water
table. Fractional derivatives have been used to describe these geometries of
nature, but no one has built such geometries from the ground up, element by
element. Using textured thin magnetic films, the team will build such geometries
as the basis for a new class of materials intermediate between order and
disorder. These materials will control transport of information in the form of
waves of magnetism, called spin waves, moving through our textured thin film
slower (sub-diffusive) or faster (super-diffusive) than possible in simple
geometries used up till now. Construction of this new artificial material will
be the first experimental realization of a quantum fractional derivative,
because spin waves follow the same equations as the wave physics of quantum
mechanics, in this case the fractional Schrödinger equation, up till now a
purely theoretical idea. A key facet of this work is cross-training of graduate
students between theory and experiment, producing a more robust workforce that
can work in multiple modalities to solve new problems not tractable otherwise.
Fields in which the work force can excel with this knowledge include battery
technology, based on porous, fractional materials; the spread of contaminants in
soil and the water table; and vascular structures for transport in biological
matter, including self-healing materials based on biological ideas.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Fractional derivatives describe the
bumpy, wrinkled, and jagged geometries of nature, where an integer derivative
leads to divergent results rendering traditional definition of a derivative
inapplicable, due to a rapid increase in the tangent and curvature with
decreasing “ruler size”. Such natural geometries in the quantum context have
been theoretically described with the fractional Schrӧdinger equation but never
experimentally studied. The team will explore the fractional Schrӧdinger
equation-governed fundamental physics in multi-scale materials that consist of
magnetic thin film–based, spatially modulated magnonic crystals. They will
design and measure tunable sub-diffusive and super-diffusive transport in this
artificial lattice as clear evidence of fractional Schrӧdinger equation
dynamics. The design builds on a new order-disorder lattice modulation axis,
with an ordered lattice at one extreme and a disordered lattice giving rise to
Anderson localization at the other. The project will provide a general basis for
generating fractional partial differential equations, and lead to a deeper
understanding of the present highly empirical approach to porous and other
fractional media ranging from battery applications to biomimetic Murray
materials to spread of contaminants in soil and the water table. The program
will be carried out through tight, integral collaborations between Mingzhong
Wu's experimental group at Colorado State University and Lincoln Carr's
theoretical group at Colorado School of Mines. Working together as an integrated
team encompassing experimental and theoretical condensed matter physics, they
propose a multi-faceted approach to meet broader impact goals, centrally themed
on blending experiment and theory to train our graduate and undergraduate
student to become well-rounded scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This DMR grant
supports research on fundamental understanding of quantum materials and
especially exploring principles that cross-cuts many other condensed matter
systems with funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in the
Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.