* 2002458
* Reconstructions of central tropical Pacific climate during the 19th to early 20th centuries
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Hussein Sayani, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 771,067.00

The tropical Pacific Ocean has a strong influence on global climate. This
influence is evident during El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events.
Interannual ENSO variations in the tropical Pacific drive large shifts in global
weather patterns, including regional rainfall extremes that can lead to floods,
droughts, and wildfires. Decade-to-decade changes in the tropical Pacific also
have large impacts on global climate, including the rate and pattern of global
warming. Thus, to predict future changes in global climate and weather extremes
we must know about the long-term state of the tropical Pacific and about changes
in ENSO variability. However, the impacts of human activities since the start of
the Industrial Revolution on conditions in the tropical Pacific are poorly
known. This limits our ability to predict climate for the coming decades. Direct
climate observations from the central equatorial Pacific are sparse prior to
1950, but this data gap can be filled by records of climate from geologic
archives such as corals, tree rings, and ice cores. This project will use
precisely dated coral records from the central equatorial Pacific to produce a
record of ocean temperature since about 1800. This temperature record will be
compared with climate model simulations to understand the observed trends and
variability in ocean temperature, and their impact on climate. The project will
support research by both graduate and undergraduate students. It will also
develop outreach videos aimed at K-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to generate up to 20
new precisely-dated records of monthly-resolved sea-surface temperature and
hydrological variability in the central tropical Pacific during the period from
1800-1950CE using paired oxygen isotope and trace element measurements in modern
and fossil corals from Kiritimati Island (2N, 157W). The proposed work builds on
the success of recent "ensemble" approaches to coral-based climate
reconstruction that allow for the development of high-fidelity, monthly-resolved
records tropical Pacific climate with explicit quantification of uncertainties,
grounded in calibration of modern corals against instrumental climate records
over recent decades. Moreover, the application of paired coral d18O and Sr/Ca
analyses allows for the separate identification of temperature and hydrological
trends over the last centuries - filling critical data gaps and allowing for
detailed data-model intercomparison with advanced ocean state reanalyses
products. The proposed work includes the application of a wide variety of
strategies to assess the robustness of the coral-based climate records,
including detailed analysis of sample preservation, as geochemical alteration
can introduce significant artifacts into coral-based climate reconstructions if
it goes undetected. If successful, the proposed work would provide a blueprint
for the extension of the short instrumental climate record throughout the
Pacific Ocean, utilizing samples from extensive coral rubble fields that are
present on many ocean islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.