* 2002964
* GOALI: Designing Adaptive Hydrogen-bonded Frameworks for Molecular Structure Determination
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Michael Ward, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2024
* USD 502,215.00

Non-Technical Summary. The structure of molecules is central to chemistry,
recognized since the pioneering efforts of 19th century scientists such as
Jacobus Henricus van't Hoff, who formulated the structure of the tetrahedral
carbon atom, and Louis Pasteur, who unraveled the relationship between molecular
chirality and their corresponding crystal forms. Chirality, a property typically
associated with the spatial arrangement of four different groups about a carbon
atom, is essential to molecules of life such as proteins and DNA, as well as
pharmaceutical compounds beneficial to human health. With support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research and
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, this project uses a combination of
computation and experiment to design adaptive host frameworks, built from
molecules, that crystallize around awkwardly shaped large guest molecules, some
chiral, that otherwise cannot crystallize on their own. This approach unravels
the rules for assembly of molecules into multicomponent crystals while also
allowing determination of molecular structure using X-ray diffraction, providing
a valuable tool to organic synthetic chemists in academic and commercial
laboratories, including pharmaceutical companies that need structural
information for drug development. Capitalizing on the structure of the NSF
program Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI), New York
University undergraduate and graduate students benefit from internships
supported by the Merck Future Talent Program to gain research experience in an
industrial setting at the nearby GOALI partner, Merck &amp; Co., Inc. The
project also partners with the NYU Collegiate Science and Technology Entry
Program to introduce students from underrepresented groups to the structure of
molecules, including creation of an educational coloring book with illustrations
of molecules that are relevant to human health; provides professional
development activities for students and postdocs; builds a broad-based conduit
to the University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras for undergraduate and graduate
research; and hosts chemical crystallography workshops and master classes for
the academic, government and industrial sectors. Consequently, the project
benefits learners at multiple levels and widens the pipeline for opportunities
and careers in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary. Molecular frameworks,
spanning metal-organic, covalent-organic and hydrogen-bonded, occupy a central
role in solid-state chemistry, largely owing to the ability to tune their
properties through molecular design. Hydrogen-bonded frameworks (HBFs) are
unique owing to their ability to form crystalline stoichiometric inclusion
compounds by encapsulating guest molecules in well-defined cavities. Hydrogen-
bonded guanidinium-organosulfonate (GS) host frameworks are remarkably versatile
in this respect, with an ability to capture a wide range of guest molecules in
tunable cavities of frameworks with architectures that adapt to the size and
shape of the guests. These characteristics provide a unique opportunity to
unravel, and then deploy, the rules governing host-guest organization and solid-
state structure in general. Operating under a GOALI construct, with support from
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, New York University and
Merck &amp; Co. investigators deploy a substantial collection of GS frameworks
with an aim of devising optimization protocols – from simple geometric fitting
to machine learning tools – for targeted inclusion of guest molecules through
single-step crystallization of high quality single crystals. This protocol
enables determination of the molecular structure of encapsulated guests,
including absolute configuration of stereogenic centers, addressing a critical
challenge faced by synthetic chemists in the academic and industrial sectors.
Consequently, the research plan provides a springboard for an entirely new
application for HBFs while revealing factors responsible for assembly and
structure of inclusion compounds in general. The GOALI capitalizes on the
knowledge base of Merck to determine the scope and generality of this approach
with a focus on target molecules of real-world interest, whether reaction
intermediates, chemical impurities, active pharmaceutical ingredients or their
analogs. The methodology is disseminated to the public through publications,
direct E-mail, and a stand-alone website that will announce new structure
assignments, archive the results and integrate computational tools for framework
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.