* 2002275
* Electron Transport in Low-Dimensional and Mesoscopic Topological Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Leonid Glazman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2023
* USD 540,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research that is
aimed at developing theoretical tools for characterizing and harnessing the
properties of various technologically relevant materials. Progress in quantum
electronics, from bendable screens of hand-held devices to future quantum
information machines, hinges on the development of materials with desirable
mechanical and electrical properties. Recent decades have brought remarkable
experimental and theoretical discoveries in the physics of materials. Isolation
of graphene, a one-atom thick two-dimensional crystal cleaved out of graphite,
boosted the discovery of new two-dimensional materials made out of various other
elements. Theoretical prediction of topological solids – conductors,
semiconductors, and insulators with highly unusual electronic properties – have
paved the way for the synthesis of these novel materials in the laboratory. Some
of them are truly unique by naturally combining the properties of an insulator
in the bulk and of a conductor at the surface. The rapid progress in such
materials discovery calls for the development of new theoretical methods to
understand the properties of these novel materials, explain experimental
findings, and help in guiding new experimental discoveries. This project aims at
building the theory needed to achieve these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research addresses a set of electrical conduction and microwave response
characteristics of novel low-dimensional topological materials. These
characteristics are associated with the materials’ unique electronic structure
and with the dynamics of their charge carriers. The three specific directions of
the research cover the microwave properties of low-dimensional topological
superconductors, theory of electron transport in two-dimensional topological
solids, and magnetic and electronic characteristics of a class of topological
conductors, called Weyl metals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will be
actively involved in the research; they will be mentored and trained in a broad
range of theoretical techniques. The PI also plans to deliver a set of lectures
introducing the frontiers of quantum materials theory to non-expert
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research that is focused on theoretical investigations of the dc
and ac response functions of several low-dimensional and mesoscopic systems with
nontrivial band topology. The emphasis is placed on theory applicable to
experiments with superconducting nano-circuits, flat-band two-dimensional
conductors, and surfaces of Weyl semimetals. The motivation comes from the
advances in synthesis of new materials, experimental techniques enabling the
high precision measurements of static and dynamic responses, and from the
challenges the evaluation of these responses presents for the
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project is devoted to
developing new methods of studying topological superconducting phases. The main
goal of this part is to elucidate the joint effect of disorder and topology of a
superconducting phase on the microwave response functions of bulk
superconductors and their junctions. The second part of the project aims at
developing a hydrodynamic theory of electrons in narrow-band two-dimensional
conductors, with or without spontaneously-broken symmetries. The goal is to
understand the recently-measured tunneling spectra, predict the electron flow
patterns in constrained geometries, and find the corresponding conductance. The
third part of the project addresses the magnetic oscillations of the transport
and thermodynamic properties associated with a surface of a Weyl metal. The goal
is to identify the oscillatory contributions to conductivity and magnetic
susceptibility which are associated with a surface, but do not rely on electron
trajectories connecting the opposite surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All parts of
the project are geared towards the needs of experimental mesoscopic physics.
Solving the problems formulated in the project is expected to explain existing
experimental results, help in planning new experiments, and develop theoretical
methods broadly applicable to low-dimensional quantum condensed matter. Graduate
students will be actively involved in the research; they will be mentored and
trained in a broad range of theoretical techniques. The PI also plans to deliver
a set of lectures introducing the frontiers of quantum materials theory to non-
expert audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.