* 2002441
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Ice Core and Firn Aquifer Studies at Combatant Col, British Columbia, Canada
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Peter Neff, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 105,511.00

This project aims to recover an ice core at Combatant Col, BC, Canada to
reconstruct hydroclimate variability over the last 500 years. Previous work at
Combatant Col demonstrates preservation of annual stratigraphy, water-isotope
and geochemical records reflecting important climate and environmental variables
including atmospheric circulation, snow accumulation, fire activity, and trans-
Pacific dust transport. Existing North Pacific ice cores are located exclusively
in Alaska and the Yukon. Combatant Col significantly expands the spatial
coverage of ice core records, while simultaneously providing a unique record of
hydroclimate in southwestern British Columbia. This project will conduct
detailed radar surveys and ice-flow modeling to better understand the
glaciological setting and to select the optimal site for drilling. A core to
bedrock will be retrieved with logistics supported by the Hakai Cryosphere Node
at the University of Northern British Columbia. Analysis of the core included in
this project consists of water isotope ratios and visual stratigraphy. In
combination with high-resolution radar imaging, the core from Combatant Col will
be used to determine whether the observed firn-aquifer at this site (liquid
water is stored perennially above the firn-ice transition) has been a persistent
feature at the site, or whether it has formed recently, and to determine its
impact on glacier energy balance and dynamics. The core will be archived and
made available for additional analyses by the ice-core research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include developing a new
record of hydroclimate variability from the Combatant Col ice core which will
provide quantitative constraints for modeling processes affecting a wide range
of ecosystems and human communities in British Columbia and the Pacific
Northwest of the United States. Other potential Broader Impacts include field
work training and participation (Ice drilling) for a diverse cohort of graduate
students facilitated by the proximity of the field site. The researchers plan
outreach activities as part of “Climate Time” seminars series in which the
paleoclimate research from Combatant Col site will be
highlighted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.