* 2002620
* RAPID: Disaster Recovery Decision Making in Remote Tourism-dependent Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Allie McCreary, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 01/31/2022
* USD 58,934.00

Hurricanes disrupt community vitality when significant damage and destruction
occurs to the built environment, particularly in remote, tourism-dependent
coastal communities. Immediately following the impacts to homes, businesses, and
infrastructure, tourism business owners and employees begin to make recovery
decisions that affect the resilience of coastal communities. This Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) project examines the factors and information networks that
influence recovery decisions in Ocracoke and Hatteras, North Carolina, which
were substantially impacted by Hurricane Dorian (September 2019). The remote
nature of these communities makes them particularly vulnerable, as their
transportation network is built upon a single state highway and/or ferry service
that, when damaged, can affect access to recovery resources. Their dependence on
tourism also makes them economically vulnerable as tourism benefits (e.g., jobs,
tax revenues) rely on transportation access and lodging availability. Similar
disaster-related impacts may become increasingly common in other coastal
tourism-dependent communities due to potential increases in storm intensity and
frequency in conjunction with sea-level rise. By identifying the factors and
networks that influence early recovery decisions, this project contributes to
NSF’s mission to advance national welfare and promote the progress of science.
Specifically, this study increases the understanding of individual disaster
recovery decisions within the tourism sector, which cumulatively influence a
community’s ability to reestablish its built environment and economic base. This
study also identifies the communication pathways that enable more informed near-
term recovery decisions, which can be activated in future disaster response,
tourism crisis management, and community resiliency building
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of our project is to compare the factors
and information networks that influence information processing and recovery
decision making in two remote post-disaster tourism-dependent communities. This
project has four objectives: (1) documenting various factors that influence
tourism stakeholders’ recovery decisions; (2) identifying information networks
accessed by tourism stakeholders to inform recovery decisions; (3) evaluating
the extent to which recovery information activated through those networks is
processed; and (4) understanding decision making pathways that influence risk
perceptions and intended recovery decisions. These objectives will be
accomplished by integrating the Risk Information Seeking and Processing (RISP)
model with Social Network Analysis (SNA) in the analysis of data generated
during in-depth interviews with tourism business owners, employees, and
community leaders, as well as state emergency response officials. Data will be
thematically analyzed for factors and RISP model predictors that influence
recovery decisions, and information networks will be mapped using SNA to
identify influential pathways for recovery decision making. Additionally,
community-level data will be compared to identify if, and how, varying
infrastructure damage and access to recovery resources impact decision making,
which will enhance the transferability of our findings. Collecting these data in
a near-term post-disaster context is critical, as the state of a tourism
destination (e.g., availability of recovery funds, others’ recovery decisions)
impacts the availability of future decision options. The findings will reveal
the factors and information pathways that influence disaster recovery decisions
in a synergistic examination of business and household recovery decisions. More
specifically, the findings will identify the ways in which information
processing of current and prior experiences, perceptions of workforce capacity
and recovery of the built environment, network support availability, and
anticipated tourism demand influence recovery decision making, as well as expose
capacity needs to maintain the tourism industry in near-term, post-disaster
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.