* 2002425
* Tracking Southern Ocean sea ice extent and frontal positions: Novel techniques based on oxygen isotope and Mg/Ca analyses of foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* David Lund, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 397,311.00

Understanding the drivers of glacial-interglacial carbon dioxide (CO2) cycles is
one of the most important questions in the field of paleoclimatology. It has
long been known that Earth’s ice sheets expand when atmospheric CO2 is low and
melt as CO2 rises, but the underlying climate mechanisms remain unclear.
Expanded sea ice coverage in the Southern Ocean around Antarctica may have
limited the release of carbon from the deep ocean during natural cold periods
such as the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM; ~20,000 years ago). Greater sea ice
extent and northward movement of oceanic fronts may have also led to carbon
storage in the deep ocean. Reliable paleoclimate records from the Southern Ocean
are thus essential to understanding the controls on atmospheric CO2 over long
timescales. The proposed study will develop new methods to produce such records,
using chemical analyses of microscopic fossils from marine sediment cores. The
educational impact of the proposed work includes support for a graduate student
and an undergraduate at the University of Connecticut. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will focus on developing a new proxy for sea ice extent based on
the oxygen isotope ratios (d18O) of benthic and planktonic foraminifera. Sea ice
formation in the Southern Ocean is characterized by near-freezing surface
conditions and negative buoyancy forcing, which creates a unique vertical
profile in d18O. Preliminary data from the published literature shows that the
d18O difference between recent planktonic and benthic foraminifera yields an
estimate of sea ice extent consistent with modern observations. We also plan to
develop a novel proxy for subtropical front position based on foraminiferal
magnesium/calcium (Mg/Ca) and d18O analyses. Contemporary measurements of sea-
surface temperature and the d18O of seawater capture the position of the
subtropical front, implying that reconstructions based on Mg/Ca and d18O can be
used to track frontal position in the geologic past. Motivated by these initial
results, we propose to use a transect of cores from ~55ºS to 35ºS in the
Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean to: 1) estimate sea ice extent and surface
buoyancy forcing during the LGM, and 2) reconstruct the position of the
subtropical front during the LGM to constrain inter-basin exchange between the
Atlantic and Indian Oceans. The proposed work could transform our understanding
of the Southern Ocean by adding two new methods to the paleoclimate toolkit. The
d18O sea ice proxy will complement existing diatom-based methods and it can be
used in regions where diatoms are sparse. Similarly, development of the
subtropical front technique will lay the groundwork for studies of the
deglaciation when changes in frontal position have been invoked to explain
rising atmospheric CO2. Given the relevance of the techniques to research
questions across a range of timescales, we anticipate our results will be of
broad interest to the paleoclimate community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.