* 2002692
* Search for new phases of the exotic superfluid 3He under nanoconfinement
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Jeevak Parpia, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Most consumer items utilize technology that
emerged because of advances in condensed matter research. Future advances will
be enabled by the sort of “curiosity driven” exploration of new regimes
accessible only in a laboratory environment. The research to be conducted in
this program will examine the special properties of superfluid 3He when confined
in precisely defined structures less than a thousandth of a millimeter tall,
marking the transition from bulk so-called 3 dimensional behavior to a new 2
dimensional regime. Undergraduate students and a Ph.D student will build on
cutting edge knowledge to design and fabricate these structures opening up a new
area of quantum nano-fluidics. The surfaces will have to have a well-defined
smoothness since the smoothness (alterable with a coating of helium 4) changes
the scattering at the surface much like a mirrored surface is different from a
frosted surface. This scattering quality (together with the confinement) can
also change the types of superfluid states (“phases”) that emerge. These phases
should show a property “chirality” that should have properties like a spinning
top. These new phases should exhibit novel characteristics such as highly
conducting “edge states” that are scientifically “exciting” and that could, in
the future form the basis of new types of devices for metrology and computation.
Past graduate students and undergraduates of this team have gone on to
productive careers in academia, high-technology industries and the financial
sector, and the planned research will prepare a new generation of students for
challenging careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Superfluid 3He can inform research activity that extends
across many fields in Physics. The project combines nanofluidics (intricate and
precisely fabricated silicon cavities with sizes tuned to the scale of the
superfluid’s coherence length) with low temperature physics, to expose new size
effects. The experimental activity will probe excitations using transport
(superfluid density and heat conductivity) as well as novel noise thermometry
and a nanowire to act as local thermometers. Researchers expect that entirely
new p-wave superfluid states can be stabilized by such confinement and the
balance between the superfluid ground state that preserves (3He-B) or breaks
(3He-A) time reversal symmetry will also be affected by confinement. By
measuring the phase diagram of confined 3He, details of the pressure and
temperature dependence of the strong coupling strength will be mapped out
allowing for more reliable prediction of the phase diagrams of 3He under
confinement. Confinement will also provide the means to study the surface/edge
excitations emerging as a result of bulk/edge correspondence. Studies of the
hysteresis in the first-order transition between the confined A and B phases
(radically different from nucleation in bulk) will challenge current
understanding of these quantum transitions. New geometries will explore the
physics of quantum transport across single and multiple interfaces. By combining
low temperatures and nano fabrication, graduate students and undergraduates will
be exposed to the exciting training ground that has prepared scientists for lead
roles in academia and high-technology industries. Eventually, the new
superfluids that emerge under confinement might be of interest in quantum
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.