* 2002716
* Arithmetic Statistics: Geometry and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Alina Bucur, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2024
* USD 165,000.00

Number theory is one of the oldest branches of mathematics, and yet it continues
to have more and more applications within the sciences. Arithmetic statistics is
the study of number-theoretic objects in aggregates, rather than in isolation.
This study takes many different forms, several of which will be pursued in this
project. The general philosophy behind the project is the interplay between
theory and computation in number theory. On one hand, initial understanding of
the behavior of many classes of number-theoretic objects is generally driven by
the study of explicit examples; however, production of a sufficient supply of
examples often depends on theory that will underpin the accuracy and range of
computations. This project will lead to a deeper understanding of the statistics
of fundamental behaviors of numbers. The strategies and techniques that will be
utilized in this project originate in a broad range of other mathematical
subjects, including analysis, geometry, algebra and in some cases, statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study a range of problems concerning zeta
functions and L-functions associated to algebraic varieties over finite fields,
function fields in positive characteristic, and number fields. These include
statistical problems about point counts, in both the arithmetic aspect (Sato-
Tate distributions for abelian varieties over Q and other number fields) and the
geometric aspect (averages over geometric objects over a fixed finite field);
algorithmic determination of L-functions; and enumeration and tabulation of
function fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.