* 2002477
* Wafer-Scale Manufacturing of Ultrathin Nanoporous Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Membranes Using Chemical Etching for Water Purification and Other Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Marija Drndic, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 641,897.00

This advanced manufacturing grant supports research in novel ultrathin membranes
for efficient water purification. This work focuses on large-area manufacturing
of ultra-thin transition metal dichalcogenide membranes to improve the precision
of water filtration and treatment. This project creates new fundamental
knowledge through the understanding of the mechanisms of water molecule and ion
motion at atomic scales in these improved membranes. An important motivation for
decreasing the membrane thickness is that it leads to increased water fluxes.
The membranes are made by chemical vapor deposition of transition metal
dichalcogenides on foils, followed by chemical etching in acids to make them
nanoporous. Besides water purification, this work is anticipated to impact other
applications where membranes are used such as gas and biomolecule filtration.
This project leverages research outcomes for education and outreach. Outreach to
the broad nanomaterials community and to membrane industry involves sharing of
manufacturing processing data. The educational component provides innovative
multidisciplinary learning opportunities for students at all levels at the
crossroads of solid-state physics, materials science and high-resolution
microscopy. Student outreach includes presentations to high school students and
participation in STEM activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports
advanced manufacturing of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials towards creating
novel cm-scale membranes, in which monolayers are supported by robust few-layer
membranes. Two-dimensional nanomaterials, such as, transition metal
dichalcogenides, have demonstrated potential for many applications from defect-
free materials for electronics to defect-engineered materials for membrane
separation technologies like water desalination and gas separation. Current
fabrication of 2D nanoporous membranes is often limited in terms of control or
rely on the use of ion and electron beam irradiation, which is slow and costly.
This work uses simple chemical etching to make holes in membranes using an
industrial wet etchant, leading to controllable membrane porosity and economic
manufacturing. This research answers key scientific questions about fundamental
properties of ion flow as a function of membrane properties, thickness, pore
size and density towards efficient water desalination in comparison with state-
of-the-art polymer membranes. The research approach encompasses chemical vapor
deposition growth of single- and few-atom thick 2D nanomaterials up to 4-inch
wafer-scales, the optimization of 2D nanomaterials transfer on to apertures to
make 2D nanomaterial membranes, followed by wet etching and transport studies to
understand fundamental pore-forming and ion transport mechanisms. The research
involves optimizing the manufacture of ultrathin membranes and maximizing water
flow while retaining membrane integrity. This work further develops the
instrumentation towards scale-up via roll-to-roll nanomanufacturing of the
nanoporous membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.