* 2002434
* CAREER: High-order Tensor Analysis for Groupwise Correspondence: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Haibin Ling, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2020
* USD 325,193.00

Visual matching is a fundamental problem in computer vision (CV) and intensive
research efforts have been devoted to building correspondence between a pair of
visual objects. By contrast, finding correspondence among an ensemble of objects
remains challenging. This project develops a unified framework for this problem
and to apply the framework to different applications. The research establishes a
close correlation between the classical multi-dimensional assignment (MDA)
problem and low-rank tensor approximation. Such correlation paves a way of using
high-order tensor analysis for groupwise visual matching that assumes an MDA
formulation. Along the way, a series of algorithms are developed to address
challenging issues such as computational efficiency and context modeling. These
algorithms are then deployed to different tasks including simultaneous tracking
of multiple targets, tracking of deformable structures, and batch alignment of
visual ensembles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project can generate broad impact
on areas of computer vision, computer graphics, combinatorial optimization, oral
and maxillofacial radiology, image-guided intervention, physical therapy,
security and defense, education research, etc. On the one hand, the fundamental
importance of visual matching makes the project transformative to many other CV
problems. On the other hand, the project benefits a wide range of fields outside
the CV community through the use of interdisciplinary applications as test beds.
This project also integrates tightly research and education with highlights on
supervising students from underrepresented groups, combining computer vision and
education research, and involving undergraduates in research.