* 2002370
* A new high-resolution stratigraphic record of the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum in the Eastern Tethys
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Ying Cui, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 120,807.00

An abrupt global warming event that occurred at the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal
Maximum (or PETM; 56 million years ago) is considered an excellent analogue for
future global climate change. This event is accompanied by an abrupt 5 to 9
degrees Celsius (9 to 16 degrees Fahrenheit) global temperature rise along with
indications of large quantities of carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere.
This project will refine the stratigraphic record of this event as preserved in
deposits of the ancient Tethys sea for proxy records of temperature change
during this interval in this region. The research will use nannofossil
biochronology and high-resolution magnetic susceptibility to begin to unravel
the geological history of the region and examine the potential to use a state-
of-the art geochemical paleothermometer to quantify temperature change. In doing
so, the research will evaluate the importance of the Tethys sea in global
climate patterns as well as the role of rapid changes in atmospheric carbon
dioxide in this much warmer climate state. The project will also provide support
for undergraduate students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. Students
will be recruited from the American Chemical Society’s project SEED (Summer
Experiences for the Economically Disadvantaged) and GS-LSAMP (the Garden State
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation). The results of the research
will be presented in public events and the data made available to the broader
paleoclimate community through the NOAA Paleoclimate database and MagIC
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research goals of this project
are to (1) further develop the stratigraphic record of the pace and timing of
temperature increase in the eastern Tethys sea during the PETM , (2) use rock
magnetic cyclostratigraphy to estimate the sedimentation rate, and (3) evaluate
the feasibility of applying the distributions of glycerol dialkyl glycerol
tetraethers to reconstruct sea surface temperatures. These data will evaluate
the potential importance of the eastern Tethys in regulating global temperature
and moisture changes, as well as the role of large and rapid changes in
atmospheric CO2 forcing during the PETM. This information could help document a
paleoclimate record that will transform our understanding of the drivers of the
PETM and offer useful insight into how the Earth system will respond to current
increases in atmospheric CO2 and more generally provide insight into key
parameters in global climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.