* 2002528
* P2C2: Tropical Response to Hemispheric Forcing--Testing Mechanisms Using Paleoclimate Data and Climate Models
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Timothy Shanahan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 743,371.00

This project aims to identify and investigate the mechanisms linking the abrupt
cooling events that occurred during the last glacial period over the North
Atlantic (Heinrich events) and altered rainfall patterns throughout the global
tropics. The research activities will address these questions by combining
climate models and paleoclimate data. Specifically, existing proxy climate
records will be used to produce new robust and unbiased syntheses of rainfall
and sea-surface temperature changes during three different past intervals when
the North Atlantic abruptly cooled and compare them against new and existing
climate model simulations with the objective of testing the dominant mechanisms
driving the tropical response to hemispheric forcing. These mechanisms will be
contrasted with the responses to other hemispheric forcings, anthropogenic
aerosols and volcanic eruptions, to assess their roles, and therefore improve
the confidence of climate variability model predictions. The research has the
potential to produce a complete theory of how the global tropics respond to
North Atlantic cooling. This theory will provide a more complete understanding
of the processes that give rise to inter-hemispheric asymmetries in tropical
climate - one of the first order features of the Earth’s climate, as well as its
response to climatic perturbations with inter-hemispheric asymmetries, such as
anthropogenic aerosols, volcanic eruptions, or arctic sea ice loss.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include advancing
theoretical understanding of the mechanisms underlying climate perturbations
transmitted through the tropics which has the potential to improve model
predictions to a range of climate forcings, and more specifically, predictions
of changes in tropical rainfall in heavily populated areas (the Americas,
Africa, Asia). The data synthesis as well as model simulation will be made
publicly available for the broad paleoclimate community as well as local
students. Other Broader Impacts include training the next generation of climate
researchers through the research framework developed in this project that will
be incorporated in the researcher’s teaching activities. In addition, the
researchers will be involved in outreach activities (Tournament of Science
Olympiad) with the goal to advance climate system literacy in high school
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.