* 2002549
* Respiratory Acclimation of Marine Fish to Ocean Deoxygenation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Andrew Esbaugh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 611,401.00

Anthropogenic factors, including climate change, are increasing the prevalence
of low-oxygen zones in oceans around the world (i.e., ocean deoxygenation), and
this is especially true in the northern Gulf of Mexico where large seasonal
oxygen minimum zones are common. Deoxygenation of coastal waters has serious
implications for marine life, including the economically and ecologically
important fish species endemic to these regions. It is hypothesized that the
long-term survival of species subjected to this type of environmental change
depend in part on their ability to acclimate by altering their physiology, a
concept known as phenotypic plasticity. This proposal will use a combination of
molecular biology, biochemistry, and whole-animal physiology to explore the
ability of an economically important fish species, the red drum (Sciaenops
ocellatus), to enhance respiratory oxygen uptake following exposure to prolonged
periods of reduced oxygen availability. Results of this work will be
incorporated into public education initiatives targeting K-12 students. The goal
of these efforts will be to increase the scientific literacy of youth and the
general public with an emphasis on understanding the core principles of ocean
health, climate change, and the importance of healthy oceans and fish
populations for coastal communities. In addition, mentored research training in
integrative physiology will be provided for several undergraduate and graduate
students and a post-doctoral fellow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
of this work is to explore the physiological mechanisms and ecological
significance of respiratory plasticity in a representative marine fish, the red
drum, exposed to prolonged environmental hypoxia. These exposures will occur
above the critical oxygen threshold for the species, and the capacity of red
drum to maximize aerobic scope, which would increase the capacity for
ecologically important activities, will be assessed. This work integrates across
multiple levels of organization by first exploring plasticity in the red blood
cells, heart and red muscle using gene expression and biochemistry, after which
whole-animal performance will be measured. The project addresses the following
hypotheses related to hypoxia exposure: 1) fish will exhibit an altered pattern
of hemoglobin expression coincident with elevated red blood cell and plasma
accessible carbonic anhydrase that will work cooperatively to enhance oxygen
offloading in the heart and muscle; 2) the heart and muscle will exhibit reduced
mitochondrial proton leak, thereby generating more energy per unit oxygen; 3)
acclimation will result in increased swimming performance and aerobic scope at
the organismal level; 4) red drum exposed to reduced oxygen levels at early life
stages will exhibit rigid phenotypic plasticity that results in altered
phenotypes later in life. This comprehensive evaluation will provide invaluable
insight into the ability of marine fishes to offset the deleterious effects of
ocean deoxygenation on respiratory performance. These activities will also
contribute to graduate and undergraduate student and post-doctoral training, and
results will be integrated into public education initiatives focused on
implications of climate change and ocean deoxygenation on marine life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the GEO-Division of Ocean
Sciences Biological Oceanography Program and the BIO-Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.