* 2002729
* Indigenous Hawaiian Knowledge/Ike Hawaii Pop-up Science Center: Exploring the Effectiveness of Community-driven, Culturally Sustaining STEM Exhibit Development
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Maile Keliipio-Acoba, INSTITUTE FOR NATIVE PACIFIC EDUCATION AND CULTURE
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 01/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

For thousands of years, Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander (NHPI) seafarers have
successfully utilized systemic observation of their environment to traverse vast
expanses of open ocean and thrive on the most remote islands on earth.
Developing NHPI trust in the scientific enterprise requires building connections
that bridge the values and concepts of ‘ike kupuna (traditional knowledge) with
scientific knowledge systems and contemporary technology. This project will
develop and research a pop-up science exhibit that connects indigenous Hawaiian
knowledge with contemporary Western science concepts. The exhibit will show how
community knowledge (that is consistent with underlying scientific principles
and natural laws) has informed innovation by indigenous peoples. This community-
initiated and developed project will begin with a single pop-up exhibit designed
to incorporate several hands-on culture-based STEM activities that integrate
traditional and modern technologies. For example, the exhibit may cover
indigenous systems of star navigation for ocean voyaging, systems of netting for
food and water containers, or systems of home design with local and natural
materials. This project seeks to develop preliminary evidence of the
effectiveness of such an approach for supporting rural Hawaiian youths’ STEM
engagement, understanding, and personal connections to Native Hawaiian STEM
knowledge. Findings from this pilot and feasibility study will inform the
development of a larger pop-up science center grounded in indigenous Hawaiian
STEM knowledge, and advance intellectual knowledge around culturally sustaining
pedagogy by helping informal STEM education practitioners understand community
initiated and developed STEM exhibits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pop-up science
center pilot will be led by a local Hawaiian community organization, INPEACE, in
collaboration with several local community members and other community-based
organizations. The preliminary research will iteratively explore whether and how
an existing Hawaiian culture-based framework can be used to design hands-on STEM
exhibits to enhance rural learner engagement, depth of STEM knowledge, and
connection to Native Hawaiian STEM knowledge. Research efforts led by Kamehameha
Schools, which has a long history of conducting research from an indigenous
worldview, will engage 120 learners from various rural communities across
Hawaii, from which 40 will be pre-selected middle-school youth, and 80
individuals will be from public audiences of learners ages 12 and up. Through a
series of observations, interviews, pre and post surveys with validated
instruments, and focus groups, the research will probe: (1) The learners’
thoughts on the science practice and its relevance to old and new Hawaii and
modern society. (2) The level at which related STEM topics have been understood,
and (3) The learners’ perceptions about their connection to Native Hawaiian STEM
knowledge. Results from this pilot study will inform a future pop-up science
center development project, and add to the scarce literature on community-
driven, culturally sustaining exhibition development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the NSF Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.