* 2002397
* P2C2: Constraining the Physics that Regulate Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity through Simulation of Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and Eocene Paleoclimates
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Christopher Poulsen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Soumaya Belmecheri
* 01/31/2023
* USD 384,686.00

This project seeks to investigate the causes and magnitude of Earthâ€™s
equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS). The goal of the proposed project is
twofold: (1) to use paleoclimate reconstructions of past cold and warm climates,
the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and Early Eocene, to constrain ECS and its state
dependence in the Community Earth System Model (CESM) series including the
latest CESM2, and (2) to provide a comprehensive mechanistic understanding of
the physics that govern past and future ECS. The proposed work will include
development of new LGM and Eocene simulations using CESM2 and comparison of ECS
in CESM2 simulations with existing LGM and Eocene simulations performed with
earlier versions of the model (CESM1.2. and CCSM4) that have very different
physics packages. Each simulation will be judged against a synthesis of proxy
data and a new paleoclimate reanalysis product in order to evaluate the
performance of the CESM versions and to identify the best estimate of ECS. The
researchers will analyze this suite of simulations using climate feedback
decomposition and radiative locking techniques to investigate the physical
processes that regulate ECS under LGM, present, and Eocene conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include model simulations of
the LGM and Eocene that would be made publicly available for the broad
paleoclimate community for further investigation and model-data comparisons.
Other Broader Impacts include outreach activities planned in collaboration with
the Earth Camp Program (University of Michigan) to develop a hands-on climate
learning module at Camp Davies Field station with the aim to broaden
participation of underrepresented minority students in the Earth Sciences. In
addition, the project will support the training of an early career scientist
(Post-doctoral researcher).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.