* 2002364
* Collaborative Research: Response of the Tropical Pacific to the Abrupt Climate Change Event 8,200 Years Ago
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Julian Sachs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 09/30/2023
* USD 456,415.00

A catastrophic outburst of glacial meltwater into the Labrador Sea 8,200 years
ago disrupted Atlantic Ocean circulation, plunging the North Atlantic region
into cold conditions for more than a century and impacting climate globally.
Some climate models indicate that the vast tropical rain bands may shift south
in response to such a perturbation, which has important implications for
understanding how the climate might change in the future if a warming ocean
disrupts ocean circulation. Yet few reconstructions of rainfall exist from the
tropics that span the 8,2000-year-ago time interval, making it difficult to
confirm the model-based predictions. To remedy this data gap this project will
reconstruct rainfall changes in the tropical Pacific from chemical variations in
lake sediments in Palau and the Galápagos that lie on the northern and southern
edges of the modern tropical rain band. The research will include climate model
simulations elucidating the rainfall changes expected in Palau and the Galápagos
in response to a meltwater addition to the North Atlantic similar in size to
that estimated during the 8,200-year-ago event. A workshop will be held for
Micronesian high school teachers along with an experiential learning coarse in
Kosrae (Micronesia). Students from the University of Washington will work with
high school teachers and conduct field exercises and create curricular
activities based on their experiences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Rainfall will be
reconstructed from hydrogen isotope ratios of the microalgal lipid dinosterol in
radiocarbon-dated sediments from lakes in Palau and the Galápagos. Confidence in
the regional nature of the hydrogen isotope signals will be achieved through
replication of measurements, sediment cores, lakes, and islands. All nine
sediment cores, which range in length from 2-15 m, have been collected, and most
have initial radiocarbon chronologies. A temporal resolution of 25-40 yr is
proposed for the 7,000-9,000-year-ago interval of each core, which ranges in
thickness from 50-250 cm. The remainder of the Holocene period in each core will
have hydrogen isotope data produced at 250-500-yr resolution in order to place
any of the 8,200-yr-ago excursions in the context of the full Holocene.
Interpretations of these rainfall reconstructions, including their global
context, will be aided by simulations with the isotope-enabled Community Earth
System Model forced with realistic meltwater fluxes to the Labrador Sea. Because
models diverge widely in their response of tropical Pacific rainfall to
freshwater forcing, our rainfall reconstructions will provide a critical
benchmark for these models and help constrain the mechanisms by which the
tropics respond to abrupt AMOC disruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.