* 2002561
* Collaborative Research: P2C2: Extending Key Records of Holocene Climate Change and Glacier Fluctuations in the North Pacific Region Using Subfossil Wood from Southeastern Alaska
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Daniel Mann, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 327,985.00

This project aims to develop a multi-millennial, tree-ring chronology from
subfossil trees exposed by retreating glaciers in Southeast Alaska to precisely
calendar-date Holocene glacier fluctuations and compare them with a new record
of climate seasonality. The multi-millennial tree-ring chronology will be used
to extend reconstructions of spring and summer temperatures and build new
records of winter storminess by analyzing traumatic resin ducts in annual tree
rings. The winter storminess reconstruction is related to the strength of the
Aleutian Low-pressure system (AL) and its analysis has the potential to
transform the understanding of cold season ocean-atmospheric variability in the
North Pacific. Specific goals of this project are to: 1) Generate 2,000-year-
long records of wintertime AL along with summer temperature variability to
determine how they responded to past climate forcing. 2) Use dendrochronology to
precisely date when seven land-terminating and two tidewater glaciers advanced
and retreated during the last 4000. 3) Test the hypothesis that the most
extensive Holocene glacier advances in south coastal Alaska occurred when cooler
summer air temperatures (reduced melt) coincided with a strengthened AL
(increased snowfall). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader
Impacts include the collection of time-sensitive archives of buried wood that
would be available to the scientific communities for multi-disciplinary
investigations. The project will generate new reconstructions of spring-summer
temperature, winter storminess and glacier advance/retreats to better understand
the dynamics of climate-glacier mass balance and the North Pacific decadal
variability at millennial time scales. This project will provide training for
four undergraduate students as part of their undergraduate thesis including
field work, data analysis and presentation of the results. The researchers will
engage in public outreach by giving two talks at Glacier Bay National Park. In
addition, a dendrochronology workshop in partnership with the Hoonah Indian
Association and the Hoonah Native Forest Partnership will be organized in the
Native Alaskan Village of Hoonah with the goal of engaging students in skill-
based technique centered on the collection and analysis of tree-ring
records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.