* 2002341
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Data Economy and the Practice of Everyday Life
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Frederick Wherry, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2022
* USD 15,892.00

Mobile money is a fast growing global phenomenon with $1.3 billion processed
daily, nearly 1 billion registered users, and explosive 20% year-on-year global
growth. In this system, credit is offered through online platforms—often
unregulated— and distributed via mobile money. In economies where exchange leans
heavily on close social ties, such impersonal and socially invisible sources of
digital credit represent a radical break with the bases of social order. How
should we understand this juncture of digital financial circuits with household
economies? How do individuals come to adopt, avoid, or use digital credit amidst
a dense network of socially negotiated economic relations? And, in turn, how
does the introduction of technocratic relations of debt and credit reshape
existing social and economic relations? This technological expansion is often
framed in terms of democratized access to the global economy, and is supported
by research that examines the effect of financial-technology interventions on
standard economic measures such as income. While empirically valuable, such
research neglects questions of how mundane technological interventions may have
broader social and political consequences. This project examines how new digital
infrastructures: 1) present occasions to re-arrange existing relations of
exchange and negotiation in the market; and 2) enable or constrain processes of
valuation, and therefore value creation, in the market. This process-oriented
approach sheds light not only on current developments but also on what a
technologically-mediated economic future may look like. In the way that 20th
century road infrastructure still shapes collective life, how digital financial
infrastructures are laid down today is likely to have far-reaching consequences.
This project presents an early opportunity to examine such futures, thus
providing guidance for policy-makers looking to help societies adapt to this
important technological change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the
case of changing relations of personal credit and debt amidst a booming digital
market for household and personal finance. The project adopts a mixed methods
approach using nationally representative survey data, qualitative interviews,
and ethnographic observation in sequence to: 1) establish statistical findings
about the current state of the digital economy, 2) examine how cultural
narratives frame the deployment and adoption of digital finance, and 3) offer a
processual account of how digital finance infrastructure re-orders exchange in
everyday life. In partnership with local research organizations, the project
first collects both self-reported data on social and economic behavior as well
as digital trace data such as mobile money transaction logs from a nationally
representative sample of 1,800 smartphone users. The project uses regression
analysis and computational cluster analysis to identify key axes of variation
along which the use of digital finance is patterned. The project then conducts
up to 100 semi-structured interviews with developers and users of the new
economy to examine how different cultural narratives and practices shape how
digital finance is both designed and integrated into everyday life. Finally, the
project conducts ethnographic observations in key urban and peri-urban sites to
gather the evidence of people’s lives. Findings from the project will contribute
to sociological theories regarding the operation of financial markets and the
effects of technological change on exchange relationships within the context of
a changing global economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.