* 2002795
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Electronic Correlations and Disorder in Berry materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Maxim Dzero, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2024
* USD 328,184.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research aimed at investigating the origin of unusual thermodynamic and
transport properties that have been observed in a variety of novel materials in
which the electron-electron interaction is strong. Recent experimental results
on these systems have highlighted the emerging conceptual challenges that arise
due to the interplay between electron-electron interaction and disorder, and the
need to develop new theoretical tools to address these challenges. The goal of
this project is to confront some of these challenges by formulating new physical
concepts, which are expected to lead to a deeper understanding of the unusual
experimental findings. The PI and his students will study three classes of
electronic systems: (i) Materials which have unconventional superconducting
properties, (ii) Materials which undergo a metal-insulator transition in their
bulk, while their surface states remain metallic, and (iii) Iron-based
superconductors which allow for the coexistence of superconductivity and
magnetism upon chemical doping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
the PI’s educational and outreach activities, which include (i) the training of
graduate students in modern condensed matter physics, (ii) the creation of a
comprehensive collection of problems on the topic of superconductivity suitable
for advanced graduate students, (ii) translation of a book dedicated to the
memory of physicist Lev Landau, and (iv) preparation of a set of presentations
on the “Physics of Cycling” for members of the local road cycling club at Kent
Free Public Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research aimed at
developing a theory of correlated electronic systems with Berry curvature to
account for the interplay between electron-electron interaction and disorder.
The PI will use contemporary methods such as field theory of non-equilibrium
systems, diagrammatic approach, and exact integrability to (i) investigate
anomalous transport properties in unconventional superconductors, (ii) study the
quantum interference effects due to an interplay between Coulomb interactions
and disorder on the value of spin-Hall conductivity, and (iii) describe the
effects of Coulomb interactions on short-time dynamics of the chiral d+id
superconductors and the formation of spatial inhomogeneities. In addition, the
PI will investigate the many-body instabilities in higher angular momentum
topological materials and develop a quasiclassical approach for disordered
multiband superconductors with competing ground states focusing on how quantum
fluctuations affect their thermodynamic and transport
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI’s educational
and outreach activities, which include (i) the training of graduate students in
modern condensed matter physics, (ii) the creation of a comprehensive collection
of problems on the topic of superconductivity suitable for advanced graduate
students, (ii) translation of a book dedicated to the memory of physicist Lev
Landau, and (iv) preparation of a set of presentations on the “Physics of
Cycling” for members of the local road cycling club at Kent Free Public
Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.