* 2002428
* Collaborative Research: A North Pacific ice core record of summer climate and wildfire history during the last 1500 years
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Cameron Wake, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 08/31/2023
* USD 85,894.00

This project intends to use the Mount Denali ice core archive to develop the
most comprehensive suite of North Pacific fire and summer climate proxy records
since about 2500 years before present. Wildfire is a key component of summer
climate in the North Pacific where wildfires are projected to increase with
continued summer warming. Studies that combine paleorecords of summer climate
and wildfire are therefore critically needed, especially in the North Pacific
region where fire recurrence rate and decadal-to-centennial scale climate
fluctuations occur over longer time periods than are covered by direct
observations. The goal of the proposed research is to improve our understanding
of relationships between summertime climate and wildfire activity, focusing
especially on the Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA), when regional temperatures
were perhaps as warm as the 20th century. Recent advances now permit the
measurement of new fire-related (pyrogenic) compounds in ice cores, enabling the
development of a robust fire record capable of rigorous comparison with regional
paleoclimate reconstructions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The records of summer
atmospheric circulation developed through this project will be regionally unique
and fill a critical gap in the suite of North Pacific paleoclimate records. The
ice core fire records will have synchronously dated temperature, precipitation
and circulation time series. Our unique compilation of these ice core records,
as well as other regional paleoproxy records will be the first effort at
combining these datasets into a regional compilation of paleofire records in the
North Pacific region. This compilation will facilitate the examination of fire
activity during Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA) conditions that are of comparable
magnitude to present climate changes over socially relevant timescales
(decades). We will analyze the archive Denali ice core for black carbon, which
is derived from both biomass and fossil fuel combustion, and organic aromatic
acids (e.g. vanillic acid) and monosaccharide anhydride (e.g. levoglucosan)
which are produced solely from biomass burning. The Denali ice core chronology
is already developed, and the archive ice is in hand, ensuring that our research
plan can be accomplished. Fire record synthesis and calibration will incorporate
instrumental fire databases, gridded burn area data, and HYSPLIT back-trajectory
analyses over the instrumental era in order to test the sensitivity of
fireclimate relationships over time. With this record we will address the
following research questions: (1) How have North Pacific summer atmospheric
circulation patterns varied over the last 1500 years? (2) How did North Pacific
fire regime characteristics naturally respond to the warm summer conditions of
the Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA)? (3) Are there consistent relationships
between North Pacific fire regime and climate?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A focal
point of our broader impacts is support for two young investigators who have
specialized expertise in North Pacific ice cores and paleofire modeling,
respectively. This project will also support one PhD student and several
undergraduate students. We will continue our longstanding collaboration with
Denali National Park to present and permanently display our major climate- and
fire-related findings at the park visitor center in Talkeetna, Alaska. We are
partnering with the Natural Sciences Education and Outreach Center at Colorado
State University to develop STEM kits focused on the Denali ice core record for
distribution to under-served K-12 students in Alaska and Maine. Prototypes of
these kits have already been developed and tested with students, and we propose
to significantly expand this program and increase its impact. Other activities
include the participation of first-year women researchers in this project as
part of the Dartmouth Women In Science Project (WISP) initiative, and through
participation in the NSF-supported School of Ice, where faculty from
historically black colleges and minority-serving institutions learn about ice
cores and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.