* 2002511
* Multi-Modal Data-Driven Platform for Multiplexed Cellular Antigen Classification using Nano-electronic Barcoded Particles for Whole Blood Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Mehdi Javanmard, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project is to develop a platform that can classify human leukocytes, which
play a critical role in the bodyâ€™s defense against a plethora of diseases like
sepsis, cancer, and other chronic and acute diseases. State-of-the-art
healthcare facilities rely on bulky and costly instruments which require manual
sample processing and highly trained technical staff to perform blood analysis.
In this work, an artificial intelligence enabled data-driven biosensor platform
will be developed for hematology analysis. It will be based on multi-modal
sensing, integrated microfluidics, and the ability to perform automated sample
processing from whole blood samples. Furthermore, the proposed sensing platform
will be equipped with real-time measurement capability and machine learning
models to train the sensors data and provide reconfigurability and resource
optimization as required. The proposed dynamic reconfigurable data driven
biosensor will advance biomedical research and will have great potential to
benefit human health and welfare. This cross disciplinary project will train
undergraduate and graduate students in areas of sensors, systems, and
bionanotechnology. The project will enable the integration of research into
educational efforts directed towards engineering students. The PIs outreach
activities will include engaging K-12 students, the local health-care industry,
and the general public through educational lectures and making them available
online for broad dissemination of knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
will enable the development of a next generation in-vitro diagnostic platform
equipped with multi-model sensing and nano-barcoded particles to perform
reconfigurable biomarker selection in whole blood samples. Human blood cells
play a critical role in immune system activation in response to infections. The
concentration of these immune cells in whole blood and their membrane receptor
densities may change in different diseases and their respective pathogenesis.
The heterogeneity of the cellular classification needs to be quantified to
provide a personalized diagnostics and monitoring system for patients in a
hospital setting. The biosensing platform will be integrated with multi-modal
sensing including electrical and optical detectors which will allow to correct
for inherent device-to-device variation to improve sensor performance. Immune
cells conjugated with functionalized nano-barcoded particles will be quantified
simultaneously with an impedance detector and smartphone image sensor. Further,
the proposed biosensor will be equipped with real-time data analysis using
machine learning to enable a reconfigurable system for resource optimization and
biomarker selection. An integrated biochip will be used to perform
reconfigurable multiplexing and quantify multiple inflammatory biomarkers from
patient blood samples. The proposed sensor will enable multiplexed cellular
antigen classification from a drop of whole blood with time to result (TOR) for
less than 30 minutes. Sensors will be benchmarked with patient clinical samples.
Furthermore, it is envisioned that the biosensor platform to be generic and
reconfigurable with pre-functionalized cartridges that can be swapped out for
different infectious diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.