* 2002354
* RUI: The molecular basis of a genetically accommodated larval color polyphenism
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Yuichiro Suzuki, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 11/30/2023
* USD 261,542.00

Phenotypic plasticity refers to the ability of an organism to generate distinct
morphological, behavioral or metabolic changes in response to environmental
changes. Laboratory and theoretical research has shown that phenotypic
plasticity may play an important role in shaping the evolutionary trajectory of
species, although the underlying mechanism remains poorly understood. This
project will lead to a better understanding of the molecular and physiological
basis of phenotypic plasticity by comparing two strains of caterpillars that
differ in their response to temperature: one strain remains black at all
temperatures and another turns green at higher temperatures. Black caterpillars
have lower levels of juvenile hormone than green caterpillars, and the project
will elucidate the regulation of this important hormone that controls insect
growth and development. Determining the molecular and physiological basis of
phenotypic plasticity has important implications for our understanding of
environmentally-induced diseases, generation of novel traits, and species
conservation. Much of the proposed study will involve female undergraduate
researchers from Wellesley College who will be exposed to research in
integrative biology. These students will be encouraged to present at national
meetings and publish their contribution in peer-reviewed journals. The award
will support inquiry-based learning in the classroom, and will also expose
undergraduate and high school students from underrepresented groups to
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the proposed
study is to determine the genetic mechanism underlying the evolution of an
artificially selected polyphenism. In this study, the transcriptomes of the
neuroendocrine complex in a monophenic strain of the tobacco hornworm, Manduca
sexta, and the polyphenic strain will be compared, as these strains differ in
the temperature sensitivity of juvenile hormone production. Once candidate
temperature-sensitive genes are identified, the flour beetle Tribolium castaneum
and RNA interference techniques will be used to functionally characterize these
genes. The project will uncover the genetic basis of genetic accommodation and
identify the molecular nature of hidden genetic variation, which remains poorly
understood. It will lead to a mechanistic understanding of genotype-phenotype-
environment interactions and advance understanding of molecular and
physiological control of juvenile hormone production. Determining the molecular
nature of genetic accommodation and phenotypic plasticity has implications for
our understanding of evolution. The findings may also help identify novel
regulators of juvenile hormone that could serve as potential targets for pest
management. By involving high school and college students in the research and
integrating teaching with research, the project also contributes to training the
next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.