* 2002619
* Functional Metal-Ligand Assemblies: Molecular Recognition and Biomimetic Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Richard Hooley, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Richard J. Hooley of the University of California-Riverside is
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) and the
Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Programs of the Division of Chemistry to develop self-
assembly approaches to creating new chemical structures that act in a manner
similar to enzymes and to explore the potential applications of these structures
in catalysis. Large biomolecules such as enzymes (a type of protein) control
many cellular processes, and chemists strive to mimic their behavior with
artificial analogs, but these mimics cannot approach the complexity of natural
enzymes. One approach to create large, complex molecules in a rapid manner is
self-assembly, whereby individual pieces are reversibly arranged to make
superstructures. This project aims to develop self-assembly approaches to create
new chemical structures that act in a manner similar to enzymes and to explore
the potential applications of these structures in catalysis. This project
provides interdisciplinary research training to a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduates students in areas that bridge chemistry, biology and materials
science. In the course of conducting this project, research results are
incorporated in the chemistry curriculum and new courses are developed with a
focus on promoting diversity and increasing retention of students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-assembled cage complexes have a wide array of
applications, but their use as biomimetic catalysts is constrained by the lack
of activating groups in their “active site” cavities. This project seeks to
remedy this by creating synthetic receptors via metal-ligand based self-assembly
that display reactive functional groups to their cavity interiors. This project
focuses on three specific areas: 1) creation and host:guest properties of new
self-assembled cage complexes with internally oriented acidic, basic and/or
ambiphilic groups; 2) application of these cages as enzyme-mimicking catalysts,
focusing on novel reactivity patterns that are not accessible with small
molecule catalysts such as unusual stereochemistry in oxocarbenium ion
cyclizations, and sequential tandem catalysis; 3) creation of robust covalent
cage catalysts via post-assembly reaction of the reversible cages and the study
of their function in protease-mimicking reactivity. An important objective in
this area is to ensure that the cage catalysts are stable to a variety of
reaction conditions, and can be applied in multiple different environments,
including aqueous solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.