* 2002437
* Collaborative Research: How Robust Are Common-Era Sea-Level Reconstructions?
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Robert Kopp III, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 357,755.00

Sea-level rise is one of the most challenging aspects of climate change. In
order to be confident in predictions of future sea level estimates, it is
important to clearly understand how and why sea level changed naturally in the
past. This project will collect field data and perform computer modeling to
improve our understanding of the main factors that control average sea level
during the Common Era (past ~2,000 years). For example, changes in wind and
ocean currents, water temperature, and the rebound of land surfaces caused by
removing the weight of ice or sediments all contribute to changes in the record
of sea level at any location. This project will examine the origin and nature of
uncertainties that enter into sea level reconstructions based on errors in
estimating each of these factors in the past. The project will not only help
scientists improve our understanding of the causes of sea level changes, but it
also will help coastal planners by providing better models for projecting sea-
level changes into the future. The project will also support three young
scientists, deepening their field, laboratory, and modeling
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding sea level during the Common Era is
central to establishing the uniqueness of modern sea-level rise related to
anthropogenic climate change, identifying links between sea level and natural
climate variability, and training semi-empirical models of future sea-level
rise. Past studies estimate global-mean sea level during the Common Era using
proxy records. These estimates differ substantially in terms of global-mean sea-
level variability during pre-industrial times. It remains to establish how
sensitive these estimates are to various uncertainties, assumptions, and choices
involved in producing global-mean sea-level time series from the raw data. A
detailed study of the robustness and reproducibility of Common-Era sea-level
reconstructions based on field, laboratory, and modeling analyses is proposed.
Objectives include: (1) determine the reproducibility of high-resolution salt-
marsh sea-level reconstructions; and (2) quantify the robustness of model
estimates of Common-Era global-mean sea level. Outcomes will fill basic
knowledge gaps, advancing understanding of the Common Era, and leading to better
characterization of trends, patterns, and causes of pre- and post-industrial
sea-level change. By documenting past spatiotemporal variability of sea level,
evaluating associated rates of change during the Common Era, and identifying
links to ocean circulation and climate, the project will contribute to achieving
the goals and scientific objectives of the Paleo Perspectives on Climate Change
(P2C2) program. Efforts will make progress towards the broader goals of sea-
level research related to the sensitivity of ice sheets to climate change, the
response of the solid Earth to redistribution of ice mass, and the assimilation
of proxy records and instrumental observations within a coherent probabilistic
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.