* 2002313
* Non-Markovian Diffusion Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Louis Bouchard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 399,932.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging program and co-funding
from the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics - Experiment and Theory
programs, Professor Bouchard at the University of California, Los Angeles is
developing new methods to study gaseous diffusion - the random motions of
molecules in gases. In traditional models of these processes, a snapshot (state)
at any given moment is assumed to be independent of past collisions between
molecules swimming in the gas. However, if the picture can be taken quickly
enough, it is possible to detect moleculesâ€™ "memory" of collisions from the
recent past, and thus to investigate the nature of surfaces encountered by the
molecules. Dr. Bouchard's group is developing both experimental methods and the
underlying theory to advance understanding in systems (e.g., catalysts and
lungs) where the memory of these collisions are important. They use nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, the tool at the heart of Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI, an important medical diagnostic tool) which avoids the
use of harmful ionizing radiation like x-rays. Graduate and undergraduate
students engaged in this research receive broad interdisciplinary training, and
contribute to the development of relevant introductory chemistry materials that
will be made freely available to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-
diffusion in a dense gas of neutral molecules is non-Markovian and must be
modeled by a Langevin equation with memory kernel. The Bouchard group has
obtained experimental NMR spectroscopy results that are consistent with a
generalized Langevin description, as confirmed by an unexpected temperature
dependence of the NMR linewidth as well as dependence on inter-pulse spacing
during Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) experiments. While the new theory
describes the results of free self-diffusion well, the diffusion behavior in the
presence of boundaries has not yet been explored. Dr. Bouchard is now probing
restricted diffusion in porous media possessing various types of boundaries, and
developing new extensions of the underlying theory based on the stochastic
calculus of bounded diffusions (sticky, reflecting, killing, and absorbing
boundaries). The new NMR-based methods may shed new light into the kinetic
theory of gases, benefitting chemical physics and medical imaging by offering
new tools to extract information about pore structure and function in media such
as porous rocks, soils, or lungs. The tools also show promise for both
characterization of catalytically reactive surfaces and mass transport during
reactions and provision of a better understanding of hyperpolarized gas MRI.
Educational impacts will derive from the training and active participation of
multiple students in the research as well as the creation of free online
educational course materials disseminated via the institution's web
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.