* 2002877
* A New Design Paradigm in Low Band Gap Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Seth Rasmussen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 02/29/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Seth C. Rasmussen of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at North Dakota State University to
advance fundamental understanding of structure-function relationships in
conjugated polymers. Conjugated polymers are long chain, organic molecules. Much
like traditional semiconductors such as silicon, these polymers can become
conductive when one applies a voltage (such as in transistors) or light (such as
in solar cells). This team creates design strategies for constructing new types
of conjugated polymers with potential applications in organic electronics,
photovoltaics and organic light-emitting diodes. In addition to conventional
synthetic techniques, computational modelling is used to evaluate potential
polymer structures and to predict their electronic properties. The broader
activities associated with this research focus on outreach to Native American
colleges via the university’s NATURE program. The team also contributes to the
history of polymer science and technology via the documentation and
dissemination of new historical publications on the origin and growth of
conjugated polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on advancing
understanding of structure-function relationships in conjugated polymers, in
particular the role of donor-acceptor interactions in efforts to produce reduced
band gap (Eg=1.5-2.0 eV) and low band gap (Eg&lt;1.5 eV) polymers. The band gap
is a critical parameter of organic semiconducting materials, particularly for
their application in electrochromic devices, organic photovoltaics, organic
light-emitting diodes, and NIR photodetectors. Of particular focus here is the
application of a new design paradigm that pairs conventional acceptor units with
thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine building blocks. These building block act simultaneously
as very strong acceptors and very strong donors. The preparation of the
conjugated polymers is accomplished using direct arylation polymerizations.
Computational techniques aid in experimental design, predicting desired
electronic properties. This new design paradigm is applied to other monomers
such as acenaphtho[1,2-b]thieno[3,4-e]pyrazine,
dibenzo[f,h]thieno[3,4-b]quinoxaline and
thieno[3',4':5,6]pyrazino[2,3-f][1,10]phenanthroline, and some of the materials
are tested in devices via established collaborations. This research addresses
the fundamental design principle for conjugated polymers involving two separate
acceptors. The chemistry is transformative with a strong potential to advance
fundamental understanding of conjugated polymer design, especially in terms of
the design of low band gap, n-type, and ambipolar
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.