* 2002409
* RISE 2019 Conference: Transforming University Engagement in Pre- and Post Disaster Environments: Lessons from Puerto Rico; Albany, New York; November 18-20, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Christopher Thorncroft, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 10/31/2020
* USD 42,760.00

The devastation afflicted by Hurricane Maria on Puerto Rico resulted in nearly
3,000 deaths and over $90 billion of economic loss - one of the deadliest
disasters on record in US history. In response, faculty and staff from
institutions of higher education nationwide traveled to Puerto Rico to provide
research, service-learning, humanitarian relief, and student exchange. While
these efforts were well intended to help communities in need, the post-Maria
experience demonstrated several aspects of the university-community relationship
associated with pre- and post-disasters that are seldom analyzed in the disaster
literature, and urgently in need of study. In June 2018, University of Puerto
Rico researchers spearheaded a gathering of representatives from mainland
universities and colleges in Mayaguez, Puerto Rico to discuss the challenges and
critical issues facing institutions of higher learning and the communities
affected or threatened by extreme weather. The RISE 2019 National Conference,
entitled Transforming University Engagement in Pre- and Post-Disaster
Environments: Lessons from Puerto Rico, builds upon that initial meeting. Led by
25 institutions of higher education, the University at Albany, State University
of New York, in collaboration with the University of Puerto Rico and the
National Council of Science and the Environment (NCSE), will hold a 3-day
conference at the University at Albany on November 18-20, 2019. The conference
will explore how universities and colleges can play a more impactful role in
resilience planning and disaster recovery, while bringing to bear the power of
higher education under an integrated framework. RISE 2019 will promote the
progress of science by building interconnections between academia and numerous
sectors of society resulting in knowledge creation, knowledge exchange and
future capacity building. Moreover, the conference will fortify our national
security in a variety of ways including through 1) enhancing opportunities for
future cross-domain, cross-sectorial research, training, and resource sharing
that address the growing challenges posed by climate variability and weather
extremes; b) fostering a nationwide coalition of partners across academia,
government, and industry aimed at transforming higher education in addressing
resilience through university hubs of innovation, including digitally connected
communities; and c) raising awareness of resiliency resources to help local
governments and policy makers advance strategies to mitigate the adverse impacts
of extreme weather and climate variability.

The RISE 2019 Conference program will incorporate three roundtables, five
keynote/armchair discussions, twelve cohort sessions, and twenty-eight panel
discussions. Each session will be aimed at exploring key questions, discussing
existing and novel research methodologies and scientific approaches, engaging
scholars and practitioners nationwide, while charting new pathways through which
the RISE consortium of partners can lead post conference efforts to develop a
national e-learning framework for higher education. In so doing, RISE 2019 will
serve to broaden awareness of and inform NSF supported research and scholarship
through programs such as the Extreme Events Research (EER) Networks, the Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI), among other extramurally
supported research programs at NSF and beyond. "CONVERGE" is one such example of
a significant NSF supported initiative, which serves to coordinate hazards and
disaster researchers and link them to the existing NHERI scientific plan,
facilities, cyberinfrastructure, and technological resources. Through RISE 2019
conference deliberations, and thereafter, hopes to promote and support the
development of a national interdisciplinary and inter-university network of
public and private sector partners to tackle the multi-faceted challenges of
disaster preparedness, response, recovery, adaptation and overall community
resilience. The three-day conference structure is designed to foster the
dissemination and exchange of knowledge and discovery, as well as the forging of
new scientific collaborations and practitioner partnerships. As a result, RISE
2019 will generate actionable information that will lead to the post conference
development of a sustainable national framework for higher education
interconnecting with government, industry and nonprofit organizations - one that
incorporates best practices, case studies, new knowledge, novel research, shared
resources and collaboration mechanisms to be more impactful in pre- and post-
disaster environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.