* 2002739
* Exploring the Synthesis and Properties of Hybrid Perovskites with a "Gas" Atom, or Molecule, as a Structural Component
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Angus Wilkinson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2024
* USD 446,849.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;A new family of solid materials that
contain gas atoms or molecules as part of their structure is being synthesized
and characterized in this project. This work takes fundamental understanding of
functional solids in a new direction and also opens opportunities for new
technologies. The materials under study can potentially trap large amounts of
gas at room temperature and pressure, and then release the gas on warming. For a
given volume, they can contain more gas than the high pressure storage tanks
typically used to contain hydrogen, helium and other industrially important
gases. Efficient and safe gas storage is one of the major barriers to using
hydrogen as a fuel. The new gas-containing materials also have potential for gas
separation and purification processes that are of importance to the nuclear
industry and national defense. Computer simulations, which make use of a machine
learning approach, support and guide the experimental work. The training of
graduate and undergraduate students in a variety of techniques that are of wide
utility in the development of new functional materials is integrated into the
project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
within the Division of Materials Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parts 2:
Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the preparation and properties
of perovskites where a small gas molecule or atom, for example molecular
hydrogen, neon or helium, is a structural component of the material. While there
is vast body of prior work on perovskites, due to their technological
significance across a wide range of applications, there is almost nothing known
about gas-containing perovskites. Materials of this type can contain the gas at
much higher densities than found in conventional high pressure gas storage
tanks, and the small pores within their structures may enable isotope separation
by quantum sieving effects. Synthetic approaches include three distinct
strategies for preparing new materials in different compositional families. High
pressure diffraction and Raman spectroscopy, along with gas release measurements
from recovered samples, provide information on the formation and properties of
the materials. In this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, experiment is
complemented by advanced computational tools, so that computation both explains
experimental results and guides the preparation of new materials. Monte Carlo
and molecular dynamics simulations, based on force fields derived from density
functional theory calculations using a deep-learning convolution neural network
approach, provide an opportunity to realistically capture the behavior of the
materials. The training of graduate and undergraduate students in a variety of
synthetic, computational and materials characterization techniques is integrated
into the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.