* 2002971
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic interactions of individual neurons in supporting hippocampal network oscillations during behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Xue Han, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 09/30/2025
* USD 544,368.00

Cognitive and motor behavior in the brain is controlled by networks of highly
interconnected neurons. Neurons communicate via signals called spikes, which are
generated by complex biological mechanisms. These mechanisms crucially depend on
the subthreshold membrane potential activity, which is controlled by the complex
interaction of ionic currents among other factors. Although the spiking patterns
of the individual neurons are typically not regular, certain neuronal networks
produce periodic oscillatory patterns. Important among them is the theta rhythm
(4-10 Hz), which has been recorded in various brain areas by global activity
measures, such as electroencephalography (EEG) or extracellular local field
potentials (LFPs). Theta oscillations have been observed during motor activity
and REM sleep, and are thought to play important roles in navigation, episodic
memory and learning. Theta oscillations have also been observed at the
subthreshold membrane potential level in brain slice preparations, and in
behaving animals in the hippocampal CA1 area. However, how the oscillatory
activity at the network level is linked to the biophysical properties of
individual neurons remains largely unknown. In this project, the investigators
will address this question using a combined experimental/theoretical approach.
The Boston University team will perform experiments in behaving animals in CA1,
and the NJIT team will carry out detailed computational modeling. This research
is expected to generate a framework for describing and understanding how high-
level neuronal oscillations depend on the oscillatory activity of individual
neurons through complex network interactions. The PIs will also work to
disseminate their imaging technology to the scientific community. This project
will contribute to the cross-disciplinary training of students and postdoctoral
trainees in both experimental and computational neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of this project is that theta
oscillations in the hippocampus are generated by resonant mechanisms involving
the intrinsic properties of individual neurons, and circuit interactions that
are tuned to amplify theta frequency inputs from the medial septum and possibly
other external sources. We will address this hypothesis from an
interdisciplinary perspective involving in vivo experiments, computational
modeling, and dynamical systems analysis. We aim to understand the cellular and
circuit mechanisms of hippocampal theta oscillations in vivo, and to create a
theoretical framework to describe the biophysical and dynamic links between the
oscillatory properties of individual neurons and network oscillations. The
Boston University team will deploy a novel voltage imaging technique to measure
subthreshold voltage dynamics and spiking activity from individual hippocampal
neurons of defined cell types, including pyramidal cells and local interneurons
(e.g. parvalbumim (PV)- and somatostatin (SOM)- positive ones) during behavioral
states with varying levels of LFP theta oscillations. Additionally, to test the
causal role of these interneurons in supporting theta oscillations, precision
optogenetic activation and silencing will be used. The NJIT team will build
biophysical models of the hippocampal network that include the intrinsic
subthreshold oscillatory properties of the participating neurons and inputs from
other areas (e.g., medial septum) to produce theta LFP oscillations. The results
of the proposed research will provide mechanistic insights on the formation of
hippocampal CA1 network oscillations with implications to learning, memory and
other cognitive functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.