* 2002182
* NSF Center for Genetically Encoded Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Alanna Schepartz, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2025
* USD 12,000,000.00

The Center for Genetically Encoded Materials (C-GEM) develops new biologically-
inspired methods to precisely tailor and build polymers. Polymers, which are
comprised of repeated molecular units bonded together, are ubiquitous, from
plastic products to DNA. By controlling the identity and linkages of the
molecular units, the properties of polymers can be finely tuned, which has led
to an explosion of new products and applications. Despite these advances, it is
still extremely difficult to systematically and precisely control the sequence
of the molecular units in a polymer. With this level of control, new polymers
could be developed for information storage, textiles and fabrics, nano-sensors,
and drug discovery and delivery. To accomplish this tough but transformative
chemistry, C-GEM Is adapting two complementary approaches. First, C-GEM is re-
engineering the ribosome to build bonds between molecules in sequence, much like
natural ribosomes build proteins by assembling alpha-amino acids in sequence.
Second, C-GEM is purposefully expanding the structures of natural polypeptides
in ways that dramatically increase their chemical diversity and function. C-GEM
also engages and trains diverse groups of students and postdoctoral researchers
in collaborative teams at a rich new interface of chemistry, biology, and
materials science. C-GEM also engages citizen scientists with a scientific
discovery game, EteRNA, that introduces interested gamers to the key concepts of
RNA structure, stability, and function. New EteRNA Challenges focus on the
chemistry of the ribosome. Overall, C-GEM is establishing a future of bespoke
polymers to address health, environmental, and industrial challenges, fostering
innovation, and training a diverse workforce at multiple chemistry-biology-
materials frontiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C-GEM’s Phase II research plan
includes interrelated goals that will expand ribosome-mediated chemistry to
generate molecular architectures unique in both structure and function. C-GEM is
also pursuing a parallel path in which innovative “late-stage functionalization”
reactions convert ribosome-derived products into substances beyond the reach of
extant biosynthesis. Novel and versatile tools to design, evolve, and
characterize the molecules of translation will expand their chemical capacity in
vitro and in vivo. C-GEM will also use new and existing technologies to
determine the structures of the genetically encoded product molecules and
polymers, as well as the mechanisms by which they are assembled. A suite of
computational methods will evaluate, model, and predict the chemical capacity of
wild type and engineered ribosomes, their translation factors, and the
properties of the polymers they produce, signaling a new era in computational
biomaterial design. Our goals also include strategies to prepare sequence-
defined chemical polymers in useful quantities, enabling functions that impact
biotechnology, in vivo imaging, molecular medicine, materials science, and drug
delivery. A diverse set of education and participation programs integrates
research with training, establishes a diverse chemical workforce, and engages
with the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.