* 2002629
* I-Corps: Magnetic Nanoremediation of Crude Oil
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Jamie Lead, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project comes from a
nanotechnology-based platform developed for the treatment and clean-up
(remediation) of contaminated land and water. The platform has the potential for
use for a wide range of contaminants and has been demonstrated successfully for
oil and metals. The platform is scalable in both synthesis and deployment, has a
low environmental footprint, and it is flexible and cost-effective. Remediation
of oil and metal pollution is an ongoing and critical concern for environmental
and human health. This flexible platform has the potential to solve these
challenges. Initial commercialization targets are the shipping, marine, and
tourism sectors, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will determine
potential use cases for safe polymer-coated and magnetic nanomaterials based on
low-cost, easily available and low toxicity chemicals. Simple and rapid sorption
reactions govern oil and metal removal, and the nanomaterials are protected from
transformations long enough to effectively perform their function. Sorbed
metal/oil is less toxic, and magnetic nanomaterials allow easy separation of
sorbed pollutants from the environment. The platform can be used effectively in
conjunction with bacterial bioremediation for in-situ use, in which the magnetic
properties may not be needed, but the nanomaterials provide an easily
assimilated carbon and limiting nutrient source to bacteria. The system would
offer rapid reduction of toxicity via rapid degradation of oil and metal
fixation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.