* 2002319
* Functional Inorganic Materials - New Ultraviolet and Deep-Ultraviolet Nonlinear Optical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* P.Shiv Halasyamani, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 459,622.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials - chemical compounds -
are at the core of advanced technologies, such as fuel cells, blue-ray DVD
players, smart phones, and lasers. The challenge lies in not only discovering a
new material, but also understanding its technologically relevant properties. If
advancements in technology are to occur - and such advancements are critical if
the United States is to remain the leader in science - the discovery and
understanding of new materials are critical. This fundamental research project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, involves the design, discovery, and crystal growth of new
materials for advanced technologies. Specifically, the research team is focused
on new materials for laser applications. The aim is to discover materials that
enable lasing technologies, i.e. coherent radiation, in the ultraviolet and
deep-ultraviolet wavelengths - below 300 nanometers. Coherent radiation in these
wavelength ranges is critically needed for advanced technologies and devices,
and the proposed materials will positively impact these technologies. Finally,
there will be a specific emphasis on recruiting underrepresented groups in STEM
to the research group as the University of Houston is designated as a Hispanic-
Serving Institution (HSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research,
involves the design, synthesis, structure, functional property characterization,
and structure-property relationships of new functional inorganic materials -
mixed alkali and alkaline earth borate oxyfluorides and mixed alkali and
alkaline-earth metal nitrates - for ultraviolet (UV) and deep-ultraviolet (DUV)
nonlinear optical (NLO) applications. An ongoing challenge in inorganic solid-
state chemistry is the ‘rational design’ of new materials - to design and
synthesize precise stoichiometries that will exhibit specific, and ideally,
technologically important properties. Meeting this challenge not only requires
synthetic expertise, but also a deep understanding of the various bonding and
crystal chemistry requirements for the desired physical property. To further
this understanding, the research team at the University of Houston not only
synthesizes new materials, but also develops structure-property relationships.
In addition to bulk phase synthesis, the growth of large, centimeter size,
crystals is planned. Large single crystals are crucial in order to thoroughly
investigate and understand the functional properties. Top-seeded solution growth
methods can be employed for the crystal growth. The materials are characterized
structurally by X-ray diffraction - powder and single crystal - and physical
property measurements will include, thermogravimetric analysis, differential
scanning calorimetry, and second-harmonic generation measurements. Through this
holistic approach - synthesis, crystal growth, characterization, and structure-
property relationships - the research team aims to profoundly advance the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.