* 2002405
* CAREER: Decision Procedures for High-Assurance, AI-Controlled, Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Yasser Shoukry, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 496,903.00

This project explores new mathematical techniques that provide a scientific
basis to understand the fundamental properties of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS)
controlled by Artificial Intelligence (AI) and guide their design. From simple
logical constructs to complex deep neural network models, AI agents are
increasingly controlling physical/mechanical systems. Self-driving cars, drones,
and smart cities are just examples of AI-controlled CPS. However, regardless of
the explosion in the use of AI within a multitude of CPS domains, the safety and
reliability of these AI-controlled CPS is still an under-studied problem. This
project includes activities integrated with education, so as to explore how
learning through counterexamples works for AI, and to help with critical
thinking skills for young students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates a new generation of formal method tools that are capable of
simultaneously analyzing the cyber components (including AI-agents) and the
physical components of CPS. This new generation of formal methods will be used
to analyze the safety and reliability of AI-controlled CPS, characterize the
environments for which the system is guaranteed to operate correctly and predict
their failure at real-time. In addition, this project will address the problem
of how to assign the blame of system failures in AI-controlled CPS. The proposed
methods will be evaluated over two flagship testbeds (i) autonomous drones and
(ii) self-driving cars. The project engages graduate, undergraduate, and high-
school students, and reaches out to the scientific community by providing open
source implementations of algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.