* 2002003
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Maintenance of Tradition Amid Organizational Pressures to Change
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Christena Turner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2023
* USD 15,997.00

This dissertation project investigates how a distinct subgroup may create novel
organizational practices by preserving traditional knowledge and practices in a
contemporary setting. The setting is a unique organization: a medical clinic
owned by the subgroup. To treat patients both from the subgroup and not from the
subgroup in their clinic, the subgroup’s approach to treatment centers on the
integration of distinct modalities including conventional, integrative, and
traditional treatment. This project examines the impact of subgroup ownership of
the clinic on the creation of new forms of treatment. It also examines how
distinct treatment modalities, often considered incompatible because they
involve different theories, practices, and evidence, are negotiated in a single
institution. This project reveals how practitioners collaborate across
epistemological and methodological divides in their attempt to establish more
efficient and effective practices. In so doing, it contributes to the sociology
of science and technology and medical sociology as it explores changing
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods for this study involve participant
observation, interviews, and document analysis. Participant observation allows
answering questions concerning subgroup healing practices and combining
modalities. Approximately 40 interviews are being held with subgroup personnel
involved with the establishment and operation of the clinic. Documents analyzed
include media reports, clinic promotional materials, and internal documentation
of the clinic’s development. As integrative clinics proliferate, this research
will help practitioners anticipate the problems that may arise in attempting to
combine disparate modalities. Further, this project will provide insight into
the challenges and opportunities in creating culturally tailored services for
treatment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.