* 2002804
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Hardware Oriented Security and Trust (HOST): San Jose, CA - May 2020
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2019,03/31/2021
* Domenic Forte, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 03/31/2021
* USD 18,000.00

Trusted hardware is the foundation of cybersecurity. The International Symposium
on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust (HOST) is a leading forum for hardware
security researchers. This travel grant enables student researchers to attend
the symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposed
activity includes professional development for undergraduate and graduate
students as well as continued growth of the symposium. HOST 2020 will be held in
San Jose, CA on May 4-7, 2020. This project provides opportunities for 60
students to receive travel support to attend HOST 2020. Their attendance enables
them to learn about the latest tools, design methods, architectures, circuits,
and novel applications of secure hardware. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
contributions from previous symposia have covered topics such as: (1)
counterfeit detection and avoidance, (2) side channel analysis and fault
analysis, (3) hardware architectures for cryptography, and (4) physically
unclonable functions (PUFs). The travel grants encourage more students to
consider a technical submission, participation in growing hardware demonstration
space to a large diverse audience, or even to attend as a means to prepare for a
technical submission in future years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.