* 2002367
* Modular Transition Metal Chalcogenide Coordination Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* John Anderson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 468,491.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modern society is built on ever
increasing technological advances. Recent decades have seen this advancement
come from sophisticated processing and engineering perhaps best exemplified by
miniaturization largely driven by the surge in nanoscience. Conversely, the
discovery of fundamentally new materials has been more limited and many modern
innovations rely on classic materials such as bulk silicon. A new class of
materials, known as coordination polymers, represent an extremely attractive
system for the rational design and tuning of new materials with tailored
properties. While there have been dramatic advances in this area, there are
still fundamental limitations in the composition of these materials that prevent
their use in potentially transformative applications such as renewable energy,
next generation electronics, and new magnetic materials. This fundamental
research project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program
in the Division of Materials Research, guides the discovery of a novel family of
coordination polymers built upon sulfur-based nodes and linkers. Unlike most
coordination polymers which rely upon oxygen- or nitrogen-based components,
sulfur-based materials exhibit strong interactions between their individual
building blocks which enhances their electronic and magnetic properties. Through
advances in the fundamental synthetic techniques and an expansive compositional
scope, these newly designed materials have the potential to enable new
applications in revolutionary technology. In parallel with these research
efforts, the principle investigator establishes a local conference in the
Chicago area, particularly aimed at including undergraduate students, graduate
students, and local postdoctoral researchers. This conference generates a
community of researchers in the Chicago area as well as a link to ongoing
efforts with younger students to increase scientific communication and literacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
fundamental challenge associated with the discovery of new chalcogenide-based
coordination polymers is the generation of reliable synthetic protocols for
families of novel materials. Such synthetic protocols are relatively well
established for more classic coordination polymer materials with carboxylate
linkers. Several early examples of chalcogenide-based coordination polymers
exhibit remarkable properties and activity, but there is a dearth of these
materials compared to their O- and N-based congeners which arises from more
poorly understood synthetic protocols. Precise synthetic control over these
materials is required to tune morphology, crystallinity, solubility, and
electronic structure. This fundamental research project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research,
establishes the much needed reliable synthetic control that is essential for
understanding and tuning bulk properties such as conductivity or magnetism,
where defects and grain sizes may have a determinative role on the observed
behavior. The synthetic protocols and the resulting family of new materials
enables the detailed study of physical properties and more clearly elucidates
how the incorporation of chalcogenides mediates enhanced magnetic and electronic
coupling. Furthermore, these efforts enable the inclusion of new components into
coordination polymers: for example, the researchers study new chalcogenide-based
linkers as well as new nodes such as polynuclear chalcogenide clusters. The
combination of synthetic access to a variety of new materials and a detailed
understanding of their properties enables rational tuning and control over their
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.