* 2002683
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated microfluidic reaction monitoring via miniaturized NMR spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Herbert Ryan, Bitome, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project is to develop a commercially-viable miniaturized nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectrometer for automated small molecule monitoring and
analysis. The project aims to address major obstacles preventing widespread
adoption of NMR spectroscopy. The proposed innovation is a miniaturized, cost-
effective, and user-friendly NMR system, thus addressing major obstacles
preventing widespread adoption of this powerful analytical method. It will be
suitable for placement in industrial manufacturing environments to provide
chemometric insights on complex solutions, resulting in reduced manufacturing
costs for a wide range of high-value biochemical products. The proposed
innovation constitutes a platform technology with a broad range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SBIR Phase I project will be to
advance the development of NMR spectroscopy. The proposed point-of-need,
microfluidic, push-button NMR spectrometer presents technical challenges in the
areas of hardware miniaturization for mass production, automated turnkey design,
multidimensional pulse sequence design, and assisted post-processing annotation.
The proposed project will explore the trade space defined by low instrument
sensitivity, as a compromise due to permanent magnets with limited magnetic
field strengths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.