* 2002950
* Enzymatic Mechanism of Oxalate Decarboxylase Revealed by Biophysical and Structural Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Alexander Angerhofer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 473,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Alexander Angerhofer from the University of Florida to
investigate the degradation of oxalic acid by an enzyme known as oxalate
decarboxylase which is found in soil bacteria and fungi. Overloading the body
with oxalic acid can lead to kidney stones and other adverse health effects in
animals and humans. As a plant product oxalic acid is present in many plant-
derived foods in appreciable quantities. A way to keep the amount of oxalic acid
low is to decompose it by chemical reactions catalyzed by enzymes. The research
of Dr. Angerhofer is focused on the elucidation of the mechanism by which the
enzyme oxalate decarboxylase breaks down oxalic acid. More specifically, Dr.
Angerhofer will test the hypothesis that to decompose oxalic acid, this protein
transfers electrons over a long distance, about 2 nm, between two manganese
ions, one of which is located at the active site for the chemical transformation
of oxalic acid. This study will involve use of a combination of advanced
biochemical methods of protein engineering with structural and spectroscopic
methods, including X-ray crystallography, electron paramagnetic resonance, and
optical spectroscopy. The results of this research will enhance our fundamental
knowledge of reactions that involve bio-active manganese and will ultimately aid
in devising strategies to mitigate the presence of oxalic acid in plants. The
project supports the training of a growing and diverse science and technology
workforce in the state of Florida by involving students in research that helps
them acquire scientific and professional skills useful in the bio-economy of the
21st century. The training of undergraduate students is supported through a
course-based undergraduate research experience at the University of Florida and
through the University Research Scholars Program, which brings gifted freshmen
students to the cutting edge of modern research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports the research of Dr. Angerhofer focused on the study of the molecular
mechanisms by which the bacterial enzyme oxalate decarboxylase catalyzes the
cleavage of the kinetically inert carbon-carbon bond in oxalic acid. It has been
proposed that long-range electron transfer between the manganese ions situated
at the N- and the C-terminal ends of the proteins subunits plays an important
catalytic role. X-ray crystallography, molecular dynamics simulations,
electrochemistry, and an array of advanced electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
technologies, in combination with site-directed mutagenesis will be applied to
the problem. The activity of manganese ions in the protein and a chain of
electron transfer-active amino acids will be studied. Genetic code expansion
methods will be used to introduce unnatural amino acids into the enzyme at
specific target sites where they can be used to probe a long-range electron
transfer pathway that may exist in the quaternary structure of the enzyme. The
planned experiments will yield important structural and kinetic information
about substrate and oxygen co-factor binding to the enzyme. The hypothesis that
will be tested is that via long-range electron transfer dioxygen promotes
catalysis by generating the +3 oxidation state on the active-site Mn ion
situated at the N-terminal end, which in turn drives the reaction. The proposed
work will elucidate how proteins tune and utilize the redox potential of mono-
nuclear Mn centers for catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.