* 2002701
* Charge distribution within supported metal nanoclusters and how it is influenced by the substrate, adsorption and surface defects
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jory Yarmoff, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Jory A. Yarmoff of the University of California - Riverside is
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry to study the charge distribution within supported
metal nanoclusters. Professor Yarmoff and his students use specialized
characterization methods to investigate how the properties of metal
nanoparticles are affected by the nature of the support material on which they
reside and how defects in the support alter their properties. In particular,
they measure the charge on individual atoms within the clusters and observe how
the cluster size and number of support defects affect what molecules will or
will not stick to the supports. Nanoparticles are a distinctive class of
materials because they have sizes intermediate between molecules (few atoms) and
solids (trillions of atoms). Nanoscale materials exhibit unique chemical and
electronic properties that depend on their size, leading to many potential
applications that include advanced electronics, battery technologies, solar
power generation, environmental remediation, and chemical catalysis.
Understanding, and then learning how to control the properties of nanoscale
materials broadly, impacts knowledge in basic science and practical
applications. A diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of California-Riverside, an Hispanic serving institution, are gaining
valuable experience by conducting laboratory experiments in a field at the
forefront of modern science. In addition, the research results are disseminated
via multifaceted in-house and outreach initiatives. This includes participation
in a Summer Physics Teachers Academy, a week-long workshop which includes hands-
on laboratory experiences to train local high school teachers and stimulate the
interest of their students in STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The edge atoms
of supported metal nanoclusters may be the active sites that drive chemical
reactions via adsorption of precursor molecules to the cluster atoms that are
directly bonded to the substrate. There is also strong evidence that the
electronic environment of metal nanoclusters is critical in determining their
electronic and chemical behaviors. Supported metal nanoclusters are directly
deposited, or produced by buffer layer assisted growth (BLAG), onto oxide,
sulfide, fluoride and frozen noble gas substrates. A novel form of low energy
ion scattering (LEIS) is used to investigate the charge distribution within
metal nanoclusters by measuring the neutralization of scattered low energy
alkali ions. This method previously showed that the charge within a gold
nanocluster is inhomogeneous, with the edge atoms being positively charged while
the center atoms are essentially neutral. This project builds on this knowledge
by exploring how the charge distribution depends on the cluster and substrate
materials, the number of defects at the cluster/support interface, the
subsequent adsorption of electronegative and electropositive adatoms and small
molecules, and how defects in the substrate modify adsorption. The research
results wicontribute to a fundamental understanding of metal nanoclusters,
thereby enabling the tailoring of their properties to improve functionality and
practical utility. The research may have a significant and broad impact on the
field by providing an understanding of the physical and chemical properties of
nanoscale materials while developing methods to control them, which will
facilitate their use in numerous advanced manufacturing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.