* 2002546
* Orbital to millennial-scale variability of the Southern Hemisphere Westerlies over the last glacial cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Timothy Shanahan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 402,158.00

The Southern Hemisphere westerly winds are a crucial component of the global
climate system, playing an important role in controlling the weather of the
Southern Hemisphere mid-latitudes through the seasonal transmission of
precipitation-generating storm systems, as well as through their influence on
the circulation of the Southern Ocean. It has been hypothesized that past
changes in the position and strength of the westerlies may have also impacted
the global carbon cycle through their influence on storage of carbon dioxide in
the deep ocean, with impacts on global climate. Models also suggest that future
warming will also result in changes in the westerlies, with the potential to
drive changes in the storage or release of carbon dioxide from the Southern
Ocean. However, the westerlies respond to a number of factors including
regional, hemispheric and global patterns of warming, ocean circulation and
Southern Ocean sea ice cover. In order to better understand how these factors
influence the westerlies and their potential role in changing in the carbon
cycle, this research project will generate a new reconstruction of the westerly
wind response to a range of natural climate factors over the past ~140,000
years. In combination with the results of climate model simulations, the results
of this study will provide a better understanding of how and why the westerlies
change, and will thus provide a perspective from the geological past on how the
westerlies will respond to future changes in global climate. The impacts of this
research on society will be presented to the public through venues such the
University of Texas Geoforce program, local community organizations, ongoing
activities and outreach at local K-12 schools, through programs such as Girls
Start and the Boy Scouts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the
generation of a new high-resolution record of past westerly wind behavior using
the laminated sediment record from Lake Orakei, a volcanic crater lake located
on the North Island of New Zealand. Reconstructions will use the hydrogen
isotope composition of sedimentary leaf waxes as a proxy for the position of the
westerlies, an approach that is grounded in a study of modern isotope dynamics
in this region. The reconstructions will be complemented by temperature
reconstructions based on the MBTâ€™5ME paleotemperature proxy and will focus on
understanding the timing and nature of the westerly response to orbital forcing,
the growth and retreat of the ice sheets and, over targeted intervals, the
response to millennial-scale variability during Dansgaard-Oeschger and Heinrich
stadials. A robust proxy-model comparison approach will be used to better
understand the underlying climate dynamics driving the westerly wind response to
these forcing mechanisms. This award is cofunded by the Division of Earth
Sciences and the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences by way of the
Paleo Perspectives on Climate Change Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.