* 2002202
* Predicting mammalian communities in Mesoamerican 'sky islands' using species traits and spatiotemporal patterns of environmental suitability
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Robert Anderson, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2024
* USD 309,000.00

Understanding and predicting shifts in species geographic distributions (or
ranges) is important to inform decision-making on a range of pressing issues in
health, agriculture, and natural-resource management. Many human activities
increase the patchiness of habitats in an area, thus affecting species
distributions. However, predicting the effects of fragmentation on particular
species remains difficult. To forecast which species will remain in each patch
and which will move into the areas between them, scientists need to consider not
only their preferred habitats but also the environmental history of the region
and other traits of the species themselves (like body size, dispersal ability,
and reproductive rates). Here, the researchers will test a new model to forecast
species distributions in fragmented landscapes, applying it to mammals
associated with mountain forests. The research will evaluate the roles of
environmental history and species traits in predicting a species' presence or
absence in particular forest patches. Graduate and undergraduate students
contributing to the project will gain training in data collection, analyses
using Geographic Information Systems (GIS), and computer coding. In addition to
publishing scientific papers on the findings, the team will conduct workshops
and produce computer code, tutorials, and webinars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
system of naturally fragmented, montane habitat islands or sky islands, the
researchers will test hypotheses regarding differential colonization and
extinction among species using traits, allometric scaling (based on body size),
and spatial patterns of present and past climate. To predict the particular
species occurring in given patches, they will implement the new Constraint-based
model of Dynamic Island Biogeography (C-DIB). The team will do so studying small
non-volant mammals associated with currently isolated mesic montane forests of
the Sierra Madre Oriental in Mexico (the mainland of this system). Specifically,
the researchers will: 1. obtain occurrence records and trait data for species of
the mainland; 2. make predictions for each species and patch within one sky
island complex using body size, trophic level, and measures of connectivity and
area from ecological niche models applied to present and past conditions; 3.
determine the species composition of the patches by conducting field
inventories; and 4. perform statistical tests of differential colonization and
extinction among species. This project will advance understanding of the factors
that affect species ranges across space and over time, empowering researchers to
improve biodiversity prediction and spark further development and use of the
C-DIB in basic and applied science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.