* 2002960
* Imaging of Element-Specific 3D Distribution Dynamics in Working Bimetallic Catalysts by in-situ Anomalous Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Yugang Sun, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 376,409.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry is supporting Dr. Yugang Sun at Temple University to
combine computation and X-ray methods to develop a rapid chemical imaging tool
that maps out the location of individual metals. Utilizing this tool, he and his
team seek to glean a real-time, three-dimensional "picture" of metals in
nanoscale metal catalyst particles on an atom-by-atom basis. Many alternative
fuel sources are derived from catalytic processes based on such metal
nanoparticles. New measurement methods that reveal information about the
arrangement and location of metal atoms in the catalyst and how atom location
and arrangement change during the chemical conversion process have great
potential to enhance our fundamental understanding of catalysis in these
systems. This novel solution to a long-standing challenge may well provide new
insights into the how atomic-level structure affects behavior of nanometer-sized
catalysts, while also holding potential to understand how the chemical behavior
of other nanoparticles is influenced by their environment over time. These new
measurement methods are anticipated to lead to significant impacts on chemical
reactions used in industry, ranging from those that produce chemical or
pharmaceutical building blocks to those that produce alternative fuels. The use
of the state-of-the-art large-scale synchrotron X-ray facilities at national
laboratories trains the students to become specialists in a significant area
that is underrepresented in the typical chemist's skill set. More broadly, the
research educates a highly diverse group of students about the use of cutting-
edge chemical measurement tools to address important scientific problems, with
an emphasis on workforce development in the field of alternative fuels. Dr. Sun
and his team also integrate research outcomes into the Philadelphia community
and beyond through a range of education and outreach programs to students and
teachers at local urban/high-need schools and Community Colleges, as well as
students participating in a National Science Foundation undergraduate research
program and the Temple University TUteach initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, Dr. Sun and his research team integrate small-angle X-ray
scattering (SAXS) measurements with ab initio modeling and calculation results
to construct models of the three-dimensional (3D) geometry of uniform
nanoparticles of well-defined chemical composition. This project is developing
this imaging protocol to enable the study of the element-specific evolution of
3D atom distributions in bimetallic nanoparticle catalysts under working
conditions. Such endeavors require two consecutive steps. First, the element-
specific SAXS patterns are deconvoluted from the highly convoluted anomalous
small-angle X-ray scattering (ASAXS) of bimetallic nanoparticles based on
penalized regression methods. Second, an imaging protocol is being developed to
determine element-specific 3D images of the composition distribution in
bimetallic nanoparticles through ab initio modeling of the deconvoluted element-
specific SAXS patterns. The ASAXS imaging protocol may then be applicable to in-
situ ASAXS imaging through its use with working reactors, allowing for the study
of the time-resolved evolution of element-specific 3D distributions of metals in
bimetallic catalysts in operando.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.