* 2002495
* CPS: Synergy: Information Flow Analysis for Cyber-Physical System Security
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Bruno Sinopoli, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2020
* USD 173,627.00

This project develops a theory of accountability that encompasses both control
and computing systems. A unified theory of accountability in Cyber-Physical
Systems (CPS) can be built on a foundation of causal information flow analysis,
a well-established set of methods for computer security. Information flow
properties model how inputs of a system affect its outputs. Causal information
flow notions provide a useful foundation for accountability since they support
traceability, that is, not just detection of violations but also responsibility-
assignment, which then can be used to adopt corrective measures. The
intellectual merit of the proposed project lies in developing a unified
foundation for CPS security based on theories of accountability, which build on
causal information flow analysis. Broader impacts include the design of
resilient and secure CPS, a key to sustaining reliable operation of a wide range
of critical infrastructure applications for societal benefit, such as
transportation and smart-grid systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
organized into three major thrusts. With regards to attack detection the project
develops information flow analyses to support passive and active detection
against realistic adversaries. First, a general framework of information flows
to recover existing results related to detection in a unified manner is
proposed. Second, information flows are used as an analysis tool, with the goal
of producing new results on active detection and stealthy attack
characterization. The proposed project will employ this framework to formally
study a set of general questions about detection. With respect to responsibility
assignment and identification, the project seeks to develop theory and
methodologies for identifying nodes responsible for an attack by a novel
combination of methods from cryptography and control theory. In particular, it
will leverage tools from traitor tracing in cryptography to efficiently search
for subsets of nodes that contain malicious or faulty entities. It will employ
methods from control theory to evaluate if given subsets of nodes are
misbehaving or normal and it will investigate control and design policies to
directly attribute information flows to distinct entities. The final task seeks
to develop corrective measures via resilient system design and control. This
task seeks to develop algorithms to support resilient offline (resource
allocation) and online (architectures and algorithms that enable resilient
online control) design of CPS and analysis tools to evaluate the security of CPS
under composition.