* 2002412
* Development of Hydrogeology Experimental System for Radiolabeled Fluid and Colloid Imaging
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Christopher Zahasky, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,461.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program grant
supports development of a novel experimental system capable of performing
Positron emission tomographic (PET) imaging of fluid flow through permeable
geologic media. PET is a technique widely used for cancer research and therapy.
The apparatus would be used to make quantitative measurements of fluid flow in
heterogeneous subsurface environments with applications to important scientific
questions in hydrogeology, subsurface energy resources, and environmental
science. This project will enhance scientific infrastructure for research and
education. The enhanced infrastructure will facilitate interdisciplinary
research collaborations, with a focus on developing new partnerships with
minority serving institutions and regional universities. The experimental system
and associated research projects will provide research opportunities that will
cultivate full participation of underrepresented demographics in science and
higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system will be capable of safely
handling, injecting, imaging, and disposing of pressurized short-lived
radiolabeled fluids, gases, and colloids to support multiscale, multiphase flow
experiments that will expand existing fluid flow experimental techniques and
imaging utilization in hydrogeology and subsurface energy resources research.
The experimental apparatus would be mobile and would take advantage of a
positron source at the University of Wisconsinâ€™s veterinary school. Research
applications have implications for remediation efforts within contaminated
aquifers, efforts to limit nanoparticle contamination of groundwaters,
exploration of engineering solutions and ramifications of subsurface CO2
sequestration, and improving efficiency of geothermal energy
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.