* 2002695
* Collaborative Research: RAPID--Atmospheric Chlorine Oxidation of Hydrocarbons Emitted from the North Slope of Alaska Oil Fields
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Kerri Pratt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 210,904.00

This project will investigate the role of chlorine (Cl) in atmospheric chemical
processes in the wintertime Arctic. A measurement campaign will be conducted at
Oliktok Point Alaska, a field site that is operated by the U.S. Department of
Energyâ€™s Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Program (DOE ARM) and is located in
the vicinity of the north slope of Alaska oilfields. Atmospheric Cl emitted from
wintertime saline snowpacks can react with volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
emitted from the oil fields to form secondary organic aerosol (SOA). The
importance of this process will be evaluated and the results may have
application to other coastal, snow-covered, polluted locations around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the hypothesis that chlorine
chemistry occurring in the vicinity of wintertime oil fields with saline
snowpacks can result in the oxidation of VOCs emitted from oil field activities
and the formation of oxidized VOCs (OVOCs) and SOA. The field deployment
includes online mass spectrometry measurements of atmospheric VOCs, OVOCs, and
SOA, and field-based oxidation flow reactor (OFR) experiments to investigate in
situ Cl oxidation of VOCs and the resulting production of OVOCs and SOA. These
measurements will provide detailed datasets of molecular composition
transformations initiated by Cl oxidation in the polluted wintertime
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was supported under the NSF
Grants for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) program because the U.S. Department
of Energy has announced that the Oliktok Point field site will be closing in
2021, with the removal of complementary atmospheric measurements starting in the
fall of 2020. There are no plans to reopen this site; thus, there is an urgent
need to conduct the research at this site before it is
closed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.