* 2002413
* Chemical Dynamics of Organic Peroxy Radicals at Aerosol Particle Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Haofei Zhang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 525,525.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the NSF Division
of Chemistry supports Professor Haofei Zhang at the University of California,
Riverside to study organic aerosol (OA) particles. Atmospheric OA affect the
Earth’s climate in crucial but poorly understood ways. The uncertainty is
largely due to the complex chemical processes that constantly change OA
compositions during their lifetime of weeks. Professor Zhang and his group study
the chemical reactions of organic peroxy radicals (RO2) at the surfaces of the
particles. These chemical processes largely determine the chemical composition
and physiochemical properties of the particle interface. Better knowledge of the
details of these reactions improves our understanding of the evolution and
impacts of OA. Other broader impacts of this project include the training and
mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students, especially those from the
underrepresented groups. In addition, Professor Zhang leads outreach activities
with Riverside high schools that serve minority students and participates in a
summer academy program aimed at enhancing STEM education for diverse
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the heterogeneous hydroxyl
radical oxidation of OA proxies and the subsequent pathways of RO2 at the OA
particle interface. This includes the previously under-explored RO2 +
hydroperoxyl radical, RO2 + nitric oxide, RO2 dimerization, and RO2 autoxidation
reactions. Laboratory oxidation experiments are performed using a hybrid
continuous-flow reaction system. This provides information on the relative
importance of the various RO2 reaction pathways. The different pathways are
impacted by the OA composition, liquid water content, oxidation timescales, and
oxidant concentrations. The team uses a suite of advanced mass spectrometry
instrumentation to systematically study the oxidation kinetics and the chemical
composition of key oxidation products. A multiphase reaction-diffusion kinetic
model framework representing the interfacial RO2 processes of interest is being
developed. The model is based on experimental results and presents a crucial
extension to the current understanding of radical-initiated OA heterogeneous
oxidation mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.