* 2002991
* Tie Chains in Semicrystalline Homopolymers and Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Richard Register, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 640,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why is paraffin wax brittle,
while the polymer used in hip replacements is tough and durable? Both are
hydrocarbon chain molecules -- varieties of "polyethylene". The key difference
is that the material used in hip replacements (along with other varieties of
polyethylene used in durable gas and water pipes) contains molecular chains
which are long enough to span between the microscopic crystals of the material,
creating “tie chains” that hold the material together. While this example shows
clearly that polymers need to be above a certain chain length to possess
toughness and ductility, surprisingly it is not known "how long is long enough?"
-- a threshold which also depends on microstructural features of the material,
such as the distance separating those microscopic crystals. This project will
establish quantitative criteria for ductility in semicrystalline polymers, by
synthesizing polymers of tightly-controlled chain length and molecular
structure, and will also investigate how these tie molecules change shape when
the material deforms. These quantitative criteria will aid the design and
processing of optimized semicrystalline polymers (of which polyethylene is just
one example): e.g., where the polymer chains are long enough that the material
does not fracture or fragment during use, but short enough that the material can
be processed using a minimum of energy. The project will provide an integrated
research and educational experience for graduate students, undergraduate
students, and high-school students, including members of underrepresented
groups. The principal investigator and students will also engage the general
public through science outreach at broadly-advertised events, both on campus and
off. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semicrystalline polymers derive their ductility and
toughness from tie chains: molecules sufficiently long that they can bridge two
or more crystals. Despite this qualitative understanding, today we do not know a
priori the minimum macromolecular size needed to impart ductility to a
semicrystalline polymer, even if all aspects of its solid-state structure (such
as the crystallite and amorphous layer thicknesses) are known. This project will
use recently-developed ring-opening metathesis polymerization routes to
synthesize well-defined semicrystalline homopolymers, statistical copolymers,
and block copolymers, based on linear polyethylene and hydrogenated
polynorbornene. In one thrust, examination of linear homopolymers by small-angle
neutron scattering will allow an assessment of the macromolecular (single-chain)
deformation which occurs in tie chains beyond the yield point. In a second
thrust, systematic examination of homopolymers and statistical copolymers as
molecular weight and noncrystallizable comonomer content are tuned will allow us
to elucidate the structural features required for ductility. Finally, we will
build on this knowledge to simultaneously raise these polymers' yield strengths
into the range of structural (engineering) plastics via incorporation of a short
glassy block, while retaining ductility. Students will work across all phases of
the project, from synthesis to characterization to property measurement, gaining
a big-picture outlook which will serve them well as a future foundation. Project
participants will engage the general public at broadly-advertised public
outreach events, with a focus on polymeric materials science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.