* 2002484
* Collaborative Research: Neotropical climate and environmental change over 400ka of glacial-interglacial cycles from Lake Peten Itza
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Josef Werne, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 332,077.00

Historically, much of our understanding of significant environmental change in
the past glacial cycles has primarily come from high latitude regions. However,
the spatial pattern of glacial-interglacial climate and environmental
variability in the tropics underscores the need for longer and better
constrained data sets from the region to fully understanding forcings and
potential feedbacks. The tropics play a crucial role in global moisture balance
and heat redistribution. Additionally, environmental change in continental
systems is also generally greater in amplitude and more spatially heterogeneous
than in marine environments, where many of the early records of tropical climate
variability are located. Thus, terrestrial records from the tropics are
particularly necessary to fully resolve regional variability of glacial-
interglacial climate variability and for comparison to existing high latitude
records. This project will contribute to an enhanced understanding of
Neotropical paleoclimate over the last 400 thousand years, and will illuminate
temperature, hydroclimate, and vegetation shifts for a key location in Central
America, Lake Petén Itzá. The researchers will mentor students in scientific
communication with the broader public, focusing on the societal relevance of
paleoclimate research, and will develop a paleoclimate-based, data-integrated
exercise that will be used for hands-on undergraduate classes. Additionally, the
project team will develop an open-access article describing paleoclimate science
in an online journal aims to inspire and educate the next generation of
scientists, reaching a large global student audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lake
Petén Itzá, Guatemala, lies in a region dominated by trade wind migration and is
influenced by sea surface temperature changes in the subtropical Atlantic basin.
It thus represents a key spatial node for understanding large-scale climate
variability of the northern tropics of the Americas. The investigators will use
existing, archived drill cores from Lake Petén Itzá to develop records of
changing Neotropical temperature (using brGDGTs) and precipitation (using δD
values of leaf waxes), and the response of terrestrial vegetation (using δ13C
values of leaf waxes) to these changes, in order to examine climate and
ecosystem evolution over the past 400 ka. The investigators will integrate
findings from the organic geochemical sedimentary reconstructions with
previously published and currently on-going sedimentological and palynological
research from Petén Itzá. Proxy-model comparison work will also be completed
using these integrated reconstructions and other regionally available records
with water isotope-enabled GCM experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.