* 2002843
* A Series of Meetings in Poisson Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Yi Lin, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides support for the 8th "Gone Fishing" meeting on Poisson
Geometry, to be held on the Savannah campus of Georgia Southern University in
Spring 2021. "Gone Fishing" is a series of regular meetings in North America
where mathematicians interested in Poisson geometry and its applications meet
and discuss new ideas and results. These workshops aim to promote interaction
between mathematicians, physicists and groups working on related areas from
different points of view, and bring together leading experts and young
researchers in these subjects to encourage more interaction and cross
fertilization between different fields. This has become increasingly important
as these various areas continue to progress deeper. The workshops also allow
junior mathematicians from all over the United States to learn about cutting
edge developments in Poisson Geometry and to disseminate their own research
results in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poisson Geometry originates in the
mathematical formulation of classical mechanics and the semi-classical limit of
quantum mechanics. Poisson structures can be traced back to 19th century
classics by Poisson, Hamilton, Jacobi and Lie. Poisson Geometry as an
independent field started around 1980 with the foundational works of Kirillov,
Lichnerowicz and Weinstein. Today the field is developing rapidly, stimulated by
the connections with a large number of areas in mathematics and mathematical
physics, including differential geometry and Lie theory, quantization, non-
commutative geometry, representation theory and quantum groups, geometric
mechanics and integrable systems. The "Gone Fishing" workshops provide an
excellent opportunity for scientists based in North America to exchange ideas
and stimulate collaboration. In addition each workshop has a goal to address
important questions and future directions of the subject: the 2020 meeting's
theme is "Integrable Systems and Group Actions", with special focus on the
recently active topic of Gel'fand-Zeitlin systems. Conference website: https://s
ites.google.com/georgiasouthern.edu/gonefishing2020&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.