* 2002850
* New Paradigms of Quantum Criticality
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Subir Sachdev, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research aimed at describing the connection between physical properties of
modern quantum materials and the nature of many-particle quantum entanglement.
Conventional theories of electron motion in metals and semiconductors usually
treat the motion of each electron independently, in an average environment
defined by the other electrons. This independent electron picture has been quite
successful in many metals and semiconductors. However, in many newly discovered
materials, some of significant technological importance, the subtle quantum
correlations between the electrons need to be accounted for, even for an
understanding of their macroscopic properties. In particular, quantum
entanglement leading to “spooky action at a distance” can be present not only
between a pair of electrons, but across long distances and involving large
numbers of electrons. A class of materials of particular interest in this
research are the cuprate high temperature superconductors, all of which are
layered materials containing layers with copper and oxygen atoms arranged in a
square lattice. There is accumulating experimental evidence for a "quantum
critical point" near a mobile electron density where the highest critical
temperature for superconductivity is observed. This theoretical research will
describe the phase transition in the electron entanglement across this critical
point. New methods for describing many particle entanglement have been developed
by the PI and others, and also across different fields of physics, including
quantum information theory, high energy particle theory, and quantum gravity.
These advances will be synthesized in new theoretical frameworks, and subjected
to tests by observations on quantum materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will also contribute to the development of the scientific workforce by
supporting the training of graduate students and postdoctoral associates in
topics at the forefront of theoretical condensed matter physics. Furthermore,
the PI will continue to pursue an active program of public lectures, interviews,
colloquia, and lectures at schools for advanced graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research which will examine models of quantum
criticality involving gauge theories coupled to finite density matter. While
much is known about phase transitions of gauge theories coupled to relativistic
matter in 2+1 spacetime dimensions, applications to cuprate criticality require
finite density fermionic matter which, in the absence of disorder, has a sharp
Fermi surface. The PI and his research team have proposed specific gauge
theories for cuprate criticality which satisfy numerous phenomenological
constraints imposed by observations. In some mathematical contexts, the
combination of the gauge structure and the presence of a Fermi surface leads to
effective quantum field theories which are bilocal in time. Currently, little is
understood about such bilocal theories in 2+1 dimensions, and unraveling this
mystery will be an important focus of this research. Previously, bilocal
theories have appeared in models with infinite-range interactions, like the
Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) models, which have some attractive phenomenological
features. Insights gained from the study of SYK models will be applied to the
more realistic bilocal field theories appearing in this research. Another focus
area of the research will be on the thermal Hall effect: In the most recent
experiments, the thermal Hall effect has emerged as a powerful diagnostic probe
of quantum phase transitions associated with changes in entanglement structure.
The PI and his team will extend theories of the thermal Hall effect to models of
the pseudogap phase of the cuprates. In addition, correlated electron
superconductivity in twisted graphene bilayers will be studied, with a focus on
the quantum interplay of multiple competing orders and
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will also contribute to the
development of the scientific workforce by supporting the training of graduate
students and postdoctoral associates in topics at the forefront of theoretical
condensed matter physics. Furthermore, the PI will continue to pursue an active
program of public lectures, interviews, colloquia, and lectures at schools for
advanced graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.