* 2002890
* Peptoid Macrocycles As Biomimetic Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Kent Kirshenbaum, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kirshenbaum at New York
University is studying a family of “peptoid” molecules that mimic natural
proteins. Peptoids are peptide-mimics but with the side chain connected to the
nitrogen of the peptide backbone. Because this unique backbone structure, they
often are more stable in biological systems and can be used for therapeutic
applications. Professor Kirshenbaum's project explores how organizing the
peptoids into cyclic structures may enable the design of new molecules with
elaborate structures and valuable functions. The broader impacts of the project
include collaborations with researchers on the chemical biology of cancer and
creation of intellectual property for commercial development of bioactive
peptidomimetics. Students contributing to the project are trained at the
interface of bio-organic chemistry and biomedicine. Professor Kirshenbaum
provides valuable training for a broad range of students including a project
suitable for high school students. Professor Kirshenbaum makes TV appearances
and appears in social media that informs the general public about the properties
and functions of biological molecules. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Peptoids are
peptidomimetic oligomers composed of N-substituted glycine units. A variety of
biomimetic properties have recently been described for peptoids. In order to
further develop functional peptoids, the project is pursuing new strategies to
enforce their conformational ordering. The research establish predictable
relationships between the sequence, the structure, and the function of peptoid
oligomers. In particular, the project explores the use of macrocyclic
constraints to dictate the folding of peptoids for diverse applications. These
applications include complex metal-associated, self-assembling materials and
peptoid macrocycles to antagonize protein-protein interactions of biomedical
importance. Establishing improved computational strategies for prediction of
peptoid macrocycle structures is a critical component of the research plan.
Teaching modules introduce peptidomimetic enzyme inhibitors to undergraduate
biochemistry laboratory classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.