* 2003961
* Exciton and its Coupling with Spin and Lattice in Strongly Quantum Confined 0D-2D Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Dong Son, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Dong H. Son and Dr. Alexey Akimov at Texas A&amp;M
University to investigate new photophysical properties of lead halide perovskite
nanocrystals. Lead halide perovskites are newly emerging semiconductor materials
important for various applications in photonics and photocatalysis.
Understanding the photophysical properties of lead halide perovskites,
particularly those found in nanosized crystal forms, is essential to developing
high-performance solar cells and light emitting devices. Professor Son’s
research team studies the photophysical properties under a special condition
called quantum confinement. This condition of quantum confinement is achieved by
making the nanocrystals’ size and shape smaller than several nanometers. This
condition may bring about new optical and electronic properties useful for
building high performance, photonic and photocatalytic devices. New
functionalities, not obtainable from the bulk form, can also emerge from the
nanocrystal forms of lead halide perovskites as photon and charge emitters.
Research in this area has generally been challenging due to the difficulty in
realizing controllable quantum confinement in these materials. Professor Son’s
team explores effective ways of accessing the useful quantum confinement-induced
properties by precisely controlling the size and shape of these nanomaterials.
In addition to the scientific activities and impacts, this project contributes
to student training on scientific instrumentation and measurements utilizing
self-learning hardware kits checked out to students for in-depth learning
experience. Professor Son’s team also reaches out to K-12 students and to the
local community providing lectures and hands-on science experiments through
University-run open-house events and a public lecture series.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular,
and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Son’s research
team investigates new photophysical properties of lead halide perovskite
nanocrystals via controlled quantum confinement in 0 to 2 dimensions. The
anticipated photophysical properties can enable these materials to be developed
into a source of photons and charges with enhanced capabilities important for
building high-performance photonic and photocatalytic devices. The research team
leverages their recent success in preparing highly uniform and strongly quantum
confined lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. These materials enhance the
coupling between exciton and other degrees of freedom crucial for opening new
pathways of photon and charge generation. In this project, Professor Son’s team
specifically examines the stable and intense emission from very long-lived dark
excitons of the strongly confined perovskite nanocrystals at low temperatures.
The team also investigates enhanced sensitization in Mn-doped lead halide
perovskite nanoplatelets benefitting from the giant oscillator strength exciton
transition and efficient energy transfer of long-lived dark exciton to Mn. In
addition, processes such as enhanced hot electron generation and hot electron
photoemission in Mn-doped perovskite quantum dots via exciton-to-hot electron
upconversion are elucidated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.