* 2003793
* CAS: Design and discovery of lead-free hybrid layered perovskite dielectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Patrick Woodward, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 435,339.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Dielectric materials find widespread
application in modern society. Ferroelectrics are used to make circuit elements
such capacitors, antennas and filters; piezoelectrics are used in sonar and
ultrasound imaging technologies; pyroelectrics are used in infrared imaging
devices among other applications. The vast majority of dielectric materials are
inorganic oxides, many of which contain lead. With support from the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program and the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program in the Division of Materials Research the principle investigator and his
group discover and develop new dielectric materials within the emerging family
of hybrid layered perovskites, materials that are made up of alternating layers
of positively charged organic cations and negatively charged, corner-connected
metal-halide octahedra. Through an iterative program of synthesis and
characterization the rules governing the complex crystal chemistry of these
materials are studied. The new knowledge is then used to design new dielectric
and magnetic materials that can serve as alternatives to the lead-based oxide
dielectrics that are widely used today. In addition, authentic in-class research
experiments are developed and implemented in general chemistry courses at Ohio
State University that impact hundreds of students per year, introducing them to
research and key materials chemistry concepts at an early stage of their college
education. Finally, the graduate and undergraduate students supported by this
project gain training that prepares them for successful careers in academia and
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program and the Electronic
and Photonic Materials Program in the Division of Materials Research, can be
divided into two thrust areas. The first thrust involves synthesis and
characterization of layered double perovskites that contain a checkerboard
pattern of 1+ and 3+ cations on the octahedral sites of the inorganic layers.
When paired with the appropriate organic cations these materials are able to
mimic the promising dielectric properties that have recently been seen in lead-
based hybrid layered perovskites, while avoiding incorporation of toxic elements
such as lead and cadmium. Phase transitions are studied to understand the
structure directing forces in these materials and reveal the mechanisms by which
various distortion mechanisms couple to one another. The second thrust brings a
similar approach to compounds that contain magnetic cations, like Cu2+, Mn2+ and
Fe2+. The research leverages the interactions between organic and inorganic
layers to amplify the electrical polarization seen in polar crystals and enhance
the coupling between magnetic and ferroelectric order parameters. The
overarching theme of the research program is to develop an understanding of the
complex crystal chemistry of these hybrid materials and use that knowledge to
design and develop new ferroelectrics, antiferroelectrics, piezoelectrics,
multiferroics, ferroelectric semiconductors, and related classes of
multifunctional dielectric materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.