* 2003771
* CAS: Synthetic Methodologies to Harness the Chemical Diversity of Natural Products for the Sustainable Production of High Value Macromolecular Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Donald Darensbourg, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Karen L. Wooley and Donald J.
Darensbourg of the Department of Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University are
developing new synthetic routes that harness natural products and consume carbon
dioxide for the sustainable production of high value polymers. These polymers
are capable of undergoing degradation to regenerate the same natural building
blocks once they have completed their useful lifetime. The team quantifies the
polymer degradation products and defines the potential uses of the polymers. The
broader impacts of this research include the transformation of natural resources
into useful polymer materials that can be readily and sustainably degraded,
thereby reducing the use of petrochemical feedstocks and reducing the
environmental persistence of plastics in landfills and water systems. The
project also contributes to the training of a diverse group of students in a
highly interdisciplinary research environment and is complemented by outreach
activities and efforts at recruiting the next generation STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on developing synthetic
chemistry approaches to the production of a series of polycarbonates,
polyphosphoesters, polyamides and polyurethanes that originate from renewable
resources. These materials exhibit novel chemical, physical and mechanical
properties, and undergo hydrolytic breakdown to biologically-beneficial or
benign by-products. Linkages between carbohydrate repeat units are designed to
include carbonates to allow for breakdown to carbohydrates, carbon dioxide and
other byproducts upon hydrolysis. To be carbon dioxide neutral, carbon dioxide
is used as a feedstock to access the polycarbonates. Carbohydrates are also
connected via phosphoesters, analogous to polyphosphoesters backbones in DNA.
Polyphenolic compounds are investigated as alternatives to bisphenol A in the
construction of engineering plastics or polyurethanes. Additionally, and of
importance for polyurethane industry, several natural diamines and diols are
studied for conversion into polyurethanes via processes that avoid phosgene and
handing of isocyanates. Polymerizations associated with this work involve step-
growth condensation or chain-growth ring opening polymerization. This work
includes research and educational components that have a high potential to
impact advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.