* 2003685
* Point of Anchor: Impacts on Interfacial Charge Transfer of Semiconductor Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Shaowei Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2024
* USD 455,538.00

Professor Shaowei Chen of the University of California-Santa Cruz is supported
by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the Division
of Chemistry to develop new chemical bonding patterns to stabilize semiconductor
nanoparticles with an organic protective layer. Semiconductor nanoparticles are
a unique family of functional materials that have found diverse practical
applications. A semiconductor has an electrical conductivity between that of a
conductor, such as metallic copper, and an insulator, such as glass.
Semiconductors are used in laser diodes, solar cells, electronic circuits, etc.
This research projects seeks to judicially select the chemical linkage to the
surface of the semiconductor nanoparticles so as to tune their optical and
electronic properties and enhance their use in optoelectronic devices, sensors
and other practical applications. In particular, the focus of this project is to
enhance the photocatalytic activity of the nanoparticles in the use of light
energy for efficient chemical conversions to specific products. Graduate
students are trained in advanced multidisciplinary research methods. In
addition, research activities are closely integrated with several educational
and outreach programs to motivate minority, women, disadvantaged undergraduate
students and qualified high-school students from the local area. The research
experience prepares these students for future careers in STEM areas. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor nanoparticles represent a unique class of functional
nanomaterials that have found diverse applications, such as catalysis,
optoelectronics, (bio)imaging, and (bio)diagnosis. Analogous to their metallic
counterparts, semiconductor nanoparticles are generally functionalized with
select organic capping ligands, ranging from small molecules to metal complexes
and to polymeric matrices. In earlier studies, the semiconductor nanoparticle-
ligand interactions mostly involved nonconjugated linkages, which significantly
impeded the electronic coupling between the nanoparticle core and functional
moieties of the capping ligands, so that a large amount of energy was needed to
induce charge transfer across the interface. Such a barrier can be efficiently
diminished with a conjugated core-ligand interfacial linkage. Thus, the central
goal of the present research project is three-fold: to develop new interfacial
chemistry for the surface functionalization of semiconductor nanoparticles, to
examine the impacts of interfacial bonding interactions (conjugated vs.
nonconjugated) on the nanoparticle optical and electronic properties, and to
exploit these unique materials properties to enhance the materials applications
in photocatalysis. Through a deliberate combination of theoretical and
experimental studies, this research may enrich the toolbox of semiconductor
nanoparticle surface functionalization, an important fundamental framework for
enhanced applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.