* 2003005
* Self-Healable Thermoplastic Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Marek Urban, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 621,914.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-healing is the
capability of a material to recover from physical damage. This research aims at
advancing our limited knowledge on the design and development of commodity
polymers that exhibit self-healing properties. An ultimate goal is the
development of new generation of inexpensive polymeric materials that are
capable of autonomous self-healing. The planned research will impact fields of
polymer and materials science, polymer engineering and processing, as well as
technologically related fields. It is envisioned that existing polymers and
devices made out of these materials will last longer while sustaining useful
functions. The significance and importance of the proposed research lies in
numerous critical applications of low-cost materials in the energy, healthcare,
and homeland security sectors, all of which are vital to US global
competitiveness. This project will develop scientific protocols on how to design
polymeric materials with sustainable and useful functions by imbedded self-
healing properties. These studies will involve design and preparation of
thermoplastic commodity polymers that are capable of self-healing. Such prepared
materials will be tested for mechanical and chemical integrity during damage-
repair cycles in the presence and absence of water. The output of the tests will
be used to perform computer simulations in an effort to understand underlying
processes of self-healing. Through the integration of research and education, a
new generation of diversified graduate students who will become productive
members of society will be educated. This training will include addressing
fundamental scientific questions on how commodity plastics can be equipped with
self-healing functions so they become sustainable and minimize waste plastics
accumulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to equip commodity
copolymers with self-healing properties which will be accomplished by
understanding the role of copolymer compositional and structural dependences on
self-healing. The proposed studies are organized into two interactive research
areas: 1) copolymerization of self-healing methacrylate/acrylate-based fluoro-
containing copolymers and 2) elucidating the origin of molecular level processes
that govern self-healing in the presence of hydrophobic and hydrophilic
environments under hydrostatic pressures. An ultimate scientific objective will
be to elucidate the origin and the strength of van der Waals (vdW) interactions
on the efficiency of self-healing. To accomplish these objectives a series of
commodity monomers with variable monomer molar ratios will be copolymerized.
They include but are not be limited to 2,2,2-trifluoroethyl methacrylate
(TFEMA), 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoroisopropyl methacrylate (HFIPMA),
2,2,3,3,4,4,4-heptafluorobutyl methacrylate (HFBMA), 2,2,2-trifluoroethyl
methacrylate (TFEMA), 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoroisopropyl methacrylate/hexyl
acrylate) (HFIPMA), and 2,2,3,3,4,4,4-heptafluorobutyl methacrylate (HFBMA)
copolymerized with acrylic-based monomers (n-butyl, n-pentyl, and n-hexyl
acrylates) to from self-healable films. Using molecular level spectroscopic
(NMR, ESR, IR, Raman) and macroscopic probes (optical microscopy, tensile and
dynamic mechanical measurements) supported by molecular dynamic (MD)
simulations, an ultimate goal is to develop a new generation of self-healable
commodity copolymers and understand molecular origins of self-healing
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.