* 2003912
* The Mechanism of Polyvalent Ion Competition with Membranes and Membrane-Associated Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jeffery Klauda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 646,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Drs. Jeffery
Klauda and Sergei Sukharev at the University of Maryland to study the binding
competition of polyvalent ions with lipids and membrane-associated proteins.
Calcium ions in solution play multiple critical roles as signaling agents and
cofactors that mediate muscle contraction, nerve signal transmission, blood
clotting, and, importantly, dead cell removal. Positively charged calcium ions
assist in recognition of injured and dying cells by special biological
processes, which depend on calcium binding to negatively-charged lipid molecules
exposed during cell death. Specific proteins recognize these calcium-coated
dying (apoptotic) cells and are key to removing these cells. However, some toxic
metal ions, such as beryllium, can compete with, displace, and suppress natural
functions mediated by calcium. Drs. Jeffery Klauda and Sergei Sukharev use a
combined experimental and computational approach to understand the basic aspects
of binding and competition of calcium and beryllium to model compounds, lipids,
and proteins. This project provides insight into the mechanisms of how beryllium
interferes with multiple calcium-dependent processes and specifically disrupts
apoptotic cell recognition and the associated cleaning cascade in the body. This
project provides training for undergraduate and graduate student researchers,
and the research results are disseminated through presentations at scientific
meetings and publications. This project involves educational outreach through
summer research internships for high school students at minority-serving
institutions. A series of magnet practicums will allow students to actively
perform supervised research in the labs of Drs. Klauda and Sukharev. In
addition, course lectures and practical examples from the project research are
integrated into undergraduate and graduate engineering and science courses to
increase engagement and exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Probing the structure and
thermodynamics for ions binding to lipids in cellular membranes has been
challenging. This project aims to use isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) to
obtain free energies of binding for calcium(II) and beryllium(II) to model
compounds for lipids and peptide carbonyls/carboxylates. Fourier Transform-
Infrared (FTIR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopic techniques
are used to determine the structure of ions binding to liposomes with the aid of
quantum mechanical (QM) calculations of model clusters. QM and experimental
measures (ITC, FTIR, Langmuir monolayer experiments, and NMR) are used to
parametrize an additive and a polarizable Drude force field for ion-water,
-lipid and -protein interactions. These force fields will be used in molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations with enhanced sampling approaches to study the
coordination and competitive binding of calcium(II) and beryllium(II). The final
aspect of this project is probing the binding of model phosphatidylserine (PS)
receptors to liposomes and/or apoptotic cells in the presence of calcium(II) and
beryllium(II) with fluorescent microscopy, flow cytometry and electron
paramagnetic resonance. In parallel, calcium(II) displacement by beryllium(II)
in the calcium(II)-arranged PS contacts with these protein receptors is studied
with MD simulations to probe the critical role of coordination and the strength
of these interactions. Together these studies are expected to provide insight
into the mechanism of how beryllium(II) disrupts intracellular signaling,
including details of extracellular PS recognition and of Be(II)-disruption of
the apoptotic cell cleaning cascade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.