* 2003389
* Upgrade of an Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) System to Establish a Center for State-of-the-Art Microstructural Analyses
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Andrew Cross, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2022
* USD 165,527.00

This award will fund the upgrade of an electron backscatter diffraction system
housed at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) in Woods Hole, MA. The upgraded
system will facilitate cutting-edge research into the microscopic properties of
Earth materials, foster collaboration among MBL and the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (WHOI), and establish WHOI/MBL as a regional center for state-of-
the-art electron backscatter diffraction analyses. Electron backscatter
diffraction has proven invaluable for examining the structure and composition of
rocks, minerals, metals, and biominerals. The upgraded instrumentation will form
a core component in the research program of the principle investigator, who is a
new junior faculty member at WHOI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous geodynamic
phenomena arise from the angstrom-to centimeter-scale creep of rocks and
minerals. To understand Earthâ€™s interior dynamics, electron backscatter
diffraction is routinely used to quantify lattice preferred orientations, grain
sizes, mis-orientations, and mineral phase distributions, and thereby examine
the micro-mechanical properties of deformed rocks. Equally, insights into
biomineralization, coral reef growth, volcanic eruption dynamics, magma flow,
meteorite formation, and impact metamorphism may be gleaned from electron
backscatter diffraction analyses of Earth and planetary materials. Within the
fields of materials science and engineering, recent technological innovations
have afforded remarkable improvements in electron backscatter diffraction-based
methods. This award will support the upgrade and acquisition of cutting-edge
electron backscatter diffraction equipment, including: 1) a CMOS-based electron
backscatter diffraction detector, capable of collecting 3000 data points per
second; 2) a software license to enable high-angular-resolution (HR-) electron
backscatter diffraction analyses; and 3) sample holders for high-spatial-
resolution Transmission Kikuchi Diffraction (TKD)
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.