* 2003956
* RUI: Development of Unnatural Tryptophan Derivatives to Expand Tryptophan Function and to Study Biological Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Andrew Sargent, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 291,381.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry is funding Dr. Adam Offenbacher of East Carolina University to
addresses the challenge of developing a new set of chemical tools that allow
tracking of electrons transported within and between proteins based on the amino
acid tryptophan. Proteins are made up of amino acids, with the individual amino
acid building blocks and their side chains conferring key structural and
functional properties of proteins. In some cases, certain amino acids allow for
communication between chemically distinct regions of proteins, sometimes by
facilitating the shuttling of electrons between specific sites. The development
of these chemical tools sets the stage for study of biological energy conversion
and also holds potential to diversify biological function in select proteins
that catalyze chemical reactions (enzymes). While a few chemically modified
tryptophan derivatives have become accessible for such studies, these species
lack desirable properties that enable easy characterization in complex
biological systems. In this project, a highly collaborative approach, combining
molecular biology, chemical biology, and theoretical chemistry, is employed to
overcome these limitations and thoroughly characterize a series of tryptophan
amino acid analogues having potentially valuable electron tracking capabilities.
The project facilitates multi-faceted, hands-on research experiences primarily
focused on the training of undergraduate students, most of whom are women or
from underserved communities in the region, and who intend to continue their
education in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;5-Hydroxyindole (5HOI) serves as the building block for the
development of the unnatural tryptophan analogues targeted in these studies
because it is easily accessible via a three-step synthesis from readily
available precursors. The Offenbacher team then seeks to generate a collection
of halogenated derivatives with tunable acidities, reduction potentials, and
spectroscopic signatures for the study of biological proton-coupled electron
transfer (PCET). Fluorinated 5HOI derivatives are converted to
F(n)-L-5-hydroxytryptophan (F(n)-5HOW) using evolved tryptophan synthases in
near quantitative yields. To enable incorporation into peptides using solid-
state approaches, a one-pot, two-step chemoenzymatic synthesis of fluorinated
FMOC-(9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl)-5HOW derivatives is being developed. As a
proof-of-concept, these new F(n)-5HOW derivatives are to be incorporated site-
specifically into model proteins using an orthogonal, tryptophanyl tRNA
synthetase/tRNA pair. This study seeks to test the impact of the protein
environment on the formal reduction potentials of these unnatural tryptophan
sidechains using square wave voltammetry and to establish model spectroscopic
signatures, characterized by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, of
their oxidized sidechains. Density-functional theory is being utilized to
quantify the electron density delocalization of F(n)-5HOW radicals formed
through PCET processes that provide a physical basis for the unique
spectroscopic properties observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.