* 2003712
* Rigidity Properties in Dynamics and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Ralf Spatzier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2024
* USD 571,000.00

Dynamical systems and ergodic theory investigate the evolution of physical,
biological or mathematical systems in time, such as turbulence in a fluid flow,
changing planetary systems or the evolution of diseases. Fundamental ideas and
concepts such as information, entropy, chaos and fractals have had a profound
impact on our understanding of the world. Dynamical systems and ergodic theory
have developed superb tools, and have a strong impact on the sciences and
engineering. Symbolic dynamics for example has been instrumental in developing
efficient and safe codes for computer science. Tools and ideas from smooth
dynamics are used as far afield as cell biology and meteorology. Geometry is a
highly developed, ancient yet superbly active field in mathematics. It studies
curves, surfaces and their higher dimensional analogues, their shapes, shortest
paths, and maps between such spaces. Surveying the land for his principality,
Gauss also developed the fundamental notions of geodesics and curvature, laying
the groundwork for modern differential geometry. It has close links with physics
and applied areas like computer vision. Geometry and dynamics are closely
connected. Indeed, important dynamical systems such as the geodesic flow come
from geometry, and vice versa one can use geometric tools to study dynamics. One
main goal of this project studies symmetries of dynamical systems, especially
when one system is unaffected by the changes brought on by the other. The quest
is to study these systems via unexpected symmetries. Important examples arise
from geometry when the space contains many flat subspaces. Finally group theory
gets introduced in both dynamics and geometry via the group of symmetries of a
geometry or dynamical situation. The principal investigator will continue
training a new generation of researchers and mathematicians, and students at all
levels in their mathematical endeavor. This project includes support for
research training opportunities for graduate students and summer research
experiences for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate rigidity phenomena in geometry and dynamics, especially actions of
higher rank abelian and semi-simple Lie groups and their lattices. The latter is
part of the Zimmer program. Particular emphasis will be put on hyperbolic
actions of such groups. As higher rank semisimple Lie groups and their lattices
contain higher rank abelian groups, the classification and rigidity problems for
the abelian and semi-simple cases are closely related, with abundant cross
fertilization. The goal is the classification of such actions. Closely related
are the study of automorphism groups of geometric structures. Investigations in
geometry will address higher rank Riemannian manifolds and their classification,
introducing novel methods. The dynamics of geodesic and frame flows will also be
studied, with investigations of discrete subgroups of Lie groups for rank
rigidity and measure properties. Besides establishing new results, the principal
investigator also strives to find and introduce novel methods for investigating
these problems which will lend themselves to applications in other
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.