* 2003796
* Expanding Mechanically Mediated Polymerization via Mechanistic Understanding
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Aaron Esser-Kahn, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Aaron P. Esser-Kahn of University of
Chicago is investigating the mechanism and reactivity of polymerization
reactions mediated by piezoelectric catalysis. Piezoelectric compounds are solid
materials, such as crystals, certain ceramics or even biological matter like
bone, which have the ability to generate electrical charge from applied
mechanical stress. In this work, piezoelectric particles composed of zinc and
oxygen are agitated with sound waves (mechanical stress) to build electric
charge. The charged particles are then used to speed up the formation of
polymers in which the chain-ends contain carbon-sulfur bonds. These bonds are
very unique because they enable reversible cross-linking of polymer chains
resulting in the formation of materials with self-modelling properties. In
addition to a mechanistic understanding of how piezoelectric particles speed up
the polymerization process, several studies are performed to determine their
surface composition and crystalline structure using a variety of sophisticated
X-ray experimental techniques. This research actively engages students across a
broad age range with a focus on high-school age children. The team is further
developing burgeoning high-school summer “Pathways” program that aims to
increase the number of STEM degree seeking college freshman.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on mechanistic and reactivity
studies of polymerization mediated by piezoelectric catalysis. Piezo-mediated
thiol-ene polymerization is extended to include new radical and metathesis
monomers, disulfide bond formation, and novel reactivity. Radical based
reactivity is expanded to include metathesis and ring-opening processes. In
parallel, the mechanism by which piezo-particles mediate polymerization activity
is explored. Combining these two approaches, the results of this research have
the potential to greatly expand both the knowledge of mechanically controlled
polymerization and the monomers and polymers accessible via this technique.
Beyond simply improving polymer properties, mechanically driven electron
ejection events could be used to harden solid materials through
reduction/oxidation processes mediated by embedded piezo particles while serving
as self-reporting strain and stress sensors. The potential to form new polymers
in demanding environments could also be possible using mechanically initiated
polymerization events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.