* 2003789
* Dynamic-covalent Interactions for Enhanced Stabilization of Kinetically-arrested Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Margarita Herrera-Alonso, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Margarita Herrera-Alonso at
Colorado State University is using dynamic-covalent interactions to enhance the
stability of nanoparticles generated from solution in the self-assembly of
polymers. Dynamic-covalent interactions refer to reversible chemical bond
forming/breaking during a chemical reaction. It offers “error-correction” of the
targeted chemical structures because the reactants are chosen in such a way that
chemical bonds during the reaction form in a predictable, precise and controlled
manner. This synthetic strategy allows for the preparation of very complex
molecules from discrete molecular building blocks. Applications of this
chemistry are found in numerous areas of biotechnology and medicine. Of
particular interest is the design of artificial polymers for targeted delivery
of drugs in a human body. In this research, large molecules with complex
architectures are prepared that have water-loving and water-hating segments.
These polymers also contain the chemical element boron that triggers dynamic-
covalent chemistry during self-assembly in solution. Educational impacts of this
work are focused on the incorporation of research results into graduate and
undergraduate courses and training of students at graduate and undergraduate
levels. Efforts to retain undergraduate underrepresented minorities are
undertaken through mentoring of student members of the Hispanic Association of
Colleges and Universities. Outreach activities center on recruiting activities
and summer research opportunities for undergraduates through The Colorado-
Wyoming Alliance for Minority Participation (CO-WY AMP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research centers around the study of dynamic-covalent
interactions to enhance the stability of kinetically-arrested nanoparticles
generated by the solution self-assembly of amphiphilic bottlebrushes. The first
objective of the project focuses on generating a library of block-like
bottlebrush copolymers exhibiting functional moieties susceptible to dynamic-
covalent (DC) interactions. Inspired by the role of boron as a stabilizer in
nature, the chemistry utilizes boronic acid-diol interactions for shell
stabilization. Complementary macromolecular crosslinkers are also prepared. In
the second objective, the kinetic features of self-assembly from block-like
bottlebrushes are examined in order to obtain insight regarding their assembly
mechanism, effect of processing conditions on nanoparticle properties, and
characteristic aggregation times. The encapsulation of a family of solutes
mediated by block-like bottlebrushes to understand fundamental differences of
the process and the resulting constructs with respect to systems based on linear
amphiphiles of similar chemical composition is additionally investigated.
Lastly, nanoparticle stabilization through shell-crosslinking via boronate ester
formation between block-like bottlebrushes and either small-molecule or
macromolecular crosslinkers is systematically evaluated. The reversible nature
of these interactions is harnessed to allow for controlled spatio/temporal
release under specific environmental triggers, including low pH, oxidative
environments and in the presence of competing cis-diols. The overall goal is to
achieve a better understanding of the effects of macromolecular architecture on
kinetically-arrested self-assemblies, and the uniqueness of bottlebrush-based
constructs with respect to their linear analogs. This research could provide
fundamental and technological insights regarding the dynamics of bottlebrush
self-assembly and stabilization strategies based on a thermodynamically-driven
dynamic-covalent interaction between boronic acids and cis-diol containing
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.