* 2003405
* Electron tunneling spectroscopy of the novel pairing state in the 1-1-5 heavy fermions and possible topological Kondo insulator YbB12
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2024
* Laura Greene, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 485,436.00

Non-technical Abstract: In this project, two important topics in condensed
matter physics are studied using techniques that explore properties of
electrons. First, transport of electricity without dissipation in a
superconducting state is a fundamental topic addressed here by investigating a
wide group of superconductors to determine the mechanism of superconductivity
unambiguously. Second, the other half of this project focuses on topological
insulators, a novel class of quantum matter harboring protected conducting
states at their surfaces. How this novel property emerges is not yet understood
when the interactions are strong. To tackle this unsolved problem, this project
applies tunneling spectroscopy to multiple candidate materials in different
forms and under hydrostatic pressure. Younger generation of scientists including
graduate and undergraduate students are actively involved in this project by
undertaking key experimental activities and trained to acquire professional
skills such as written and verbal dissemination of their work. Outreach to
underrepresented group is planned, as well as engagement in various activities
focusing on elevating general public’s literacy in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: This project involves two
forefront research topics in condensed matter physics: the pairing mechanism in
the 1-1-5 family of heavy-fermion superconductors and the interplay between
strong correlations and topology in correlated topological materials. Electron
tunneling spectroscopy is employed to reveal their key spectroscopic properties
that are essential for microscopic understanding of the underlying physics.
Despite the widely accepted pairing mechanism involving spin fluctuations in
heavy-fermion superconductors, key experimental signatures for the 1-1-5 family
of heavy fermions remain controversial/missing. The resultant spectroscopic
information is expected to lead to a deepened understanding of the interplay
between strong correlations and topology. Younger generation of scientists
including graduate and undergraduate students are actively involved in this
project by undertaking key experimental activities and trained for acquiring
professional skills such as written and verbal dissemination of their work. All
personnel involved in this project participate in outreach activities to elevate
general public’s literacy in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.