* 2003839
* D3SC: Collaborative Research: Overcoming Challenges in Classification Near the Limit of Determination
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Karl Booksh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences,
Professors Karl Booksh and Jocelyn Alcantara-Garcia at the University of
Delaware, and Professor Barry Lavine at Oklahoma State University, are
collaborating to improve the ability of hand-held chemical sensors for rapid
sample classification. The problem is important, for example, for field analysis
related to chemical forensics and art conservation, when the observed
differences between two or more classes of interest are small compared to the
natural variation among samples or among replicate measurements on a single
sample. The team is developing advanced statistical and mathematical tools to
enable quantitative determination of the statistical confidence with which the
reliability of inferences can be assessed. The project entails combining
information from two or more disparate sensors in order improve overall
performance. Graduate and undergraduate students participating in this
interdisciplinary research gain skills in advanced data analysis. These skills
are in very high demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative
effort aimed at investigating fundamental issues important to chemical modeling
in modern measurement science: (1) improving classification model efficiency
through variable selection, (2) assigning robust confidence levels to
classifications that account for non-normal distributions of errors and class
memberships, (3) increasing reliability of classification models when
information from different sensors is available. The primary measurement tools
are hand-held Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) and X-Ray Fluorescence
(XRF) data. This project probes the connections among variable selection, data
fusion, optimization of instrumental parameters, and the performance of
classification models. Targets include real-world classification applications
where the class distribution and/or the measurement errors are not normally
distributed. Nested bootstraps and genetic algorithms are being employed to
solve this multilayered optimization problem. The developed methods will be
modified as needed for PLS-DA, ANN-, and KNN-driven classifications. Resulting
data sets will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.