* 2003927
* Nanoscale Visualization and Understanding of Atmospheric Aerosol Dissolution Kinetics in Aqueous Organic Droplets
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Akua Asa-Awuku, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 589,280.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
funds this research led by Professors Akua Asa-Awuku and Taylor Woehl. The
project studies the interactions between organic vapors in the atmosphere and
atmospheric particles (also known as aerosols). Of particular interest is the
ability of these aerosols to affect cloud formation, which in turn is important
for the Earth's climate. Atmospheric particles are complex mixtures of water-
soluble and insoluble compounds. Chemists want to determine the ability of
aerosols to act as effective cloud condensation nuclei (CCN), but chemical and
physical diversity results in complicated interactions between aerosols and
clouds. Models often assume that water-insoluble organic aerosols cannot act as
CCN. The processes by which aerosols take up water and form droplets are not
fully known. It is assumed that partially soluble particles must first dissolve
and enter the water phase before readily adding more water. However, this
phenomenon has not been directly seen. The project directly visualizes the
processes that occur during CCN activation of water-insoluble aerosols on the
nanometer scale. From these observations, the team derives a new mechanistic
understanding of CCN behavior of this important class of aerosols. The project
provides opportunities for engaging a diverse STEM workforce. Both Professor
Asa-Awuku and Professor Wohl mentor K-12 students and engage with existing STEM
outreach programs at the University of Maryland College
Park.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the impact of organic vapors
on the CCN activity of water-insoluble aerosols and the nanoscale dynamic
processes that occur during droplet condensation. The project directly
visualizes nanoscale dynamic processes that occur during CCN activation. These
observations are used to derive new mechanistic understanding of the CCN
behavior of this important class of aerosols. The team utilizes a novel single
particle technique, liquid cell transmission electron microscopy, to visualize
particle dissolution kinetics and droplet growth kinetics in real time with
nanometer scale spatial resolution. The electron microscopy data are directly
correlated with quantitative measurements of CCN activation using controlled
aerosol characterization techniques. Together these data are expected to reveal
the series of chemical and physical processes occurring during CCN activation of
water insoluble aerosols. These insights will contribute to a broader
theoretical framework for cloud-aerosol interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.