* 2003198
* MLWiNS: Democratizing AI through Multi-Hop Federated Learning Over-the-Air
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Chen Chen, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 06/30/2024
* USD 446,667.00

Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a key technology for enabling next-
generation privacy-preserving AI at-scale, where a large number of edge devices,
e.g., mobile phones, collaboratively learn a shared global model while keeping
their data locally to prevent privacy leakage. Enabling FL over wireless multi-
hop networks, such as wireless community mesh networks and wireless Internet
over satellite constellations, not only can augment AI experiences for urban
mobile users, but also can democratize AI and make it accessible in a low-cost
manner to everyone, including people in low-income communities, rural areas,
under-developed regions, and disaster areas. The overall objective of this
project is to develop a novel wireless multi-hop FL system with guaranteed
stability, high accuracy and fast convergence speed. This project is expected to
advance the design of distributed deep learning (DL) systems, to promote the
understanding of the strong synergy between distributed computing and
distributed networking, and to bridge the gap between the theoretical
foundations of distributed DL and its real-life applications. The project will
also provide unique interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students through both research work and related courses that the
PIs will develop and offer. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to use
concepts of federated learning and multi-agent reinforcement learning to provide
optimal solutions for training DL models over wireless multi-hop networks that
have communication constraints due to noisy and interference-rich wireless
links. The main thrusts include: 1) developing a novel hierarchical FL system
architecture with layered federated computation, semi-asynchronous model
aggregation, and regularized objective function to significantly improve system
scalability, communication efficiency, and stability; 2) fine-tuning the FL
system via multi-agent reinforcement learning to maximize the FL accuracy with
the minimum convergence time under the computing constraints of edge devices; 3)
finding high-gain computation-light robust federated computing strategies for
resource-constraint edge devices, including efficient DL model design and
resource-aware model adaptation; and 4) developing an open-source wireless FL
framework (OpenWFL) for fast prototyping, deploying, and evaluating the proposed
FL algorithms in both an emulator and physical
testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.