* 2003725
* Elements: FLARE infrastructure for reproducible active learning of Bayesian force fields for ex-machina exascale molecular dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Boris Kozinsky, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2023
* USD 379,050.00

Much needed progress in technologies for energy storage and conversion relies on
our ability to design and understand next-generation key functional materials at
the core of these systems. The fundamental physical effects that govern the
functions of batteries, catalysts and fuel cells originate at the atomic level.
Molecular dynamics simulations are indispensable tools with broad applicability
for materials research due to their ability to probe microscopic details of
atomic motion and predict thermodynamics, reaction kinetics and ionic
diffusivities of many materials. Machine learning approaches are transforming
how simulations of complex materials are performed; hence software tools are
needed to make this transition faster and smoother. Our main goal is to advance
machine learning methods and create software for constructing accurate fast
simulation models that contain principled uncertainty of their predictions,
which is a highly desirable target in many data science areas beyond atomistic
modeling. Principled uncertainty quantification is especially critical for
prediction of non-equilibrium dynamics, where rare important events, such as the
breaking of bonds or atomic migration, determine the materialâ€™s performance but
involve atomic configurations that are unlikely to be in a naive unbiased
training set. Tools that we aim to develop will accelerate and automate
computational research efforts in the fields of catalysis, batteries, thermal
coatings, soft structural and functional materials, and actuators, to name a
few.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently available tools for machine learning based
force fields are based on non-parametric methods that only provide estimates
without uncertainties, require large amounts of training data, and are slow to
evaluate for large numbers of atoms of different species. Our goal is to develop
community software infrastructure to enable a new paradigm of simulating non-
equilibrium dynamics of complex materials, where ML models are automatically
trained and dramatically accelerate ab-initio simulations on-the-fly, preserving
exact physical symmetries with minimal accuracy loss. We will create and freely
disseminate FLARE (Fast Learning of Atomistic Rare Events), a parallelized
database-driven automation framework tightly coupling ML model training with
high-fidelity DFT computations, using rigorous model uncertainty to guide data
acquisition via closed-loop active learning. Specially designed many-body multi-
species kernels and tools for systematic hyperparameter optimization will allow
the models to be mapped to fast tabulated Bayesian force fields, implemented in
the widely used MD software aimed at exascale computing performance. The result
will be the ability to perform MD simulations of materials systems of millions
of atoms at near-DFT accuracy and with predictive uncertainty. The unique
advantages of the proposed infrastructure are (1) the automated training
requiring minimal amounts of DFT data, (2) predictions containing principled
Bayesian uncertainty, (3) scalable performance of at least 5 orders of magnitude
faster than ab-initio molecular dynamics, and (4) ability to record full
provenance and reproducibility information of training and prediction
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research
and the Division of Chemistry within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental
and Transport Systems within the NSF Directorate of
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.