* 2003627
* Metal Tetrapyrrole Biosynthesis: Inserting the Correct Metal
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Matthew Liptak, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Matthew Liptak at the University of Vermont to
investigate the biosynthesis of metal tetrapyrroles. Metal tetrapyrroles are
small molecules that have essential functions throughout biological systems. For
example, an iron tetrapyrrole (heme) is required for oxygen transport by red
blood cells. A cobalt tetrapyrrole (vitamin B12) is required for recycling of
folate in humans; folate is one of the B vitamins necessary for the production
of DNA and other genetic material and for cell division. A nickel tetrapyrrole
(cofactor F430) is required for methanogenesis by bacteria in the deep sea;
methanogenesis is the last step in the degradation of biomass by these bacteria.
As seen in these examples, a different specific metal is required for different
biological processes, but the mechanism(s) by which biology selects the correct
metal for each type of process is/are unknown. Dr. Liptakâ€™s research program
seeks to answer this fundamental question. It also provides a starting point for
the production of non-natural metal tetrapyrroles that can be employed for next-
generation, energy applications. This project is integrated with an outreach
program that provides local high school students the opportunity to do research
in the Liptak laboratory during the summer. A second integrated outreach program
in collaboration with a local museum focuses on the development of interactive
activities related to the broader impact of metal tetrapyrrole biosynthesis on
nutrition and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims
to advance molecular-level understanding of metal tetrapyrrole biosynthesis.
Metal tetrapyrroles are biosynthesized by long, multi-step pathways that include
a chelatase enzyme responsible for metal insertion. Surprisingly, the means by
which chelatases select the correct metal and insert this metal into the growing
tetrapyrrole ligand is unknown. Three competing hypotheses have emerged in the
literature: metal specificity driven by metal affinity, metal specificity driven
by tetrapyrrole distortion, and metal specificity arising from product
inhibition. Dr. Liptak and his team will use new spectroscopic data to
distinguish among these proposed mechanisms. For example, optical spectroscopies
are used to measure the metal affinities of different chelatases, UV/vis
absorption and Raman spectroscopies are employed to measure tetrapyrrole
distortions induced by different enzymes, and activity assays are utilized to
determine whether the reactions are inhibited by the product. Ultimately, the
project aims to reveal how life selectively inserts iron into heme, cobalt into
B12, and nickel into F430.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.