* 2003208
* Chemical Tools to Probe the Activation of Bacterial Signaling
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Erin Carlson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 04/30/2024
* USD 243,000.00

Bacteria can sense and respond to the world around them. For example, a microbe
in a hostile environment activates mechanisms of defense. However, it is not
well understood how bacteria are able to differentiate between the many chemical
stimuli that they encounter and respond accordingly. Professors Carlson and
Goodpaster of the University of Minnesota uses chemical synthesis and
biochemical methods to gain an understanding of the response pathways that
bacteria use and how their responses are customized to a variety of
environmental conditions, such as high temperature, low nutrients, or the
presence of chemical compounds, such as antibiotics. This knowledge ultimately
enables us to control the behaviors of bacteria to our advantage, including for
the production of biofuels or natural products that can be used as drugs. A
collection of educational activities introduces students, especially girls from
low socioeconomic groups and diverse backgrounds, to the roles that microbes
play in our lives. These efforts include interactions with the same cohort of
girls and young women over multiple years, encouraging them to see themselves as
scientists in their future careers. This program also provides opportunities for
graduate students to mentor and teach students starting from age six and
generates materials that are broadly disseminated to enable others to teach
young students about bacteria and their many functions on our lives, both bad
and good. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program is funding Professors Carlson and Goodpaster at the
University of Minnesota to study how microbes translate the complex environment
in which they live into the actions required to survive and thrive. Essential to
this capability are the two-component system (TCSs), which consist of a
histidine kinase and response regulator protein pair. A single organism
possesses tens to hundreds of individual TCSs, each reacting with high
sensitivity and selectivity to one or a small number of chemical signals. Each
chemical message is converted into a defined bacterial action, ranging from
growth, motility, biosynthesis of natural products, and pathogenesis. Although
numerous individual TCSs have been studied, current methodologies do not enable
global assessment of the conditions under which many of them are induced,
characterization of the relationship between TCS signal transduction and
phenotypic results, or the regulation of response between multiple TCSs. A
deeper understanding of TCS-mediated signaling is achieved by: 1) Synthesis and
evaluation of molecules to develop an understanding of how to internalize
phosphate-containing molecules into bacteria, and 2) Develop chemical proteomics
methodologies to pair TCSs with their stimulating molecule(s) and to globally
map HK activation by environmental stressors in live cells. The overarching goal
is to define the suite of TCSs that are required for a generic stress response
and those that are stimulus-specific. This information promotes a deeper
understanding of how bacteria are able to utilize their relatively limited
genome to orchestrate response to nearly limitless stimuli. This goal is aligned
with one of the NSF 10 Big Ideas, Understanding the Rules of Life. A set of
rules that predict an organism's observable characteristics and its phenotype,
as it relates to the roles of the TCSs, is elucidated. These research goals are
complemented with educational and outreach activities, focused on girls from low
socioeconomic groups and diverse backgrounds, that introduce them to the roles
that microbes play in our everyday lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.