* 2003409
* Collaborative Research: Accessing the Near Infrared Transparency Window for Triggered Delivery with Singlet Oxygen-Degradable Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Vincent Rotello, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nano-sized materials that disassemble on demand
can release therapeutic agents to sites where they are most needed. Light is an
especially promising tool for triggering this on-demand carrier disintegration:
it can pass through many barriers, be directed to precise locations, and be
switched on and off easily. Most current biologically relevant technologies use
high energy ultraviolet (UV) and visible light that do not penetrate tissue
significantly. The research groups of Professor Samuel Thomas at Tufts
University and Professor Vincent Rotello at the University of Massachusetts
Amherst are working to overcome this limitation in therapeutic delivery by
designing, developing, and understanding the ability of nano-sized materials to
disintegrate upon exposure to low energy near-infrared (NIR) light. NIR light
penetrates tissue to far greater depths than UV or visible light, providing
access to new biological applications. They will gain understanding into how
chemical design influences nanomaterial response to NIR light, and these
materials will be further elaborated to target and deliver therapeutics to both
cancer cells and bacterial biofilms. This research has the potential to benefit
society through creation of new nanomaterials that harness NIR light to
selectively deliver drugs and mitigate harmful side effects. Beyond the hands-on
interdisciplinary training that this research provides to more graduate
students, this project also provides targeted support for disadvantaged high
school students to undertake research through the Tufts Summer Research
Experience, thereby broadening participation in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With support from
the Biomaterials Program of the NSF Division of Materials Research, the goal of
this research is to establish the ability of micelles in vitro to be degraded by
singlet oxygen prepared in situ using NIR light. The overall project goal is to
understand how chemical structures and polymer assemblies influence key
individual chemical and physical material characteristics relevant to drug
delivery. The first phase of this project will be to prepare and characterize
polymers and micelles with a range of singlet oxygen-cleavable linkers,
reactivities, and polymer topologies. The second phase of this project will be
to understand how chemical structure and nanomaterial composition determines
loading of cargo, stability in serum, photodegradation, and triggered release.
The third stage of this project will evaluate the in vitro cytotoxicity and
anti-bacterial activity of cargo-loaded NIR-degradable micelles. Further
extension of this understanding of fundamental structure-property relationships
will include micelles with targeting groups on their surfaces such as the RGD
motif for cancer cells and quaternary ammonium cations for bacterial biofilms.
Overall, this work has the potential to improve the efficacy of light-responsive
drug-delivery systems, and in a broader context, advance the field of stimuli-
responsive biomaterials by correlating chemical structures and their assemblies
with loading, release, and in vitro activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.