* 2003109
* Development of Next-Generation Hyperpolarization Methods for Chemical Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Warren Warren, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,112,700.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical
Experimental Physics Program in the Division of Physics, Professor Warren Warren
and his group at Duke University are working to expand the utility and
accessibility of “hyperpolarized” nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.
NMR is a powerful tool for chemists; it is useful for determining molecular
structure and for monitoring the progress of chemical reactions. NMR's clinical
cousin, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an important tool for producing
images of soft tissues in the body. However, both methods usually suffer from
low sensitivity - meaning that they cannot detect small amounts of sample or low
concentrations. "Hyperpolarization" methods can increase NMR signals by a factor
of 1000 or more, but are usually technically challenging and extremely
expensive. The Warren group is exploring the fundamental chemistry and physics
behind new strategies with prospects of providing routine hyperpolarization as a
simple and cost-effective add-on to any NMR spectrometer. The team is also
providing research and training opportunities in these critical technologies for
members of underrepresented groups, and providing substantial K-12 science
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Warren group studies the production, quantum
statistical mechanics, and characterization of hyperpolarized, long-lived
nuclear spin states in NMR and MRI. They seek to drastically improve the
generality, fractional polarization, and absolute polarization levels of nuclei
such as 15N, 13C and 19F from parahydrogen gas (p-H2) in solution, without
chemical reaction, thereby enabling applications ranging from quantifying
rotational-state effects on reactivity in solution to dark matter detection. The
ability to make and store large quantities of p-H2 should enable creation of
massively large (kg size) continuously hyperpolarized targets which can serve as
ultrasensitive magnetometers (e.g. for dark matter detection) or can drastically
reduce the size of the magnets needed for clinical MRI. Applicability can also
be expanded by the ability to make p-H2 at the L-atm/hour level using a simple,
inexpensive laboratory apparatus. While ultra-low-field NMR is not new, this
work aims to bring it into the mainstream, while also enabling better high-field
experiments. The aim is to reduce or eliminate the cost and complexity barriers
to implementation of hyperpolarization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.