* 2003385
* Conference: 2020 Pacific Northwest Summer Crystallographic Institute; Whitworth University; July 15-18, 2020
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Kraig Wheeler, Whitworth University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2023
* USD 5,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Single crystal X-ray crystallography is a
central method for determining the detailed structures of solid materials. Such
structures are important in understanding structure-property relationships in a
wide variety of materials, including those used in applications such as solar
cells and batteries. This method is also widely used in establishing the
structures of molecules used as pharmaceutical agents. Despite its importance,
this method is frequently not taught in undergraduate curricula. The primary
goal of the 2020 Pacific Northwest Summer Crystallographic Institute to be held
at Whitworth University is to develop the expertise of 20-25 undergraduate
students and their faculty mentors in single-crystal X-ray crystallographic
techniques. Workshop attendees will be exposed to a full range of
crystallographic topics from crystal growth to the preparation of data for
publication and will do hands-on sample preparation and data collection. In
addition, the pedagogical approach of this project helps to i) increase
collaboration among institutions located in the Pacific Northwest and ii)
develop the teaching and research capacity in the structural sciences at the
participants' home institutions. This award, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, defrays
participant costs for students and their mentors to attend the workshop. The
diversity of the workshop will be further enhanced by supporting the
participation of junior scholars and faculty from underrepresented and
marginalized groups in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Research demands on faculty at primarily undergraduate
institutions (PUIs) are increasing, requiring reliable, modern instrumentation
to advance research agendas and improve undergraduate education. Given the cost
and required expertise to manage single-crystal X-ray diffraction equipment, it
is not surprising that structural studies via crystallographic techniques is
often absent at PUIs. The pedagogical objective of this project is to provide
participants with formal and hands-on training in the practical aspects of
crystallography with emphasis placed on increasing research and teaching
capacity. This 2020 Pacific Northwest Summer Crystallographic Institute to be
held at Whitworth University will facilitate access to a broad user base of U.S.
scientists that will encourage collaboration on state-of-the-art
instrumentation. This award, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, will provide
support to defray the registration and travel costs for workshop participants --
20-25 undergraduate students and their faculty mentors. Faculty participants
will find that easy access to structural data enhances the innovation and
outcomes of their current research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.