* 2003513
* Chemical Tools for Understanding Histidine Phosphatase Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Amy Barrios, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 405,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Amy Barrios at the University of Utah to study the newly
discovered protein histidine phosphatase family of enzymes. Communication
between and within cells is critical in controlling all aspects of cellular
activity, including cell growth, cell division, and cell death. One common way
that cells communicate signals is by chemically changing proteins by adding or
removing a phosphate group. The Barrios research group develops chemical tools
that can be used to study the enzymes responsible for removing phosphate groups
from proteins, providing insights into cellular mechanisms of communication.
This project focuses on the newly discovered family of histidine phosphatase
enzymes. The chemical tools being developed in this project have the potential
to provide valuable insight into the roles played by these enzymes in cellular
signaling and thus, provide fundamental insights into this poorly studied, but
critically important, mode of cellular signaling. Key to the success of the
project is the inclusion of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers from diverse backgrounds with the goal of broadening participation
in research. In addition, Dr. Barrios is committed to mentoring junior
scientists and is working to create a university-wide framework to provide
support and career development opportunities for postdoctoral researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reversible protein phosphorylation is widely used in
biology to regulate protein-protein interactions and cellular signaling
pathways. While phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine in mammalian
cells is widely recognized as critical, histidine phosphorylation is much less
well understood. Recently, three mammalian histidine phosphatases have been
discovered. These enzymes play critical roles in regulating ion channels, T-cell
receptor signaling, and G-protein coupled receptor signaling, with additional,
yet-undiscovered roles likely. Researchers in the Barrios lab are developing
chemical probes that will facilitate monitoring the activity of individual
histidine phosphatases both in vitro and in cells. Specifically, the Barrios lab
is developing selective substrates and inhibitors of histidine phosphatase
activity that can be used to address key questions about histidine phosphatase
biology. This approach can readily be applied to almost any member of the
histidine phosphatase family of enzymes. The research objectives are integrated
with work aimed at broadening participation in science by engaging
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers from diverse backgrounds
and with efforts to enhance the framework for postdoctoral training through the
development of programs that support early-career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.