* 2003557
* RUI: Exploring the Structural Basis of Dynein Regulation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Nikolaus Loening, Lewis and Clark College
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 297,000.00

Motor proteins serve a number of functions in the cell, including helping
transport biological molecules (cargo) to where they belong. One such motor
protein, dynein, is important for moving cargo from the periphery of cells
toward the center. In human cells, dynein needs to partner with another protein
(dynactin) in order to move cargo across long distances, such as along nerve
cells. The control or regulation of how these two proteins interact determines
what, when, and where cargo are transported in a cell. With this award, the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr.
Nikolaus Loening from Lewis &amp; Clark College to determine how the
interactions between these two proteins are regulated by changes in the
structure of dynein. Dr. Loening focuses on dynein intermediate chain, a part of
the motor protein that initiates binding with dynactin, and studies how
variations in its sequence and the addition of phosphate chemical groups change
its binding behavior. The intermediate chain is difficult to study because it
does not normally adopt a fixed and rigid shape; it is intrinsically disordered.
Consequently, a variety of biophysical techniques are used to study the effects
of these structural variations on the intermediate chainâ€™s shape and its
interactions with dynactin. This project provides undergraduate and high school
students with opportunities to participate directly in this research. In
addition, some parts of this research are incorporated into laboratory and
special topics classes at Lewis &amp; Clark College, thereby broadening
participation in this project to include a larger number of undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project characterizes the
structural properties of a little-studied isoform of the dynein intermediate
chain (IC) to better localize the interaction between IC and its binding
partners. The objective of this project is to develop a structural model for how
an intrinsically disordered region of IC binds with the p150Glued subunit of
dynactin. Results from these studies lead to insights into how this interaction
is regulated by the isoform type or phosphorylation state of dynein. The dynamic
nature of this system makes it difficult to study by cryo-electron microscopy or
X-ray crystallography. In addition, the complex has characteristics that make it
unfavorable for study by conventional NMR methods. This project uses a
combination of mutagenesis to stabilize p150Glued combined with better
localization of the binding site to allow the development of smaller, more
tractable constructs that are providing high-resolution structural information.
This work helps to develop an understanding for how this system is regulated,
which further complements studies on the less dynamic regions of the dynein
complex. In the course of this research, new methods for protein NMR
spectroscopy are developed to benefit not only researchers studying dynein and
intrinsically disordered proteins, but the protein NMR community at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.