* 2003336
* Collaborative Research:  Diarylethene-based Crystalline Materials: Design and Function
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Jeffrey Rack, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,226.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In this project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, Associate
Professor Jason Benedict of the University at Buffalo, The State University of
New York and Professor Jeffrey Rack of the University of New Mexico are
developing crystalline porous materials that are activated by UV light. These
molecular materials comprise photo-active chemical groups that change shape when
exposed to light. The light-driven molecular transformations cause the pores
(holes) and channels in the crystals to change shape and dimension. This leads
to the development of smart materials capable of selectively absorbing or
releasing guest molecules, but only when exposed to the proper wavelength of
light. Experiments using ultrafast pulses of light and/or X-rays reveal critical
insights into the fundamental photochemistry that occurs in these novel
materials. The research establishes much needed design principles to understand
and enable the rational design of next-generation photo-responsive materials.
The educational projects include the continuation of the U.S. Crystal Growing
Competition, and a nation-wide crystal growing competition, that brings concepts
of crystals and crystal growth into K-12 classrooms and home schools throughout
the country by providing participants a fun and exciting hands-on STEM-based
contest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Integrating the
photo-responsive properties of diarylethenes into hybrid crystalline systems
transforms these traditionally passive materials into active materials that
change their chemical or electronic properties in response to light stimulus.
The PIs' innovative approach - using ring-closed diarylethene building units -
ensures the reliable and predictable synthesis of photo-responsive crystalline
materials. Given the importance of extending longevity in sustainable materials
development, the proposed research also includes an effort to identify and
understand the root causes of fatigue in these systems. The photochemical
reactions in these materials, both desired and undesired, are precisely
monitored through advanced spectroscopic and in situ X-ray diffraction methods.
These experiments provide a crucial link between the molecular photochemistry
and the photophysics of the proposed hybrid crystalline solids. It is
anticipated that the design principles and experimental techniques developed
through this collaborative research program can be extended to other
photochromic systems. The outreach efforts bring concepts of crystal growth
classrooms across the country through the continued growth of the US Crystal
Growing Competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.