* 2003464
* Greenland Ice Sheet dynamic response to inland expansion of a hydrologically-active ice-sheet bed
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Meredith Nettles, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 722,623.00

The Greenland Ice Sheet’s contribution to sea-level rise is accelerating, partly
due to the acceleration of ice-sheet flow. Melt from the ice-sheet surface can
reach the base of the ice and change ice flow, but this effect is complex and
poorly understood. As the climate warms and the area of the ice surface
undergoing surface melting expands inland, important questions include whether a
larger area of the ice-sheet bed will receive injections of meltwater, and
whether this will lead to faster flow. This 3-year project will make
measurements of ice-sheet velocity and deformation along a transect of
supraglacial lakes and moulins, which provide surface-to-bed meltwater pathways,
on the Greenland Ice Sheet. These on-ice measurements will allow improved
understanding of the processes controlling water access to the ice-sheet bed in
regions of new supraglacial lake formation, with a focus on the process of
hydro-fracture (water-driven fracture). The project will support an educational
partnership between Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory scientists and the New York
City Department of Education to develop and implement a series of classroom
sessions focused on geophysics applied to the Greenland Ice Sheet and New York
City environments. This project will train one graduate student and support a
postdoctoral scientist and an early career scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current inland migration of surface melt is unprecedented in the observational
era. A fundamental challenge in predicting the ice sheet’s dynamic flow response
to the injection of surface meltwater at the ice-sheet bed is quantifying
stresses in areas of nascent supraglacial lake formation in the mid- to upper-
ablation zone of the ice sheet. In this project, Global Positioning System (GPS)
and autonomous phase-sensitive radar units will be deployed over a 16-month
period to measure ice-sheet surface velocity, surface and englacial strain, and
stress transients around supraglacial lakes and moulins in the mid- to upper-
ablation zone. These field data will be used in conjunction with geophysical
inverse modeling techniques to compute surface and englacial stress and
deformation patterns and to quantify the processes controlling water access to
the ice-sheet bed. A major goal of the research is to address fundamental
questions that will move us towards being able to describe the dynamic impact of
surface-to-bed meltwater transit in prognostic ice-sheet models for both the
Greenland Ice Sheet and Antarctic Ice Sheet. Quantifying the stresses necessary
to initiate hydro-fracture or moulin formation over a range of ice thicknesses
and viscous strain rates allows for the extension of these findings to thousands
of existing and forthcoming lakes on grounded regions of these ice sheets.
Moreover, combining observations of englacial strain and surface deformation has
the potential to transform our understanding of ice-sheet deformation, by
allowing an empirical test of the assumption that an elastic model is
appropriate for inverting observations of surface deformation of glacial ice on
short timescales. Answering the question of whether, and when, the Greenland Ice
Sheet interior will respond dynamically to surface melt is vital for predicting
sea-level rise. The engagement of school students and doctoral and postdoctoral
trainees will broaden participation in the Earth Sciences and help train the
next generation of interdisciplinary geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.