* 2003246
* GOALI: CDS&amp;E: Computationally-Guided Development of Chromatographic Phases with Improved Retention Characteristics and of Sustainable Mobile Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Stephanie Schuster, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,648.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging program, and co-funding
from the Interfacial Engineering program, Professor Siepmann and his group at
the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities together with collaborators Mark Schure
at Kroungold Analytical and Stephanie Schuster at Advanced Materials Technology
are investigating processes used to separate the components of chemical mixtures
and enable their analysis. Specifically, they are using advanced simulations to
obtain a molecular-level understanding of chromatographic separation processes.
“Separation science plays a critical role in maintaining our standard of living
and quality of life,” as recently emphasized by the National Academies in a
report entitled "A Research Agenda for Transforming Separation Science."
Chromatography is an important approach to separations that exploits differences
in the interactions of various chemicals with particles packed into a tube (a
chromatographic column). Small differences in these interactions get magnified
as the mixture passes through the chromatographic column enabling one compound
to move more quickly through the column than another and thus, separate. This
university-industry team is working to improve understanding of how
modifications of the particle surfaces and the use of environmentally benign
solvents impact the separation, thereby enabling improved chemical separation
systems. This partnership is advancing the education and training of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students, with special efforts made to recruit
students from traditionally underrepresented groups in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics. This effort has relevance to advanced manufacturing
as separations is one of the most expensive and time-consuming aspects of the
production of industrial scale chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying
principles of liquid and supercritical fluid chromatography are inherently
complex, being dictated by the interplay of the sample with the stationary phase
(porous solid substrate and bonded ligands) and the mobile phase (often a
mixture of solvents). The Siepmann group and Kroungold Analytical are using
Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations with enhanced-sampling algorithms
and transferable molecular-mechanics force fields to model and characterize
interactions in hydrophilic stationary phases including zwitterionic phases;
novel hydrophobic stationary phases with limited flexibility and wettability
tuned by the addition of hydrophilic compounds; and supercritical carbon dioxide
and hot, compressed water mobile phases. The team is also utilizing coarse-
grained models to investigate retention of block copolymers in superficially
porous particles. Advanced Materials Technology is leading an effort to carry
out synergistic chromatographic measurements. The development of both stationary
phases with improved retention characteristics and sustainable mobile phases is
being advanced through the molecular-level insights derived from this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.