* 2003889
* Molecular rotors for studying transition state stabilization by non-covalent interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Ken Shimizu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2024
* USD 447,500.00

Professor Ken D. Shimizu of the University of South Carolina is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to investigate the role of non-bonding interactions in the
stabilization of the transition state between reactants and products. Catalysts
are frequently used to speed up chemical reactions and make them more selective
for the desired product. A key challenge in catalysis development is enhancing
the ability of catalysts to bring together molecules into crowded reactive
structures know as transitions states. Professor Shimizu and his students are
constructing molecular machines (rotors) that assist in the fundamental
understanding and optimization of catalyst reactivity. The molecular rotors are
designed to assess factors that simplify the formation of these crowded reactive
structures via changes in the speed of their rotation. Thus, the molecular
rotors provide a simple and systemic way to study and improve catalyst design.
The development of new and improved catalysts enables the efficient production
of new chemicals, polymers, fuels, and pharmaceuticals. Graduate and
undergraduate students are trained in research methods, in particular women
chemists through a collaboration with faculty and students at a local womenâ€™s
college. A graduate course is developed to provide students with fundamental
skills, such as how to present seminars, time and research management
strategies, and how to write research publications and proposals. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The ability of non-covalent interactions to stabilize transition
states is measured using a series of molecular rotors. The rotors form non-
covalent interactions in their planar transition states. The stabilizing effects
of the non-covalent interactions can be measured from the increase in speed of
the molecular rotors. The versatility and modularity of the rotor framework
enables the study of a wide range of non-covalent interactions including
hydrogen bonds, cation-pi, anion-pi, n-pi*, chalcogen-chalcogen, CH-pi, arene-
arene, OH-pi, and metal-pi interactions. The transition state effects are easily
and accurately assessed by measuring the rotational barriers using dynamic NMR
spectroscopy. Finally, the rigid framework limits the degrees of freedom in the
ground and transition states enabling accurate modeling and simulation using
standard DFT methods, which provide computational-corroboration of the
experimentally measured barriers, transition state structures, and insights into
the origins of the stabilizing effects. The project broadly impacts the
development of new strategies to improve synthetic catalysts and provides
insights into the large rate accelerations in enzymatic systems. In addition,
the development of a new strategy for studying and interrogating transition
state energies using molecular rotors provides chemists with new tools for
fundamental kinetic studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.