* 2003680
* Developing Learning Environments that Support Molecular-level Sensemaking
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Ryan Stowe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,365,046.00

This project will investigate how high school students can be supported in
developing, organizing and using knowledge of atomic/molecular behavior to make
sense of phenomena such as phase changes, atomic emmision spectra and
dissolution. Prior research has shown that many students are unable to construct
representations of simple molecular structures. Many fail to make the important
connection between these representations and macroscopic properties of the
material. In addition, students are often unable to decode the information
contained in such representations. A pilot study indicated that adapting
college-level, evidence-based conceptual progressions for use in high school has
the potential to aid students in connecting molecular-level structure to
measurable properties. &lt;br/&gt;This project will study whether an innovative
college level curriculum, "Chemistry, Life, the Universe and Everything"(CLUE)
can be co-modified by teachers, chemists and researchers to help students master
these difficult concepts and connections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four
research questions: 1) How should opportunities be designed to help students
make molecular level sense of phenomena and design solutions to problems?; 2)
What evidenced-based,scaffollded core idea sequences support high school
students in making sense of phenomena in terms of atomic/molecular behavior; 3)
What changes do teachers make to the materials?; and 4) What factors motivate
teachers to make these changes? Several methods will be used to assess student
learning. The project will use OrganicPad, a tablet-PC program that can
recognize, record, and grade student free-form naturalistic structure drawings
and a validated survey that asks students to identify the kinds of information
they believe can be deduced from electron dot diagrams. In addition, the
researchers will collect data using learning observation protocol that will
describe what the student and instructor do. For the teacher, the protocol will
focus on the "what" of teaching: lecturing, follow-up/feedback on questions,
listening to and answering students questions. For the students, the protocol
will focus on activities such as listening, discussing with other students,
working in groups, class discussions, presentations and tests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.