* 2003962
* 2D Peptide and Protein Crystal Engineering for Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Vincent Conticello, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 466,940.00

Non-technical Summary: Two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials (nanosheets) have
potential advantages for the construction of devices of technological
importance, such as chemical sensors, diagnostics, selectively permeable
membranes, and catalytic and electronic scaffolds. However, the limited methods
to control growth and rationally modify the resultant structures of these
materials represents a significant impediment to progress in this field.
Peptides and proteins are attractive candidates for the construction of these
types of 2D materials since the control of sequence potentially permits the
control of structure and function across length scales. One complicating factor
is that proteins commonly display complex folding pathways, which can often
result in limited control over the structure of the final material. An approach
is proposed in which structural information from the Protein Data Bank (PDB), a
vast library of freely available high-resolution protein structures, will be
employed as the starting point to create novel classes of protein-based 2D
materials. Layered protein structures will be identified in the PDB, in which
close contacts are observed within the layer and long contacts are observed
between layers. Computational and rational design methods will be used to
strengthen interaction within a layer and further weaken or abrogate
interactions between layers. Using this approach, one need not explicitly design
the structure from first principles, but can instead create nanosheets from
proteins that have a demonstrated propensity to form 2D layers. Several classes
of materials targets will be investigated that would be useful from the
perspective of potential applications in devices, including selectively
permeable membranes and polar 2D crystals. These initial studies will validate
the computational design approach and provide generally applicable methods to
access novel classes of structurally defined 2D materials. Students involved in
this project will gain valuable experience in cross-cutting research that
enables a vertical consolidation of skill sets, including computational design,
synthesis, and advanced methods of high-resolution structural characterization,
that will be implemented for the design and fabrication of functional 2D
nanomaterials. In addition, material related to the proposed research will be
presented as content to illustrate concepts and learning objectives in a newly
developed introductory undergraduate lecture course and laboratory experience on
macromolecular chemistry at Emory University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: A heuristic approach is proposed to the design of structurally ordered
2D peptide nanomaterials that leverages the natural diversity of crystal
structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). The PDB represents a rich trove of
structural information on biomolecules. Many structures comprise layers of
biomolecules, i.e., arrangements in which contact areas are more extensive
within at least one crystallographically defined plane than between planes. In
principle, the lateral interfaces within appropriately chosen crystal structures
can be computationally optimized to enhance the cohesive interactions between
protomers, while axial interactions are attentuated through weakening or
blocking of the lamination of layers. This investigation comprises a proof-of-
principle directed toward the hypothesis that crystallographically characterized
layered structures can be used as a starting point to engineer and structurally
diversify crystalline 2D peptide and protein assemblies through computational
optimization of protomer interfaces. The research plan of this proposal
encompasses three specific aims in support of the preceding hypothesis. The
first two aims focus on the validation of this computationally-driven approach
with respect to the design of two specific classes of 2D peptide materials
targets that represent potential substrates for high value-added applications,
namely open framework (porous) lattices and polar 2D crystals. We anticipate
that success in these two aims will experimentally validate the feasibility and
scope of this approach with respect to materials design, while simultaneously
providing access to novel 2D nanomaterials. In the third specific aim,
structural data resulting from the materials generated in specific aims 1 and 2
will be employed as input for additional rounds of computational design in order
to create multi-component 2D nanostructures in which the tectons are chemically
distinguishable and independently addressable on the nanoscale. In each specific
aim, computational methods will be employed initially to optimize the
structurally critical interfaces between protomers. Candidate peptides will be
synthesized and screened using higher throughput, low-resolution experimental
methods. Suitable structures will be subjected to high-resolution structural
analysis, primarily using cryo-EM 2D reconstruction with direct electron
detection and, when applicable, single-crystal diffraction
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.