* 2003752
* Mechanism of Substrate Transformations by the Complex Iron Sulfur Molybdoenzyme (CISM) Family
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Partha Basu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Partha Basu of Indiana University–Purdue University
Indianapolis to investigate how the Complex Iron-Sulfur Molybdoenzyme (CISM)
family of respiratory enzymes catalyze the reduction of a wide variety of
chemicals. Respiration is an essential metabolic process that generates energy
in all living systems. Many microorganisms utilize specialized enzymes to carry
out anaerobic respiration where substrates such as nitrate, perchlorate, and
dimethyl sulfoxide are reduced. These metabolic processes contribute to
ecological diversity. Biochemical, spectroscopic, computational, and kinetic
methods are used to systematically study how the structure of the active site of
these CISM enzymes allows them to display substrate selectivity. This project
provides graduate students and postdoctoral fellows with specialized training in
enzymology, spectroscopy, and computation. In addition, the research is
integrated into an outreach program that introduces high school students to the
study of enzymes and attracts first-year students who are not pursuing a science
degree to science. A strong emphasis of the program is to use research to convey
to students from groups underrepresented in STEM careers an appreciation for
science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CISM enzymes are ubiquitous and play essential
physiological roles in transforming different oxyanions. This research project
uses periplasmic nitrate reductase as a model enzyme and develops several
mutational variants of this enzyme where the coordination environment of
molybdenum is systematically modified. The kinetic analyses of the enzyme
variants help develop a quantitative picture for substrate selectivity. In
addition, several residues in the catalytic pocket are identified as being
involved in proton shuttling and substrate binding. Mutations of these residues
provide valuable information about the mechanism of the reaction. The kinetic
data are placed in the context of structural and spectroscopic properties of the
enzyme. The proposed research provides new detailed insights into the substrate
transformations catalyzed by members of the CISM
family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.