* 2003010
* Peptide Stapling Using Conformationally Constrained Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* James Baleja, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 357,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Joshua Kritzer of Tufts University to develop new
chemical building blocks that control the shape of peptides to mimic distinct
conformations seen in proteins. Peptides are short polymer chains of amino acids
that share many properties with larger proteins. The ability to control the
three-dimensional shape or conformation of peptides allows the control of these
properties and, consequently, their functions. In this project, chemical tethers
are used to link an unnatural amino acid (one that is not found in terrestrial
organisms) to another amino acid along the chain to constrain the shape of the
peptide. The resulting peptides have potential applications in materials
science, as catalysts and in drug development. In addition, the project prepares
students to enter the science workforce through the development of a series of
training workshops that help students practice professional skills, provide
career guidance, and promote diversity and inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project employs a new strategy for side-chain-mediated cross-linking,
or “stapling,” that takes advantage of the unique conformational properties of
the unnatural amino acid 4-mercaptoproline. Multiple independent strategies are
used to incorporate 4-mercaptoproline staples into peptides, producing unique
varieties of stapled beta-hairpins, stapled collagen-like helices and
assemblies, and stapled bicyclic peptides. The three-dimensional structures of
these designed structural scaffolds are determined by solution-state NMR
spectroscopy. The effects of the new staples on biological degradation and cell
penetration are examined through cell-based assays. The long term broader
scientific impact of this work is to provide tools and methodology to control
peptide architecture and biological stability and in so doing construct
polypeptides with particular utility for studies in chemical
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.