* 2003978
* Collaborative Research: Nanoscale Charge Transfer in Quantum Dots Connected with Molecular Switches
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Joshua Choi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 310,420.00

This project aims to discover new ways of controlling how electrons move across
arrays of quantum dots by using light as a switch. Quantum dots are
nanoparticles of semiconductors with optical and electrical properties that can
be tuned through changing the size of the particles. This research is focused on
studying how flow of electrons between neighboring quantum dots can be turned
‘on’ and ‘off’ by switching the shape of molecules connecting the quantum dots
using light with different colors. Such phenomena can be exploited to make
materials for optically switchable components for optical computing and memory
devices that are faster and more efficient compared to traditional electronics.
Broadly, this research has a potential to advance the fundamental understanding
of nanoscale charge transfer which is crucial for understanding optical and
electrical processes in macromolecular, nanoscale, and biological systems. The
research activities are integrated with educational efforts aimed at enhancing
the recruitment, training, and retention of students in the science and
engineering fields, especially among underrepresented groups at the University
of Virginia and Old Dominion University. With an emphasis on middle and high
school students, hands-on activities on 'Switching Molecules with Light' are
provided. Undergraduate researchers are recruited through the Virginia-North
Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation and other
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to test a hypothesis
that the rates of charge transfer and exciton dissociation in colloidal quantum
dot assemblies can be modulated by changing conformation of the 'bridge'
photochromic molecules that inter-connect the quantum dots. To this end, a
combination of nanoparticle synthesis, organic synthesis, surface chemistry
characterization, optical spectroscopy, electrical measurements and X-ray
scattering is employed. In the context of Marcus theory, the impact of potential
barrier height on nanoscale charge transfer is systematically studied while
keeping exactly the same charge donor-acceptor pair and the surface chemistry at
contacts. This research has a potential to result in the discovery of a novel
class of quantum dot assemblies with optically switchable light emission and
non-volatile ‘read’ and ‘write’ operations. The dense, fast and reliable on-chip
compatible non-volatile optical memory materials potentially obtained through
this research can lead to new research directions and capabilities for optical
computing, data storage, processing and transmission. The research team from the
two universities will (1) determine the relationship between the potential
barrier height and the rates of charge transfer and exciton dissociation in
quantum dot assemblies in the context of Marcus theory, (2) investigate the
relationship between bridge molecule structure and functional groups on charge
transfer and exciton dissociation in quantum dot assemblies, and (3) demonstrate
quantum dot assemblies with optically switchable photoluminescence
intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.