* 2003117
* Manipulating the strong quantum spin fluctuations in triple perovskites with effective spin-1/2 triangular lattice
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Haidong Zhou, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;While the rise of quantum computers may one
day help solve complex problems and deliver information with unhackable
security, there is lack of a material platforms for scalable realization of
quantum technologies. For instance, the most interesting magnetic property of
the celebrated quantum spin liquids (QSLs) is the possibility of quantum
mechanical encryption and transport of information, protected against
environmental influences. Despite extensive studies on QSLs, they are still far
away from applications. First obstacle is the shortage of understanding of this
new phase of matter. The common belief is that the strong quantum spin
fluctuations (QSFs) play a critical role in QSLs but how exactly QSFs lead to
QSL state or other exotic quantum magnetic phenomena is not clear. Second
obstacle is that most of the studied QSLs are insulators and electronically
inert, which is incompatible with an electrical circuit that relies on moving
charge carriers. The grand challenge is to find a way to convert the
entanglement information into mobile charge signal by “metallizing” quantum
magnets. This project will take a unique approach by using strategical materials
design to address these two obstacles. The project also will support the
education and activities of two graduate students. The principal investigator’s
educational effort is to attract undergraduate and high school students to the
real world of science and technology and to motivate them to pursue careers in
science by bridging the gap between research and educational settings. The main
activities include: (i) bringing the lab to the classroom by integrating the
exposure to the PI’s research program and research facility into existing
undergraduate courses; (ii) bringing the classroom to the lab by developing a
summer seminar; (iii) reach out to high school students through the Governor
Summer School of the Tennessee state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on triple perovskites A3BC2O9, in
which the effective spin-1/2 magnetic ions form a two-dimensional equilateral
triangular lattice. Therefore, this system fits all the requirements for
maximized QSFs. The chemical substitution on A sites or C sites can easily
introduce perturbations, such as anisotropy and quenched disorder into the
system. Moreover, the PI also can use its “sandwich” structure, by combining
high pressure, to explore the metallization of quantum magnets. The approach
includes (i) crystal growth of the new triple perovskites; (ii) studies on how
the QSFs react to the perturbations and how the physical properties of the
sandwich structure involve under high pressure by complementary low temperature,
high magnetic field, and high pressure measurements, including AC
susceptibility, specific heat, thermal conductivity, resistivity, elastic and
inelastic neutron scattering, and total scattering for pair distribution
function (PDF). The expected outcomes will provide (i) new QSL candidates and
guidelines for new QSL search; (ii) a new direction for metallizing quantum
magnets and fundamental knowledge about how the itinerant electrons interact
with quantum spin states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.