* 2003430
* Support for U.S. Participants at the 17th International Congress on Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2020
* Eranda Nikolla, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 0.00

The project will provide support for graduate student participation in the 17th
International Congress on Catalysis (ICC) to be held in San Diego, California
(CA) on June 14-19, 2020. Specifically, the funding will partially cover
registration and travel expenses of approximately 35 U.S. academic PhD students
to attend the Congress and facilitate their interaction with the international
catalysis community. The students will present their research at the conference,
attend lectures by leaders in the field of catalysis, and interact with fellow
students from around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICC meetings are the
largest global meeting dedicated to catalysis, and are held once every four
years. The Congress was last held in the United States in 1996. The theme of
17th ICC - 2020 Vision for Catalysis - aims to look into the future for
catalysis research guided by the past and to assess the present state of
catalysis in context of what lies ahead. The program will highlight recent
developments,challenges, and opportunities in the context of shifting feedstocks
and in the discovery and development of experimental and computational methods.
The scientific program will include plenary and keynote lectures, invited and
ontributed papers and poster presentations. The proceedings of all International
Congresses are published as abstracts on the web. They also constitute a
significant part of the archival literature on catalysis. The critical
importance of catalysis is reflected by the fact that 25-30% of all manufactured
goods in the United States involve at least one catalytic step. Because advances
in a large number of catalytic processes, which are crucial to U.S. interests,
will be presented at this meeting, it is important to ensure participation from
both the U.S. academic and the industrial sectors. Furthermore, the
International Congress is a rare opportunity for U.S. students to interact with
fellow students and premier researchers from all across the world at the most
prestigious conference the catalysis community has to offer. This will
significantly assist with maintaining U.S. research competitiveness, while also
inspiring students to tackle grand challenges related to catalytic processes.
Catalysis is an enabling technology for a broad range of scientific and
engineering impact areas related to environmental pollution control,
sustainability, energy, and chemicals, to name just a few. Student training and
engagement in these areas ensures a future crop of catalytic researchers well-
positioned to make continued advances to science and engineering that will serve
the needs of the Nation and society in general for years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.