* 2003505
* CAS: Understanding Glyphosate's Reactions at Mineral and Organic-Coated Mineral Surfaces: Sorption-Desorption Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Carmen Martinez, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 424,984.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
funds Professor Carmen Enid Martínez at Cornell University to study the dynamics
of glyphosate reaction with mineral and organic-coated mineral surfaces present
in soils. Glyphosate is the world’s most heavily applied herbicide used to kill
broadleaf plants and grasses. As a result, environmental contamination with
glyphosate occurs frequently and widely in U.S. soils, sediments, surface and
groundwater. Glyphosate’s interaction with soil greatly influences glyphosate’s
environmental behavior including toxicity, mobility, and bioavailability. The
goal of this project is to learn how and how fast glyphosate is retained and
released upon interaction with soil components. Given the widespread use of
glyphosate, it is essential to understand the conditions for its accumulation.
Of interest is also whether its reactions with soil components create a
reservoir with slow-release capability, which is a route to surface and
groundwater contamination. This project provides research opportunities and
training for graduate students. The project integrates an outreach component
with the Sciencenter (Ithaca, NY), and outreach activities with NYS 4-H and
Cornell Cooperative Extension. Graduate students participate in all outreach
activities which supports their development and professional
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides comprehensive information
on molecular-scale processes of glyphosate at mineral and organic-coated mineral
surfaces. The overarching question is: Does glyphosate accumulate in soils, and
is its accumulation a reversible process? Research activities are designed to
test the hypothesis that mineral and organic-coated mineral surfaces differ in
their ability to retain (sorb) and release (desorb) glyphosate, and that
glyphosate sorption at mineral surfaces outcompetes sorption of dissolved
organic matter. Mechanisms of interaction and kinetics of glyphosate sorption-
desorption are investigated using minerals that represent a variety of surface
structures, and organic-coated minerals where the organic-coating differ in
structural characteristics, functionality and aromaticity. Molecular-scale
sorption-desorption behavior and kinetics of these processes are probed
utilizing surface sensitive approaches coupled to simultaneous analyses of
outflow solutions from these experiments. Process-based parameters are obtained
that help explain glyphosate sorption-desorption behavior (binding constants,
sorption maximum) and their rate constants. The simultaneous monitoring of
surface reactions and solution chemistry facilitates a more comprehensive
understanding of molecular-scale processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.