* 2003431
* Origins of Unique Optical Properties in Intermediate Band Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Richard Robinson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;When a metal is shrunk down to nanometer
sizes, it can obtain new optical absorption features that don’t exist in bigger,
bulk materials. These new features, called plasmons, change the color of the
metal, so that the commonly expected color becomes something different, like
nanoscale gold colloids appearing red. Interestingly, there are some non-metals
(semiconductors) that show this same effect at the nanoscale, but the origin and
size-dependence of these effects is not well-understood. This project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, employs state-of-the-art x-ray characterization methods to elucidate
unanswered structure-property questions of semiconducting nanocrystals. This
project is examining several hypotheses to understand the nature of the
semiconductor plasmons, including how excited electronic charges move in the
materials and how these are affected by nano-sizing. To accomplish the goals,
the PI is synthesizing nanocrystals, and characterizing them with methods
including x-ray resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) measurements through
the quantum confinement size regime. The products of this work will benefit
society because these nanocrystals have the potential for photovoltaic
applications or they could lead to others such as photothermal therapy of tumor
cell annihilation upon laser irradiation. These nanocrystals could also lead to
high-frequency, all-optical modulation and switching of light. The accompanying
outreach programs invigorate the public excitement about interesting Materials
Chemistry through Lending Library demonstration kits on plasmonics. Furthermore,
the PI mentors students of color through a program at
Cornell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Certain metal chalcogenide nanocrystals have the ability to
sustain absorption features that resemble localized surface plasmon resonances
(LSPRs) typically seen in metal nanocrystals. The electronic origin of these
features in these materials, however, is not completely understood. One theory
is that interband electronic transitions lead to the features. This project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, employs state-of-the-art x-ray characterization methods to
determine the influence of quantum confinement on the electronic bands and
optical absorption profile of semiconducting nanocrystals. The central
hypotheses are that transitions between bands control the absorption features
and can be affected by quantum confinement. To test these hypotheses, this
project is using synchrotron x-ray spectroscopy, including hard x-ray resonant
inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) measurements and analysis, of nanocrystal
semiconductors through the quantum confinement range. The team is synthesizing a
size series of monodisperse nanocrystals, characterizing them with x-ray
spectroscopy and optical absorption, and correlating the information with
electronic structure models, to elucidate fundamental structure-property
relationships. The products of this work will benefit society because these
nanocrystals have the potential for photovoltaic applications or they could lead
to others such as photothermal therapy of tumor cell annihilation upon laser
irradiation. These nanocrystals could lead to high-frequency, all-optical
modulation and switching of light. The accompanying outreach programs invigorate
the public excitement about interesting Materials Chemistry through Lending
Library demonstration kits on plasmonics. Furthermore, the PI mentors students
of color through a program at Cornell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.