* 2003315
* RoL: Control of trans-species microRNA expression
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michael Axtell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 831,688.00

Parasitic plants can be noxious weeds that attack crops and affect agricultural
productivity. The parasitic plant Dodder (genus Cuscuta) is widespread in the
United States and is a problem on diverse crops. Strategies to control Dodders
are limited. One way that Dodders affect their hosts is by injected short bits
of genetic information, "microRNAs", into host stems. These "trans-species"
microRNAs destroy certain target host genes. This process seems to allow the
parasite to suppress the host's immune system. This project seeks to understand
exactly how the Dodder trans-species microRNAs are activated and injected into
the host plants. Understanding this process could lead to novel methods of
control and thus would benefit agriculture. Other parasites and pathogens use
trans-species microRNAs to manipulate their hosts. Thus, details learned from
study of the Dodder trans-species microRNAs may inform research into a broader
array of parasites and pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have shown
that Dodder (Cuscuta) expresses many microRNAs which enter host plant tissues
and target host mRNAs. These trans-species microRNAs are likely acting as
virulence factors to shut down host mRNAs in order to benefit the parasite.
Unlike canonical microRNAs, the Cuscuta trans-species microRNAs only accumulate
at the interface between the host and parasite. The core promoters upstream of
trans-species microRNA loci in the Cuscuta genome all have a common Upstream
Sequence Element (USE) that is absent from canonical microRNAs and also absent
from the promoters of Cuscuta mRNAs. The 10 base-pair USE sequence is identical
to the USE element known to drive transcription of small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs)
in all plants. It thus appears that Cuscuta trans-species microRNAs have co-
opted a pre-existing, constitutive promoter element to drive a highly tissue-
specific expression pattern. This project will seek to understand this process
via two aims: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1: Functional analyses of USE to
determine its role in the transcription of Cuscuta trans-species microRNA
precursors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim 2: Identification and functional analyses
of the USE-binding factor(s).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.