* 2003955
* Elastic loading of metallic glass as a method to obtain defined enthalpy states
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Robert Maass, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 0.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project is dedicated to a novel class of metallic materials that are called
metallic glasses (MGs). Opposite to normal metallic alloys, MGs have a
disordered atomic structure, which makes them more like a frozen liquid than a
crystal. This change in structure brings a long a series of advantages over
conventional engineering metals, such as steels. However, one problem with MGs
is that their processing is very difficult. The sensitivity of the glassy
structure to various processing parameters leads to a large variety of
structures and therefore properties. This limits the widespread use of MGs in
applications and thus the exploitation of their exceptional properties. In order
to overcome this problem, the PI uses a novel route of elastic loading protocols
that aim at introducing a defined and quantifiable structural state,
irrespective of casting history. The goal is to achieve a structural reference
state that subsequently can be relaxed via thermal processing to any desired
state and its corresponding property. If successful, this project therefore
provides a reversible thermo-mechanical processing method that puts an end to
the ill-defined structural states and property variations originating from MG
casting. Such an advance will significantly promote the usage of these novel
alloys in engineering applications, enabling, for example, more energy efficient
devices, novel consumer goods, high-performant medical devices, or magnetic
components.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Defined thermo-mechanical protocols are a key to target specific microstructures
and therefore properties. Such knowledge is used in daily industrial operations
to obtain a desired mechanical performance of crystalline metallic materials.
Modifying the structure, and therefore mechanical properties of disordered
metallic materials, also known as metallic glasses (MGs), is much less
straightforward due to the lack of well-defined structure-property
relationships. Furthermore, the lack of apparent length scales in the amorphous
MG makes it very difficult to identify a given structural state. Therefore, one
normally uses the measure of stored excess enthalpy to characterize the
structural state. In this research project, the PI addresses this shortcoming by
i) homogeneous rejuvenation via stresses within the elastic regime, and ii) by
demonstrating how spatial correlation lengths of property fluctuations at
different length scales directly quantify a given excess enthalpy state. This is
achieved by using site-specific characterization methods at the micron- and
nanoscale. The experiments will reveal saturation limits of rejuvenation, from
which the PI constructs a thermo-mechanical deformation map on how to prepare
well-defined and quantifiable structural states. If successful, this research
project introduces a novel structure-property relationship for tailoring
properties of MGs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.