* 2003840
* Collaborative Research: Studies of Charge Transport in Designed Nanoscale  Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* James Batteas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2024
* USD 345,000.00

Professors James D. Batteas of Texas A&amp;M University and Adam B. Braunschweig
of the Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center are supported
by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Division
of Chemistry to develop an understanding of methods whereby molecular assemblies
can be built on extended and nanostructured metal surfaces to exhibit
predictable properties. Molecular assemblies built with precise nanoscale
geometries on surfaces are designed to trap and transport charge and energy in
directable ways. Advanced imaging and optical techniques are used to examine the
resulting structures and to determine how the structures control the movement of
electrons through the molecules or how they exchange energy with the surfaces on
which they are deposited. The project advances the development improved light
harvesting and solar energy conversion, portable chemical sensing, and quantum
computing. In the course of this research, graduate, undergraduate and K-12
students from diverse backgrounds are prepared to join the advanced electronics
workforce. They are trained in cross-cutting research at the intersection of
chemical synthesis, materials chemistry, and surface science in a coordinated
collaborative environment between the laboratories of the principle
investigators. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Designing molecular assemblies that can
trap and transport charge, and exchange energy in predictable and directable
ways via efficient electronic coupling, is critical for enabling the design of
devices ranging from novel sensors to molecular/organic based electronics, to
dye sensitized solar cells, where molecular assemblies are integral components
for modulating the optoelectronic properties of the devices. Several key
questions are addressed to foster the rational design of molecular based systems
for these and other applications, and to guide their implementation. These
questions include how can directed molecular interactions (e.g. van der Waals,
hydrogen bonding and local cross-linking) influence electron transport behavior?
Researchers also want to know how molecular assemblies can be spatially confined
and fabricated with precise architectures in nanoscopic junctions for potential
device applications? The team asks how the combined effects of spatial
confinement and local intermolecular interactions within the assemblies and with
surfaces afford control over their final resulting optical and electronic
properties? A series of self-assembled systems is explored, including
porphryinoids, two-dimensional (2D) cross-linked diacetylenic thiols, and donor-
acceptor dye molecules, such as perylene, dicyanonaphthalene and
diketopyrrolopyrrole derivatives. These are selected because their tailorable
optoelectronic properties make them reasonable targets as components for organic
electronic devices. Nanoscale assemblies of these materials are created on
extended gold surfaces, and patterned gold nanostructures, to further explore
the effects of exciton-plasmon coupling on the resulting optical and charge
transport behavior of the assembled systems. The assembly processes and
optoelectronic properties are measured in detail via a host of surface science
approaches including, STM, AFM, XPS, IR and fluorescence and Raman
spectroscopies. The project bridges the gap between understanding charge
conduction in single molecules and extended molecular thin films, which is
relatively unexplored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.