* 2003436
* Understanding the Formation and Utilization of Halogenated Metabolites in Natural Product Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Emily Balskus, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2023
* USD 435,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Emily Balskus from Harvard University to investigate
microbial enzymes that catalyze previously unappreciated chemical
transformations. Uncovering novel biosynthetic enzymes and strategies expands
our knowledge of Nature’s chemical capabilities. It also motivates the
development of new synthetic methods and strategies and is a first step toward
employing enzymes in practical applications. This research is providing detailed
understanding of previously unknown enzymes that could ultimately impact society
by enabling more efficient and environmentally friendly routes for the synthesis
of pharmaceuticals and industrial chemicals. Additionally, the research
generates knowledge of enzymes that could streamline the identification of
previously uncharacterized and potentially bioactive microbial natural products.
Such products could have future applications in drug discovery and even
agriculture. Finally, the goals of this research synergize with ongoing
education and outreach activities aimed at educating and communicating the
importance of the chemistry of living systems to a diverse group of students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this project is to characterize
newly discovered enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of the
cylindrocyclophanes, a family of structurally unusual cyanobacterial
metabolites. Previous studies of this pathway revealed a new type of
halogenating enzyme capable of functionalizing unactivated carbon atoms as well
as a previously unknown ‘cryptic’ halogenation strategy that involves an
enzymatic Friedel–Crafts alkylation. The proposed research elucidates how these
newly discovered alkyl halide-generating and -utilizing enzymes accomplish these
challenging reactions and develop an experimental workflow that could rapidly
uncover additional microbial natural products constructed using analogous
biosynthetic logic. Altogether, this research has the potential to enhance our
understanding of enzymatic catalysis and facilitate the discovery of additional,
structurally unusual microbial metabolites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.