* 2003635
* IIBR Informatics: Development of Multimodal approaches for protein function prediction
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Uma Aryal, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2024
* USD 427,507.00

Proteins are working molecules, playing crucial roles in almost all activities
of a living cell. Therefore, elucidating the biological function of proteins is
fundamental in any modern molecular biology, biochemistry, medical science, and
drug development. In the post-genomics era, when a vast quantity of genomics and
proteomics data are awaiting biological interpretation, substantial improvement
of computational function prediction methods is essential to achieve the scale
and reliability required for practical use by experimental biologists.
Computational prediction is crucially useful in biological studies for designing
experiments and for interpreting experimental data. In this project, a
comprehensive framework for protein function prediction will be built that
effectively integrates various aspects of protein features that are indicative
of function. Moreover, a web-based portal will be developed, which will provide
biologists with easy-to-access function prediction, visualization, and analysis
tools as well as pre-computed genome function annotation. The project will train
next generation interdisciplinary students through course work and direct
involvement with research. Interdisciplinary proteomics approaches will be
learned through local and national workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
framework will integrate several different types of state-of-the-art deep neural
networks. Multiple relationships of proteins, including physical similarities
and proteomics data similarities, will be represented as similarity graphs
centered at the target proteins, where the functional inference will be
performed using deep convolutional neural networks. Among the protein features
to be considered, we incorporate three-dimensional structure similarity of
proteins, which will be measured through encoded local protein structures
detected from protein sequence information using deep convolutional neural
network. The developed methods will be used for functional analysis of
photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation pathways of photosynthetic cyanobacteria,
Cyanothece ATCC51142, which provides promising platforms for light-driven
biofuel production. Proteins involved in photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation
cycles will be experimentally identified using a new protein complex profiling
method that combines chromatography separation techniques with quantitative mass
spectrometry. Then, we will apply the developed prediction methods to determine
their function and validate the predicted functions with the expressed proteome.
All project outputs will be available at
http://kiharalab.org/software.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.