* 2003118
* Exploiting Chemical and Structural Tunability to  Harness Temperature-Dependent Luminescence at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Federico Rabuffetti, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 451,312.00

The accurate and precise determination of temperature is critical in diagnostic
and therapeutic biosystems. Nanomaterials capable of serving as optical
temperature sensors are uniquely suited for this task because they are able to
operate in environments where contact thermometry cannot be implemented (e.g.,
cells and deep tissues). However, the vast majority of luminescent
nanothermometers lack the required temperature sensitivity. New inorganic
nanomaterials with temperature-dependent luminescence response will be
discovered and developed in this research. Through a combination of synthesis
and characterization studies the rules governing the temperature sensitivity of
these phosphors are established. These rules are then used to design optical
thermometers with targeted sensitivity within a given temperature window. In
addition, this project provides opportunities for workforce development at both
undergraduate and graduate levels and K-12 STEM outreach. Graduate and
undergraduate students are trained in the synthesis and advanced
characterization of luminescent nanomaterials. 6th through 9th grade students
participating in the annual STEM Day hosted by Wayne State University are
introduced to optical materials research through a hands-on activity based on
photostimulable phosphors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to develop an
understanding of how to tune the temperature sensitivity of luminescent
nanothermometers by rationally matching hosts and activators. The chemical and
structural tunability of a novel family of host materials is exploited to this
end. The project can be divided into three thrust areas. The first area involves
synthesis of a series of inorganic nanocrystals that incorporate divalent and
trivalent metal dopants as luminescent centers. To this end, colloidal synthetic
routes to heterocationic and heteroanionic nanocrystals are developed. The
second thrust focuses on ascertaining the placement of the luminescent centers
in the nanocrystalline hosts. This task involves interrogating the atomic
arrangement in multiple length scales using element-specific spectroscopic
probes. Finally, in the third thrust, the temperature-dependent luminescence
response of the nanocrystals is systematically probed using steady-state and
time-dependent spectrofluorometry. Composition–structure–luminescence
relationships are then derived to reveal the fundamental chemical and structural
principles governing the temperature sensitivity of the
nanothermometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.