* 2003910
* Spectroscopic explorations of redox active metal-organic frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jenny Lockard, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 382,501.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the investigation of a
class of porous materials called metal-organic frameworks that have potential
applications ranging from fuel cell technology to industrial chemical production
to solar energy conversion. While significant progress has been made in
developing novel frameworks for these purposes, basic insight on how these
materials work is severely lacking. The research activities in this project,
which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the
Division of Materials Research, rely on several X-ray and optical
characterization methods to meet this need. The study targets a fundamental
understanding of the properties and processes behind the applications, including
how charges move and are distributed in these materials. The outcome of this
work is crucial for facilitating the rational design of the next generation of
these materials with improved performances and therefore has far reaching
implications for a broad range of energy and environmental sustainability
applications. Furthermore, as part of a broader mission to integrate research in
education, the outreach component of the project provides not only hands-on
research experiences for high school science teachers in the Newark region, but
a mechanism for translating those experiences into meaningful high school
science curricula that meet the specific needs of the students in this urban
community. This outreach initiative stands to have a large impact on the
students in these schools since it targets the educators that teach them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, researchers focus on understanding fundamental structure/function
relationships in redox and photoredox active metal organic frameworks (MOFs), an
emerging class of materials composed of metal ions or clusters connected by
organic molecules to form crystalline microporous networks. Their intrinsic
porosity and tunable architecture allow electronic structure (bandgap-like)
manipulation, selective guest species interaction and the incorporation of redox
active components and other synergistic characteristics. Furthermore, these
multicomponent framework functionalities inevitably lead to increasingly
complicated structure-function relationships, involving subtle structural
rearrangements, electronic delocalization and cooperative interactions of the
framework host and guest species. Redox active MOFs therefore not only engender
emerging technological interest but serve as a unique and fascinating platform
for fundamental studies of host-guest chemistry, electron transfer and
organometallic photophysics in 3D coordination space. The project focuses on MOF
systems that exhibit redox activity in the ground state, excited state and/or
associated with donor-acceptor host-guest interaction. The principal objectives
in studying these systems are to expose the prevalence and role of electronic
delocalization and pertinent electronic and molecular level structural changes
associated with their redox or photoredox processes. To accomplish this, a
targeted set of vibrational, optical, and X-ray spectroscopy methods are
employed in combinations of steady state, in situ, and in some cases time-
resolved studies of MOF systems to garner real time information on their
electronics, host-guest interactions and molecular level structure changes.
These insights help elucidate the mechanisms behind their redox behavior.
Ultimately the trends afforded by this study facilitate the rational design of
the next generation of MOF materials with improved performance for redox-based
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.