* 2003914
* Interaction of Coherent Electronic Spin Current with Antiferromagnetic Order
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Jean Heremans, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;An electron carries a small angular momentum
called spin. A flow of many electron spins, or spin current, may be an efficient
way to transport information with minimal resistive heating or to flip stored
information in magnetic recording media. To design practical spin-based
information-technology devices, it is important to understand (1) how long a
spin current travels before decaying and (2) how a spin current interacts with
magnetic moments in recording media. This project answers these two questions
for a specific advantageous type of magnetic materials, antiferromagnets, where
magnetic moments are aligned anti-parallel (alternating) at the atomic length
scale. Antiferromagnets operated by spin current potentially enable faster and
more stable magnetic recording devices than conventional magnetic materials
(ferromagnets, with parallel-aligned magnetic moments), but the basic physics of
spin current in antiferromagnets is not well understood. This project fills this
gap in knowledge through complementary experiments that determine spin-current
decay lengths in tailored antiferromagnets, as well as through a powerful X-ray
experiment that reveals the interaction of spin current with different magnetic
atoms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A spin current is said
to be coherent when the spin polarization of its carriers (e.g., electrons) is
locked in a uniform orientation or precessional phase. How a spin current loses
its coherence, particularly as it interacts with magnetic order, is a crucial
fundamental question in spintronics and quantum information science. The goal of
this experimental project is to understand decoherence mechanisms of spin
current carried by electrons that interact with alternating magnetic moments,
i.e., antiferromagnetic order. This project fills a gap in basic understanding
of spin decoherence in antiferromagnetic metals, which have recently gained
considerable attention as platforms for next-generation spintronic devices. The
specific objectives are: (1) to determine how the coherence length of
transverse-polarized spin current is impacted by structural disorder and
electronic scattering in antiferromagnetic metals, and (2) to determine how an
electronic spin current transfers spin angular momentum to chemically distinct
antiferromagnetic sublattices in ferrimagnetic alloys. These objectives are met
by leveraging a unique combination of model systems (e.g., epitaxial thin films,
nanostructured spin valves) and complementary characterization of film
structure, magnetic order, microwave spin pumping, and magnetotransport.
Furthermore, a pump-probe X-ray synchrotron method is utilized to gain an
unprecedented time- and element-resolved insight into spin-current physics in
multilayered antiferromagnetic systems. The distinct approach in this project to
elucidate spin decoherence will have transformative impact on the growing
discipline of antiferromagnetic spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.