* 2003619
* Multidimensional and Nonlinear Kinetics in Complex Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Mark Berg, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 458,500.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program and co-funding
from the Chemical Structures, Dynamics, and Mechanisms - A program, Professor
Mark Berg and his group at the University of South Carolina are developing new
methods for probing chemical changes that occur when a system is perturbed by
illumination with powerful laser light. The research group is particularly
interested in the response of a system to multiple perturbations, in contrast to
more conventional approaches which use a single perturbation. These
“multidimensional” experiments are uniquely useful for understanding complex
materials where otherwise identical molecules may have their responses altered
by their local environment. The research focuses on perturbing systems using
ultrafast laser pulses then monitoring very fast responses (less than a
trillionth of a second), enabling the elementary steps of a reaction to be
observed before molecular motion reorganizes the local environment. Dr. Berg
actively recruits undergraduates from both within and outside chemistry to
provide a cross-disciplinary research experience. Graduate students are trained
in advanced optics, spectroscopy, electronics and data-processing methods.
Professor Berg is involved with workshops familiarizing students (especially
those from underrepresented groups) with graduate school opportunities. He is
also active in a partnership between the University and the Graduate Education
for Minorities (GEM) Fellowship Program aimed at increasing the number of
students from underrepresented groups who go on to graduate studies in STEM
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As many liquids cool, they spontaneously form
microstructures that lead to a very rapid increase in viscosity.
Multidimensional spectroscopic experiments are designed to examine the initial
formation of these microstructures to see if they are sufficient to explain the
observed changes in macroscopic properties. Independent control of the
polarization and phase of up to six laser pulses enables investigation of the
local structure, fluidity and reaction dynamics in microstructures created by
soaps and detergents. These microstructures range from simple micelles that
solubilize organic materials in water to the complex bilayer membranes that are
ubiquitous in cells. The Berg laboratory provides a highly interdisciplinary
environment for graduate and undergraduate students involved in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.