* 2003683
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Hierarchical Kernel Matrices for Scientific and Data Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Edmond Chow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2023
* USD 315,981.00

Kernel matrices in machine learning and scientific computing describe the
relationships between collections of points which may represent various types of
information. The increasing size of data sets in various disciplines and the
increasing computational capability of computer hardware make it essential that
our algorithms and software for kernel matrices are scalable, and that the time
it takes for their execution grows linearly or close to linearly, with the
problem size. Otherwise, such large-scale data problems may not be tractable.
This project addresses the scaling bottlenecks associated with handling the
kernel matrix by exploiting a hierarchical structure that is often found in
these matrices. By accelerating computations with kernel matrices, this research
enables large-scale data analysis and scientific simulation in diverse areas
such as uncertainty quantification, integral equation problems, particle
simulations, and geostatistics. High-performance software implementing the newly
developed methods will be developed in an open-source
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically addresses high-
dimensional problems, the use of specialized kernel functions in machine
learning, and the high initial computational cost of constructing a hierarchical
representation for a kernel matrix. New methods developed will be applied to
large-scale cases in a scientific application and a machine learning
application: Brownian dynamics and Gaussian process regression. In machine
learning, the new methods will complement existing large-scale approaches for
Gaussian processes. High-performance software will address specific scaling
challenges in constructing hierarchical matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.