* 2003597
* Effective Mass Spectrometer (MS)-Based Methods for Systematic and Unambiguous Characterization of Protein O-GlcNAcylation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ronghu Wu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 418,200.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Ronghu Wu and his group at Georgia Tech are working to
improve our ability to characterize an important group of natural protein
modifications that involve attachment of sugars. Specifically, Dr. Wu is
developing biotechnology tools based on mass spectrometry, in search of better
understanding of O-GlcNAcylation, a protein modification which impacts cell
function (for example, regulation of gene expression). Graduate and
undergraduate students engaged in the research receive valuable training in
instrumentation, chemical measurements, and large-scale data analysis. Dr. Wu
also provides research opportunities for high school students and teachers,
exposing them to cutting-edge research and stimulating their interests in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wu group seeks to comprehensively and unambiguously
characterize protein O-GlcNAcylation through the development of novel mass
spectrometry (MS)-based methods. The problem is challenging because of the low
natural abundance of the target proteins in complex biological samples, and the
need to distinguish proteins with O-GlcNAc from those with stereoisomeric
O-GalNAc. Dr. Wu is developing protocols which selectively enrich O-GlcNAcylated
proteins, enabling global and quantitative analysis of protein O-GlcNAcylation.
Identification of glycoproteins in the cytosol and the nucleus, and
quantification of their dynamics, will provide valuable information to
facilitate our understanding of protein O-GlcNAcylation, with potential
applications in biological and biomedical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.