* 2003081
* Collaborative Research: MLWiNS: Distributed Learning over Multi-Access Channels: From Bandlimited Coordinate Descent to Gradient Sketching
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Gautam Dasarathy, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The recent wave of technological advances in machine learning and artificial
intelligence has led to widespread applications and public awareness. At the
same time, the rapid growth of high-speed wireless network services presents an
opportunity for future distributed learning involving a vast number of smart IoT
devices. This project targets several technical challenges posed by the limited
reliability of wireless connections and computational constraints of the edge
nodes in distributed learning systems. Overcoming these challenges is vital to
the plethora of computation, communication, and coordination tasks required by
distributed machine learning at the network edge. Centered on developing
innovative edge learning algorithms over wireless MAC channels under the
constraints of computing, power, and bandwidth, this project can significantly
impact wireless edge learning in a variety of IoT applications, ranging from
transportation, safety, and agriculture, to energy efficiency, e-health, and
smart infrastructure. The broader impact of this research will also come through
many educational opportunities by providing opportunities in STEM to K-12,
women, and underrepresented minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will develop an
innovative network architecture for distributed learning over wireless multi-
access channels. Specifically, the PIs will take a principled approach to
develop an integrated wireless edge learning framework, using both gradient-
based methods and also very recent advances in gradient-free, zero-order
optimization, while taking into account the constraints in computing, power and
bandwidth therein, in a holistic manner. The developed methods will be also
extended to the setting of distributed online learning and reinforcement
learning under wireless MAC. The PIs will focus on optimizing communication-
efficient gradient sparsification based local updates that are communicated
within the wireless network under bandwidth constraints; and each sender
intelligently carries out transmission power allocation based on learning
gradient and channel conditions. One important objective is to develop a novel
learning-based framework for efficient wireless channel estimation and update to
enable effective power control and learning. The project will devise edge
learning algorithms that are robust against wireless channel uncertainty. The
team of PIs shall comprehensively investigate the impact of the wireless
bandwidth and power constraint on both the accuracy and convergence speed of
edge learning algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.