* 2003017
* Collaborative Research: Predicting ecosystem resilience to climate and disturbance events with a multi-scale hydraulic trait framework
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* William Anderegg, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 09/30/2025
* USD 273,173.00

Forests provide numerous services to society and play a critical role in
governing the flux of carbon between the atmosphere and the biosphere.
Currently, there is considerable uncertainty about the capacity of forests to
continue providing services under altered precipitation regimes. By making
detailed measurements related to drought-induced mortality for multiple,
widespread tree species, using a continental-scale forest composition data set
to extrapolate these measurements across the United States, and by incorporating
predictions of future rainfall patterns, this project aims to improve our
ability to predict the susceptibility of forests throughout the United States to
drought. The investigators plan to make new measurements related to how low
water availability in soil reduces water flow through trees, reduces rates of
photosynthesis, and causes trees to die. The planned measurements, which are
associated with key traits that influence coupled carbon and water flow in
trees, provide a new basis for understanding how environmental variability has
given rise to the forests of today, and for predicting how the species
composition of forests is likely to change in the future. Furthermore, comparing
the trait combinations of individual trees, and average trait values across
species, to optimal values derived from a model enables a deeper understanding
of why some species are more susceptible to drought than others. The team,
composed of plant physiologists, forest ecologists, and Earth system modelers,
plans to develop new measurement and modeling techniques, and plans to publicly
disseminate datasets that will be used to identify regions at particular risk to
changing rainfall patterns. In the process, the team will conduct
interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate training to prepare diverse, next-
generation scientists to tackle ecological and data science
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will combine a simple
mechanistic vegetation model that links plant hydraulic traits to plant fitness,
given local environmental conditions, and a wide range of datasets including
forest community surveys from the USDA Forest Service Forest Inventory and
Analysis (FIA) program, hydraulic trait databases, and new measurements of
within-species variation of plant hydraulic traits. The team will aim to predict
observed patterns in forest mortality at FIA plots, and across multiple long-
term forest demography networks, using observed community hydraulic trait
distributions and mechanistic model simulations driven by local environmental
conditions. The team will identify the extent to which mortality during extreme
events is dictated by community-weighted mean hydraulic traits and ecosystem
hydraulic diversity. Finally, the team will apply these concepts to understand
the limits of plant physiological plasticity/acclimation within a species. The
project team will generate new continental-scale datasets documenting community-
weighted hydraulic traits, community physiological function and community
resilience. The knowledge gained will inform ecosystem management and
conservation efforts, as well as future Earth system model development. The
research team plans to engage local land managers about the impacts of climate
on forest resilience, to incorporate undergraduate and high school researchers
from local communities and underrepresented groups in STEM in project
activities, and to reach out to local prison populations through an annual
lecture series focused on the effects of variation in environmental conditions
and terrestrial ecosystem health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.