* 2003196
* AXS - Enabling Analysis of Petascale Astronomical Datasets
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Zeljko Ivezic, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 579,295.00

Astronomy is being rapidly transformed by the advent of large, automated,
digital sky surveys into a field where petabyte tabular data sets are becoming
commonplace. Unfortunately, this increase has not been followed by commensurate
improvements in the tools and frameworks: we are now limited not by the richness
of our datasets, but by an inability to mine them for knowledge. When the most
challenging questions of the day demand repeated, complex processing of large
information-rich tabular datasets, scalable and stable tools that are easy to
use by scientists are crucial. This is a project to develop, package, and deploy
the Astronomical eXtensions for Spark (AXS), a scalable open-source astronomical
data analysis framework built on Apache Spark. AXS will make it possible for
astronomers, including and perhaps especially those who are not data management
experts, to devise and execute astronomical big data analyses using industry-
standard tools. This will be a transformative increase in the community's
ability to extract knowledge from datasets collected at great expense, thus
unlocking their value across all areas of astronomy. There will be opportunities
for knowledge transfers and partnerships between industry and academia. The
techniques used and created will be taught within the astronomy curriculum, and
those curriculum materials will be made public. This will improve the
competitiveness of astronomy students in careers beyond astronomy, and it will
help to develop a globally competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AXS
will enable astronomers to scale their analysis from a personal laptop to
thousands of nodes on either cloud or NSF-supported cyberinfrastructure (CI).
This system has already been prototyped, and leverages Spark, a state-of-the-art
industry-standard engine for big data processing, to make it possible to query
and analyze almost arbitrarily large astronomical catalogs while supporting
complex workflows with astronomy-specific operations. The tool will be
accompanied by a hosted demonstration service, documentation, and support for
deployment on NSF CI resources and public cloud platforms. For long-term
sustainability, AXS will be developed in a tight loop with major stakeholders,
built on open source tools and processes, and strongly integrated with AstroPy
and the PyData stack, which are widely used in astronomy. AXS will also robustly
scale to large computational clusters, making both NSF-supported and public CI
more accessible to astronomers. Developments by this project will enable other
industrial and academic applications, especially those dealing with large,
tabular, spatio-temporal datasets indexed on a sphere, such as geospatial
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Division of Astronomical
Sciences within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences is
jointly supported by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.