* 2003883
* Macaulay2 Workshop at Cleveland State University
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Branden Stone, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2022
* USD 19,973.00

This grant supports an online software development workshop for the software
Macaulay2 held May 11-15, 2020 and an in person conference to be held at
Cleveland State University on a weekend in October or November 2020 (the exact
dates depend on COVID-19 pandemic related restrictions). Macaulay2 is one of the
world's leading software packages for supporting research in commutative algebra
and algebraic geometry. Macaulay2 is open source, and researchers can extend its
functionality by adding their own code in the form of packages. The workshop
allowed new users to learn from experienced programmers how to develop high
quality packages that will be made publicly available to support future
research. The Fall conference will bring some of the May workshop participants
together to discuss progress in their coding efforts and present related
research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop featured tutorial sessions
on Macaulay2 and other tools for collaborative development. The organizers
identified coding projects in active research areas of commutative algebra and
algebraic geometry, including algebraic statistics, coding theory, fast linear
algebra, invariants of reductive groups, and toric varieties. Participants
formed small groups and collaborated on writing code for these and other
packages. In addition, the workshop included professional development activities
for early career mathematicians, such as panel discussions on jobs and
developing a research program that successfully incorporates computational
tools. The Fall conference will take place over a weekend (Friday afternoon to
Sunday morning) and will feature invited speakers from the various coding
groups. More details are available at the website:
https://math.galetto.org/m2csu2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.