* 2003240
* RUI: Stem Cell Genesis in Leech
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Daniel Shain, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 581,225.00

The process by which a single cell, such as a fertilized egg, develops into a
complex, multicellular animal is perhaps one of the most fascinating questions
in modern biology. Because all animals share a common ancestry many aspects of
their development are conserved, particularly with regard to the network of
genes they employ during the developmental process. Nonetheless, animals appear
morphologically very different from each other (e.g., compare a starfish with a
human) despite having a strikingly conserved set of developmental genes. To
address this disparity, we focus on an understudied yet experimentally elegant
organism, the leech, which offers a unique system for dissecting gene expression
patterns in the critical early stages of embryogenesis. Specifically, leech
embryos are atypically large and divide in asymmetrical patterns such that
embryonic stem cells and their precursor cells can be readily identified and
physically separated from the embryo, a technique that is not currently possible
in more conventional model organisms (e.g., mouse, fly, nematode). Using modern
molecular and genomics approaches, we will reconstruct the detailed molecular
events that occur inside the embryo that lead to the formation, specification
and maintenance of embryonic stem cells in leech. Our hypotheses will be tested
directly by manipulating target genes during development, utilizing leech
embryos as an experimental platform. This information will contribute to a
broader understanding of how ancestral genetic pathways have evolved to generate
the remarkable diversity of animal life we currently observe.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The spatiotemporal precision by which totipotent zygotes reproducibly
generate properly situated cells (including stem cells) with varying degrees of
more restricted cell fate potentials remains mostly an untenable question in
conventional model organisms. The project offers an alternative and modern
approach to this problem by applying bioinformatic and molecular techniques to a
classical system that is uniquely well-suited for such methodologies.
Specifically, glossiphoniid leeches provide experimentally tractable embryos
whose stereotyped cleavages yield five bilateral pairs of large, identifiable
and accessible, lineage-restricted stem cells of four distinct potencies, from
which segmental mesoderm and ectoderm arise. Thus, one can routinely collect
convenient quantities of RNA from small numbers of identifiable cells at each
developmental step, from the zygote up to functioning stem cells. This project
will generate transcriptional profiles for a set of uniquely defined stem cells,
non-stem cells and selected precursors from which they arise in the leech
zygote. Illumina sequencing and proven bioinformatic pipelines will be used to
assemble in-depth transcriptomes for stages leading from zygote through the
formation of four distinct classes of lineage-restricted stem cells (the M, N,
O/P and Q teloblasts). Coupled with the availability of whole genome sequence,
this presents an opportunity to profile transcriptional dynamics leading to stem
cell formation on a cell-by-cell basis with unprecedented detail and
completeness. Since the leech represents an understudied yet evolutionarily
strategic member of the super-phylum Lophotrochozoa, this work will provide a
critical perspective on the range of molecular genetic pathways leading to what
we recognize operationally as stem cells. The experiments are specifically
designed to provide meaningful training activities to many undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.