* 2003248
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing Factors that Influence Streamflow
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Steven Quiring, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2021
* USD 17,023.00

This project will quantify how factors that influence streamflow change over
space and time. Streamflow is an important source of water for industrial and
domestic uses. Changes and intra-annual variations in streamflow pose management
challenges and may cause devastating societal and economic consequences.
Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the underlying mechanisms that drive
such changes. This project will significantly improve the understanding of the
water cycle, support the development of more effective water balance models, and
provide improved projections of future water availability. This project will
identify areas that face water shortages and require greater priority in future
water management efforts. Research findings will be disseminated to local and
regional watershed and water resources managers. In addition, the project will
promote teaching and training by involving undergraduates in modeling water
availability and by supporting an undergraduate research
assistant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unraveling the relative importance of different
factors that influence streamflow is essential for a holistic understanding of
hydrology. There is a knowledge gap regarding knowing which non-climatic factors
are the most important contributors to streamflow variations at various
timescales, and how the relative importance of climatic and non-climatic factors
varies over time. To address the knowledge gap, this project has three research
questions: (1) How does the relative role of climatic and non-climatic drivers
change over space and time? (2) What non-climatic factors are the most important
and how do they vary over space and time? (3) How will streamflow change in the
next thirty years? These questions will be answered using a water balance model
combined with statistical analyses across a large number of watersheds in the
continental United States. This project will inform adaptive watershed
management and will have significant implications for future interactions
between water, energy, food security, and human
wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.