* 2003692
* Development of Natural Product-Inspired Ubiquinone Mimics as Next Generation Agrochemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* William Wuest, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2023
* USD 429,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. William Wuest from Emory University to investigate
antifungal natural products active against blight. Blight is broadly defined as
the disease or injury of plants marked by the formation of lesions, withering,
or death of parts. Effects can range from widespread shortage of a specific crop
to complete famine resulting in significant financial burden and societal
hardships. In an effort to limit these potential threats, work presented in this
research uses chemistry to make antifungal natural products and derivatives.
Biological testing is also performed to evaluate their activity with the goal of
creating new front-line agrochemicals. This pursuit allows graduate students to
acquire specialized training in chemical synthesis and biological assays. This
project additionally incorporates educational training for graduate student
scientists interested in a diverse set of careers. Students are provided
opportunities to participate in an innovative teaching program to diversify the
workforce. Involvement in an educational program on consulting that leverages
the existing entrepreneurial infrastructure at the university is also provided.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to characterize and
develop natural products and derivatives thereof for their implementation as
inhibitors of agriculturally relevant pathogens. The target molecules are
products found within the rhizosphere and have been exquisitely tuned to inhibit
plant pathogens. Specifically, this project utilizes tools from synthetic
organic chemistry, biochemistry, and microbiology to interrogate two specific
natural products, promysalin and peniciaculin A. The compounds appear to act on
plant pathogens as mimics of ubiquinone. Synthetic analogs are used to probe the
molecular basis for the biological effects. By leveraging an understanding of
the mechanistic targets of these natural products the research team is able to
design and construct lead compounds for commercialization in the agrochemical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.