* 2003658
* Collaborative Research: Structure and function of flavin-dependent N-monooxygenases
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Pablo Sobrado, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 395,670.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Pablo Sobrado from Virginia Tech and John. J. Tanner
from the University of Missouri to investigate the structure and chemistry of
enzymes known as flavin-dependent-N-monooxygenases (NMOs). NMOs play integral
parts in how microorganisms make numerous natural compounds for a variety of
purposes. These compounds can also have useful bioactivities that benefit
society. While many flavin-dependent enzymes are well known and have been
thoroughly characterized, the NMOs are a relatively recently discovered branch
on the family tree, and do not resemble the other members in common ways. This
leads to the hypothesis that new and interesting structures and chemistries are
likely to be at play in the reactions catalyzed by the NMOs. The investigators
choose several examples of NMOs for in depth examination in order to compare and
contrast their behaviors. Further, a highly multidisciplinary approach is
proposed to provide the broadest possible understanding of the enzymes. The
proposed experimental approach will provide a platform for the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in modern enzymology and biophysical
chemistry. The laboratories are also committed to strategies to enhance
diversity in the scientific research workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project expands our knowledge of the diversity of flavoenzymes through the
structural and biochemical characterization of new N-monooxygenases. Because
these enzymes have low similarity to proteins already in the Protein Data Bank,
the structures are expected to exhibit novel features and reveal unanticipated
relationships to other enzymes. This further advances our understanding of the
evolutionary relatedness of these enzymes. Also addressed are key knowledge gaps
in our understanding of flavoenzyme mechanisms by characterizing “double-
hydroxylating” NMOs, exploring a newly discovered flavin “flapping” motion in
Group B NMOs, and trapping heretofore-elusive flavoenzyme-ligand complexes in
crystallo for structure determination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.