* 2003551
* RUI: Effect of Multidentate Ligand Exchange Pathways on Metal Ion Uptake
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Nathan Boland, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 362,929.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of Chemistry funds
Professor Nathan Boland at Whitman College. Professor Boland and his students
study chemical reactions that affect the availability of metal ions in living
organisms. Metal ions can be essential nutrients or toxic contaminants depending
on identity and concentration. The chemical form of a metal ion affects how
readily the metal is absorbed into an organism. Researchers use chelating
resins, which are synthetic compounds that also absorb metal ions, to estimate
bioavailability in particular natural waters. This project studies the chemical
reactions where chelating resins capture metal ions bound by different organic
molecules. The goal of this project is to better understand these reactions and
build better predictive tools. The project provides a unique opportunity for
undergraduate students to participate as researchers, collaborators, and co-
authors of presentations and papers. The project will immerse Whitman
undergraduate students in cutting-edge environmental chemistry research. The
project will contribute to a growing network of research-active faculty at
Whitman with interests in environmental chemistry and transition metal
chemistry. This project will enhance Dr. Boland's ability to integrate teaching
and research by informing his courses with current and relevant issues in the
field. Dr. Boland is committed to continued involvement with Whitman-based
science outreach and educational activities engaging local elementary and middle
school students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multidentate ligand exchange
reactions are important in controlling transition metal ion speciation and
biouptake. However, there is limited mechanistic understanding of how reaction
pathways affect reaction kinetics. The technique of diffusive gradients in thin
films (DGT) was designed to mimic bio-uptake and is a useful tool for evaluating
metal ion bioavailability in situ. The project uses the adjunctive-semijunctive-
disjunctive framework for classifying multidentate ligand exchange reactions to
evaluate common assumptions in both DGT and biouptake models. Initial rates of
nickel uptake into a suite of DGT chelating resin layers are quantified under
varied reaction conditions. Results are used to evaluate new combined kinetic-
mass transfer models for each multidentate ligand exchange pathway.
Additionally, the project evaluates the effect of low molecular weight organic
acids (e.g. oxalate) and the common constituent ion calcium on rates and
pathways of metal ion uptake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.