* 2003808
* Elements: DeepPDB: An open-source automated framework to enable high-fidelity atomistic simulations in unexplored material space
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Wissam Saidi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 10/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

A key requirement to address the worldâ€™s energy challenges is the development of
new energy-efficient and smart materials. To aid in this process, state-of-the-
art and revolutionary computational tools can be used to simulate new materials,
thus providing a thorough understanding of their characteristics and behavior.
Such materials simulation efforts can drastically reduce the time-to-market of
new materials from decades to months. Traditional simulation approaches can
accurately predict the behavioral properties of materials both at the smallest
possible scale (atomic) and at the macroscopic level, i.e. millimeter or larger.
Many critical materials properties are defined and needed at scales ranging from
a few nanometers to micrometers, yet simulations are lacking at these levels.
While algorithms do exist to simulate properties at these scales, often we lack
the fundamental parameters, termed force-fields, for novel materials such as
those for next-generation solar cells, batteries and jet turbine alloys. These
force-fields are laborious to determine using traditional methods, requiring
significant expertise and thus restricted by the human-in-the-loop. The primary
goal of the proposed Deep Potential DataBase (DeepPDB) will be to offer an open-
source toolkit with the ability to automatically generate estimates of force-
fields parameters using advanced empirical-based computational tools. We will
also curate and disseminate a validated repository of first-principles datasets
and their corresponding potentials for inorganic materials. DeepPDB will serve
both the materials science and machine learning communities, by providing the
former with critical parameters to solve materials challenges and the latter by
benchmark datasets for machine learning development. The resulting synergy will
enable artificial intelligence and machine learning to play a greater role in
computing critical materials properties for next-generation challenges. DeepPDB
will also serve a critical educational objective, allowing the budding of a new
generation of materials scientists, who understand how deep learning can be used
to solve materials science challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DeepPDB aims to
build a database of deep neural network potentials (DNP) for the simulation of
inorganic materials. In the process DeepPDB will: (1) develop automated
workflows that given a target composition, will run the necessary density
functional theory (DFT) calculations, train DNPs, validate against metrics
imposed by the training data, identify the input-data space with the largest
uncertainty and iterate until an optimal DNP is trained; (2) openly disseminate
the training DFT data along with the pre-trained DNPs; (3) develop transparent
automated validation that encompasses both traditional DNP based methods as well
as fully integrated tests that include target metrics. To accomplish this,
DeepPDB will build a toolkit based on careful software engineering practices: a
combination of feature- and sprint-based development cycles; constant continuous
integration using unit-tests and integration tests as milestones; and a
database-oriented approach to data and workflow management. The resulting open-
source toolkit will serve as a foundational tool to investigate the properties
of hitherto-unseen materials at length- and time-scales previously not
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research
within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.