* 2003129
* MLWiNS: Distributed Learning for the Nomadic Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 593,333.00

Edge computing is a paradigm that brings computing closer to where the data is
generated, such as cellular networks, internet service providers, and enterprise
networks. Typical edge nodes are static and are located in fixed points over a
wired network. This project creates a new notion of edge computing, Nautilus, to
support distributed machine learning over mobile nodes, such as vehicles. The
project aims to create new techniques that can enable a new class of
applications that leverage sensors mounted on vehicles. The applications range
from smart transportation, to urban planning, and to broadly support smarter
cities and communities. The broader impact of this project includes: (i)
creation of a hands-on curriculum centered around computer vision techniques and
machine learning; (ii) educating the broader public on wireless systems and
machine learning technologies and their impact on our society; (iii) engagement
with industrial partners and with regulatory bodies; (iv) public dissemination
of the developed source code and prototype design; (v) mentoring of women STEM
students through various campus programs as well as global ones and helping them
identify opportunities for fulfilling careers in this
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is structured in a three-
tiered architecture consisting of the nomadic edge (in vehicles), the static
edge (co-located with Radio Access Networks), and the cloud. To support diverse
emerging applications across domains (e.g., smart transportation, urban
planning, and more broadly across different aspects of smarter communities)
which can issue queries spanning large spatio-temporal regions. The research
agenda includes five complementary tasks: (i) Design of distributed and dynamic
computer vision from the vehicular context, which involves collaborative and
federated machine learning approaches to event and object detection under
diverse conditions; (ii) Design of collaborative and distributed training and
inference to address high level queries which will utilize various techniques of
redundant and coded computing and communication to support efficiency and
scalability; (iii) Estimation and prediction of the wireless network context to
infer opportunities for communication between collaborating nomadic edge nodes,
as well as between the nomadic and static edges; (iv) Design for privacy and
security of both data and models; and (v) Systems integration and field trials
to allow for technique refinement, evaluation, and reproducibility. Through a
partnership with the local transit network â€” Madison Metro Transit, the research
team plans to use the project research results and assist them in understanding
various challenges, opportunities, and optimizations in planning various
transportation and transit decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.