* 2003261
* RUI: Exploring Shape-selective Binding of the DNA Major Groove by Haiprin bis(diarylmethylene)Hydrazides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Thomas Minehan, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 330,662.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Thomas Minehan from California State University-
Northridge to investigate how tightly a set of hairpin
bis(diarylmethylene)-hydrazide compounds bind to the DNA major groove and
thereby potentially provide new tools to control when and at what levels genes
are expressed. Nature's transcription factors are proteins that control when
genes are turned on in cells by recognizing and binding DNA sequences in the
major groove of the double-helix. Compounds that compete against transcription
factor binding can thus be used to control genes that may be out of control. The
molecules being constructed herein are to recognize regions in the DNA that are
widened, mimicking the shape of the double-helix when proteins bind. Efforts to
develop molecules that recognize DNA shape-selectively represent important new
exploratory directions in chemistry and chemical biology. Success here could
lead to a new class of tailored synthetic agents that modulate gene expression.
The research provides valuable training at the interface of organic and
biological chemistry to both undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, a
new course and teaching resources are being developed to increase the
appreciation of chemistry-related fields by non-science
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is great need to develop new chemical
scaffolds for sequence-specific major-groove binders. Peptide-tethered
bis(diarylmethylene)-hydrazides are sterically bulky small molecules with
defined distances between positively charged dimethylamino groups. Varying the
tether length and aromatic surface area of these molecules allows the design of
ligands with well defined distances between the projected positive charges so as
to contact the negatively charged phosphate groups on opposite sides of expanded
DNA major groove. Four hydrazide ligands possessing varying N-N spans will be
synthesized and their DNA binding affinity and sequence selectivity evaluated
using fluorescent intercalator displacement assays and isothermal titration
calorimetry. These studies, together with X-ray crystallographic data on select
DNA-ligand complexes, will be used to achieve optimal ligand structures for
sequence-selective binding. Finally, an electrophoretic mobility shift assay is
to be utilized to assess the ability of the ligands to selectively inhibit the
binding of transcription factors to their target nucleic acid sequences, thus
shedding light on the therapeutic and biotechnological promise of this class of
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.