* 2003567
* Electrons in Diamond
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Anna Zaniewski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 813,616.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Diamond is often considered as the ideal
semiconductor material for a new generation of power electronics. A key
application would be modernization of the electricity grid to integrate energy
sources, energy storage and diverse usersâ€™ needs such as DC and AC power
systems. Moreover, electrons emitted from diamond into water can enable chemical
reactions for a variety of applications. The research will use new methods to
modify diamond and its surface to enable these applications. The results will
support the development of diamond power transistors, high frequency components
for communications and electron emission into water for localized chemical
reactions not possible with other materials. This project will collaborate with
ASU Sundial, a program which supports retention and diversity in the physical
sciences. The activities with Sundial include research related workshops,
mentoring and the development of an outreach-level scientific conference, geared
at community members and local high school students and teachers. The goal of
these activities is to increase access to science careers to students who are
traditionally under-represented, by improving retention and educational
enrichment opportunities for these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description &lt;br/&gt;Diamond is a wide band gap semiconductor with outstanding
semiconductor properties that have long been recognized as beneficial for high
power and high frequency applications. With specific surface termination,
diamond has a negative electron affinity that can enable injection of electrons
into water for localized catalysis. The high electron and hole mobilities of
diamond are unusual compared to all other wide band gap semiconductors. While
p-type doping with boron has been well characterized for two decades, n-type
doping with phosphorus has recently advanced in a number of laboratories, and
understanding Electrons in Diamond could enable a new generation of diamond
devices based on electron transport and electron emission from conduction band
states into vacuum or water. The focus of this proposal is on electron injection
and diamond-dielectric interfaces to enable electron transport, confinement, and
surface emission. This proposal will address three fundamental challenges to
achieving Electrons in Diamond: 1) Can electrons be transported into the
conduction band of diamond? The low or negative electron affinity of diamond
means that the n-type Schottky barrier for contact metals on diamond will be
large and prohibit electron injection. 2) Can a dielectric-diamond interface be
formed that confines electrons in diamond? A dielectric-semiconductor interface
to confine electrons requires a conduction band offset where the dielectric
conduction band minimum is above the diamond conduction band minimum. 3) Can a
surface termination of diamond enable continued efficient electron emission into
vacuum or water? While hydrogen terminated diamond has a negative electron
affinity, the surface is unstable in vacuum or oxidizing environments including
water. The understanding gained from this program will set the stage for new
applications of diamond as a semiconductor for electronics or localized
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.