* 2003891
* Effect of Chain-ends on the Mixed Polymer Brush Morphology
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Padma Gopalan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer brushes are long
stringy molecules that are chemically anchored to a surface to form a dense,
thin coating that alters the surface properties. While the chemical anchoring to
the surface provides the required mechanical strength to the coating, the
chemistry and structure of the polymer enables communication with the
environment. Hence, these coatings have broad relevance in solving problems in
materials science and in human health. They can act as sensors for rapid
detection of biomarkers in biofluids when anchored to electronically active
surfaces, direct cell growth for regenerative medicine, resist deposition of
micro-organisms on surfaces, control flow of charge in batteries, control
friction at relevant interfaces., etc. This research program will develop new
synthetic methodologies to make these polymer brushes with well defined
structure and chemistry. The methodology developed is high yielding, simple and
reproducible on a wide range of surfaces, hence can be adapted by the coating
industry. This program will develop characterization methods to aid in the
molecular level understanding of the resulting structure. The research program
will serve to inspire and involve undergraduate students in polymer science and
engineering research, by working with graduate student mentors, through the REU
program. Educational modules will also be developed for dissemination through
UW-Madisonâ€™s institute for Chemical Education, a national center dedicated to
STEM education through outreach and education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program
will develop a highly versatile approach to grow mixed A/B polymer brushes from
a substrate using a cross-linkable copolymer coating, which contains a
polymerizable initiator (inimer) as a comonomer. Mixed A/B polymer brushes
consist of chemically distinct A and B chains, randomly grafted to the surface.
They show changing density, height and composition profile as a function of
solvent environment. These polymer brushes will have high chain grafting
density, uniform distribution of A and B graft points, controlled molecular
weights, and excellent control over composition. Theory predicts the lowering of
critical point for phase separation in mixed brushes compared to block
copolymers, and the formation of nanoscale morphology. However, experimental
studies have fallen short of validating these predictions. The gap between
theory and experiments is attributable to lack of: a) experimental methods for
uniform growth of high grafting density mixed brushes with controllable grafting
ratios, and predictable chain lengths, (b) accounting for chain end-groups in
theory and experiments, and (c) characterization methods to study the
morphology. In this project the goal is to understand the role of chain-end
density, size, distribution, and type on the A/B mixed brush morphology. This is
a largely experimentally and theoretically unexplored area in polymer brushes.
Key aspects of this research will be to develop synthetic strategies to append
select chain end groups, quantification of the extent of functionalization and
chain-end distribution by a combination of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and
Resonant Soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS), and studying the effect of chain-end
functionalization on lateral phase segregation by a combination of scattering
and advanced microscopy techniques. The morphological insight developed through
these experiments will contribute towards the broader understanding and
application of polymer brushes.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.