* 2003415
* RCN: Finding Your Inner Modeler - an interdisciplinary community solving problems in systems biology
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Sztul, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 08/31/2024
* USD 740,489.00

The project seeks to develop a community of cell biologists working across
disciplines to solve complex biological problems using computational approaches.
It builds on the success of the three “Finding Your Inner Modeler” (FYIM)
workshops that took place in the summers of 2017-2019. These events introduced
computational modeling to traditional cell biologists and promoted
interdisciplinary collaborations in systems biology. This RCN project will serve
a broader community by promoting collaborations between cell biologists
interested in using computational methods in their research with physicists,
chemists, engineers, mathematicians, and computer scientists who wish to apply
their computational skills to biological problems. Thus, the project will
benefit two distinct groups: cell biologists who wish to apply quantitative and
modeling tools to their research, and experts in other STEM disciplines who wish
to advance the study of important biological questions using their computational
skills. Three annual meetings will serve as incubators for interdisciplinary
interactions, facilitating crosspollination and leading to synergistic
collaborations that advance systems biology. A virtual venue will be developed
that will allow remote online participants to interact directly with
participants at the in-person meetings, thereby removing most geographical
barriers. Standardizing the schedule, locations, and structure of the annual
FYIM meetings is expected to encourage a sense of community; an associated FYIM
website will provide this community with an online home and communications hub.
A 10-person Steering Committee whose members cover a broad range of scientific
specialties and geographic locations will work with the PI and two co-PIs to
ensure well-attended, high-energy meetings, and utilization of the website. The
Broader Impacts of this work involve the training of a diverse group of
participants at all academic levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central premise
of this project is that computational modeling is required to extract the
principles underlying cell processes and structures from what are increasingly
large and complex datasets. Emergent properties simply cannot be understood by
examining one variable at a time. Yet, many cell biologists lack the expertise
to take advantage of computational approaches, while expert modelers in other
fields who are interested in working on biological problems lack the
opportunities to do so. The three annual FYIM meetings will provide traditional
cell biologists with insights into the utility of computational modeling,
guidance in how to get started, and the chance to interact with interested
modelers from a broad range of disciplines. Unlike most field-specific meetings,
the events will bring together scientists and engineers with diverse backgrounds
and expertise, thereby promoting productive interdisciplinary collaborations.
The ongoing development of the FYIM website will continue during the project
period with the goal of creating an active online meeting place and information
nexus for the systems biology community at large; in addition to providing a
home for meeting registration and information, the website will serve as a
prototype for web-based interactive communities. Such communities may become
important hubs of scientific communication and attractive alternatives to
distant travel within the next decade. Advertising for the meetings and website
will target a diverse group of potential participants with respect to their
career stage, type and location of home institution, gender, and ethnicity. The
diversity of participants is important to achieving the ultimate aim, which is
to promote the development of quantitative and computational cell biology into a
widely used and high-impact discipline, on par with other interdisciplinary
fields such as bioinformatics and genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.