* 2003613
* Synchronizing the chemical composition of silver nanoparticle surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Katherine Willets, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 393,607.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Silver nanoparticles (~1 â€“ 100 nm in size, more
than 1000x smaller than the width of a human hair) are used in a wide range of
applications, including antibacterial coatings, cosmetics, electronics, chemical
and biological sensors, and catalysis. However, silver is a highly reactive
material, particularly when shrunk down to nanoscale dimensions, and is
susceptible to unwanted side reactions, such as the well-known tarnish that
forms when silver jewelry or utensils are exposed to the ambient environment.
These unwanted side reactions can impact the performance and reproducibility of
silver nanomaterials in critical applications. Even silver nanoparticles taken
from the same bottle will perform differently on day 1 vs. day 100, and there
can be significant batch-to-batch heterogeneity, due to the extent and chemical
nature of the reactions that have happened on the surface. The objective of this
proposal is to determine whether it is possible to clean the surface of silver
nanoparticles that have undergone these unwanted reactions and restore them to a
more uniform, reproducible silver surface. To accomplish this, silver
nanoparticles will be exposed to a variety of chemical and electrochemical
conditions, and the change in their surface will be monitored by following time-
dependent changes in their optical properties. By tracking the behavior of large
numbers of single nanoparticles, these studies will determine specific
conditions that produce a shift from significant surface heterogeneity to
improved homogeneity across a nanoparticle population. The proposal will also
support the training of graduate and undergraduate students, all of whom
participate in community outreach with the Willets lab (including the Adventures
in Silver high school chemistry lab developed by the group), as well as support
the ongoing professional development efforts of the PI, which focus on improving
scientific communication as well as creating a more equitable and inclusive
environment within chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Metal nanoparticles are widely used across a number of
applications, including sensing, nanomedicine, and catalysis, yet dynamic
changes in their surface chemistry can affect their reproducibility. Rather than
attempt to control the surface of nanoparticles during synthesis, this proposal
seeks to develop strategies to synchronize the surface chemistry of
nanoparticles post-synthesis, thereby creating more reproducible behaviors when
integrated into devices and used in applications. To synchronize the surface
chemistry across a population of silver nanoparticles, sacrificial shells will
be introduced, either chemically or electrochemically, which outcompete unwanted
contaminants on the surface of the nanoparticles. The shells will then be
removed via electrochemical stripping, ideally recovering pristine silver
surfaces. This proposal will test a variety of chemical and electrochemical
shells, in order to assess their ability to improve the surface homogeneity
within a nanoparticle population. To quantify the success of the approach, dark
field scattering microscopy will be used to track the scattering intensity,
spectral profile, and spatial origin of single nanoparticles throughout the
shell growth and stripping cycle. The kinetics of single nanoparticle
electrodissolution will be used as a metric to confirm the quality of the
resulting silver surfaces, with fast electrodissolution indicating near-pristine
silver and sluggish electrodissolution kinetics suggesting high levels of
surface impurities. These studies will not only yield strategies for improving
the post-synthesis/storage surface homogeneity in silver nanoparticles, which
will improve reproducibility in critical applications, but will also allow for
direct comparisons in how the kinetics and interfacial behaviors of
nanoparticles change when exposed to various perturbations. Outreach projects
introducing high school students from a local minority-serving school to silver
nanoparticle synthesis and spectroscopy complement the proposed work, along with
PI-led professional development activities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.