* 2003648
* CAS: Sustainable Analytical Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry for Biological Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Susan Olesik, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 466,296.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Susan Olesik and her group at Ohio State University are
working to improve the capabilities of powerful analytical methods that combine
separation of complex mixtures (using chromatography) and detection of the
components in those mixtures (using mass spectrometry). Specifically, they seek
to improve the performance of both elements by adding liquefied carbon dioxide
to the solvents used for separation. The Olesik group is engaged in fundamental
studies aimed not only improving performance, but also reducing the amount of
sample and solvent needed for the analysis. The insights gained should enable
new capabilities in a broad range of fields, such as environmental and
biomedical studies. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in the project
gain state-of-the arts skills that will prepare them for STEM careers. To better
inform the general public about the importance of sustainability, online
presentations are being developed to teach nonscience undergraduates about the
properties, use, and sustainability of solvents. The presentations highlight the
widespread public uses of solvents and the associated environmental, health and
safety risks. The expectation is that better and more widespread understanding
of those risks can reduce their impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Olesik group is
using biodegradable enhanced-fluidity mobile phases generated from biomass
(e.g., water-methanol-CO2) for separation and mass spectrometric detection of
biologically relevant compounds. These mobile phases will yield both higher
sensitivity and enhanced sustainability. The approach can serve a wide range of
applications involving analyses of many polar compounds. Proteins are used as
model analytes because of the significant use of chromatography-mass
spectrometry for their characterization and the need for improved analytical
performance metrics for these compounds. Insights from the charge state
distributions of representative proteins should provide evidence on the protein
conformation while in enhanced-fluidity liquids. Through studies of relative
ionization efficiencies and ion internal energies, mechanistic insights on the
electrospray ionization process when using enhanced-fluidity solvent mixtures
are anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.