* 2003456
* Probing Ion Injection in Organic Electrochemical Transistors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,10/31/2023
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 10/31/2023
* USD 505,581.00

Plastics that can conduct both electrons and ions are important for numerous
applications such as bioelectronic sensors that convert biological nerve
impulses into signals readable by digital electronics, energy storage devices
that can deliver high currents for short times, and next-generation computers
that mimic the function of the brain. One of the factors limiting technological
developments in these fields is limited understanding of how ions inject into
and transport within these semiconducting plastics. This project addresses this
question by analyzing polymers (plastics) at the nanometer scale using advanced
microscopy techniques. These methods can determine where polymers are swelling
from ion injection and can correlate that response with the chemical signature
of the ion using infrared light, also at the nanoscale. The microscopic
information is then compared to transistor measurements to gain a fundamental
understanding of how the polymer processing and structure influences ion motion.
The scientific knowledge from this project enables better design and
processing/manufacturing of polymers for the applications noted above. The
project additionally builds upon the track record of the principal investigator
in education by enabling development of new outreach materials such as polymer
electrochemistry kits that are suitable for integration into existing outreach
programs and networks. The project also provides direct support for
undergraduate research through continuation of the successful partnership with
the Rainier Scholars organization to provide pathways to assist under-
represented groups and first-generation college students succeed in the
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this project
is to gain a fundamental understanding of the structure/function relationships
controlling ion injection in pi-conjugated polymers operating as mixed
ionic/electronic conductors while using blended organic electrochemical
transistors as an experimental testbed. These polymers and blends typically
exhibit features on the scale of tens of nanometers, and therefore this project
uses advanced scanning probe microscopy tools to investigate the ion transport
process at the nanoscale. Conjugated polymers have emerged as promising
electronic and photonic materials for transducing signals at the interface
between the biological and digital environments, and the proposed project will
explore fundamental structure/function properties of these materials relevant to
these applications in a way that is distinct from other efforts through a
combination of unique local and bulk methods. Specifically, the project will: 1)
use a new method, photoinduced force microscopy (PiFM), to make nanoscale maps
probing how local chemical structure and morphology combine to affect local ion
injection; 2) apply electrochemical strain microscopy (ESM) to measure local
swelling due to ion uptake in homopolymers, block copolymers, and blends; and,
3) do so while exploring new blend and composite architectures as a means to
overcome the bottlenecks of existing materials performance. Notably, this
project uses nanoscale infrared microscopy to probe blends of conducting
polymers and ionic conductors to test the hypothesis that decoupling the high
electronic mobility component and high ionic mobility component can enable
improved electrochemical transistors. The principal investigator has shown in
previous work that ion injection and electronic mobility are often anti-
correlated in mixed conductors, which serves as a device bottleneck. These
experiments yield a distinct set of measurements that enable multimodal analysis
of the structure-function relationships underpinning ion injection. The project
provides important insight into how mobility and volumetric capacitance in mixed
ionic-electronic conductors are related, and whether it is possible to
rationally improve conducting polymers and polymer blends design by focusing on
how ions move into the polymer from the ground up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.