* 2003302
* Structure-Property Relationship in Graphene Nanoparticle Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Alexander Star, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Alexander Star at the University of Pittsburgh is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to synthesize graphene metal nanoparticle composites and evaluate
their properties and potential applications in sensing and catalysis. Graphene
(sheets of carbon atoms arranged in a rigid structure that resembles chicken
wire) is perforated to form an ordered array of holes. These holes then act as
handles to accommodate nanoparticles. The goal behind the synthesis of this
nanoparticle construction is that the decoration of holey graphene with select
metallic nanoparticle dopants may act to tune the graphene electronic properties
to enhance their sensing and catalytic properties. Success in achieving this
objective may impact the fields of energy and environmental remediation as the
research may open the way for practical applications, such as in water splitting
to form hydrogen fuel and carbon dioxide use in useful chemical products. A
diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students are trained
as they conduct this research. The concepts of sensors and energy are
incorporated in instructional videos and practical demonstrations communicated
to the general public. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Professor Star and his research
team are working on the synthesis of holey graphene metal nanoparticle
composites (GNCs) and the evaluation of their properties and potential
applications in sensing and catalysis. The formation of holey graphene is
accomplished with oriented covalent organic framework growth as a template
followed by reactive ion etching. It is hypothesized that grapheneâ€™s band
potential can be doped with a versatile range of nanoparticles to match the
redox potential of specific analytes. This precise matching may enhance sensing
and catalytic behavior. The holey graphene edges-nanoparticles interfaces are
manipulated by varying the size and the activity of the holes and the chemical
nature of the nanoparticles to tune the graphene work function. The idea is to
match the work function to the redox potential of the molecular probes in both
gas and aqueous environments to enhance the sensing of these probes and
establish a link between sensing and catalytic behavior. Different GNCs are
being synthesized and evaluated to facilitate the electrocatalytic splitting of
water and to control the electrocatalytic product formation resulting from
carbon dioxide reduction. Structural characterization of the composite materials
is accomplished using a suite of analytical tools and electrochemical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.