* 2003422
* Quantum Chemical Studies of the Thermal and Photo-induced Chemistry of Criegee Intermediates.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tolga Karsili, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 248,499.00

This project is being jointly funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences
(ECS) and the Chemical Theory, Modeling, and Computation (CTMC) Programs of the
Chemistry Division, as well as the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR). Professor Tolga Karsili of the University of Louisiana at
Lafayette and his students are using and developing state-of-the-art quantum
chemical and dynamics methods to study the chemistry of Criegee intermediates
(CI). CIs are formed by the reaction of ozone with volatile organic compounds in
the atmosphere. Such reactions are an important source of hydroxyl radicals
which break down pollutants and ‘clean’ the atmosphere. They are often referred
to as atmospheric detergents and are important in increasing the oxidizing
capacity of the atmosphere. The project involves graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as high-school students, including members of underrepresented
groups. The students also have opportunities to travel to the group of the
collaborator, Professor Hua Guo (University of New Mexico), to learn new
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focusses on the unimolecular decay
of the thermalized and vibrationally and electronically excited CIs. CIs are
formed with excess internal energy and thus may undergo further reactions, such
as unimolecular decay or isomerization. Alternatively, the highly vibrationally
excited CI may undergo vibrational energy relaxation through collisions with
proximal molecules. The stabilized CIs can then undergo unimolecular decay,
react with several trace atmospheric species or may undergo UV-excitation.
Unimolecular decay of thermalized and highly vibrationally excited CI is a well-
known source of hydroxyl radicals. Professor Karsili and his group are
computationally studying the vibrationally and electronically excited quantum
dynamics associated with the simplest CI, derived from the ozonolysis of ethene
and then systematically comparing with CIs of increasing molecular
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.