* 2003820
* Elements: Morpho-Cyberinfrastructure for scientists and engineers studying shape change
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* James Adler, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The goal of this project is to create an accessible open-source software
package, Morpho, able to solve a wide variety of shape optimization, evolution
and shapeshifting problems. These occur in numerous systems that cut across
multiple NSF programs involving soft matter, an umbrella term for readily
deformable materials, and includes soft robots, plastics, complex fluids,
textiles, particulate media, glasses and biological materials as well as other
applications in mathematics and computer science involving computational
geometry. Shape change is an important feature of these systems, or a goal of
the envisioned applications, but predicting their behavior is very challenging.
There is presently a lack of appropriate simulation tools readily available to
practitioners working in these domains inhibiting quantitative, mechanistic
understanding of their behavior and optimization for applications. With Morpho,
domain scientists gain a powerful new simulation tool that enables them to
tackle larger and more complex shape evolution problems than presently possible.
The project also creates a user community by providing extensive training
opportunities including an immersive annual workshop, high quality documentation
and a virtual community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape optimization and evolution
problems are numerically extremely challenging because the final shape is not
known ahead of time: The numerical representation must be continuously monitored
to ensure the solution obtained is correct and of high quality. The central
innovation of Morpho is to regularize ill-posed shape problems by introducing
auxiliary functionals that capture some notion of mesh quality. The aim of this
work is to extend the range and complexity of problems Morpho can solve in two
ways. The first is to allow the user to incorporate arbitrary types of
manifolds, field quantities defined on the manifolds, discretizations,
functionals and constraints pertinent to their problem. The second is to
leverage multilevel algorithms and GPU computing to accelerate the simulations
and enable the software to predict the dynamical response of the system given an
initial configuration. The project also engages domain scientists in creating
and using Morpho through a user-centered development process and a community
driven science and education program, incorporating documentation, a repository
of example code and tutorials, a virtual community and an annual training
workshop. The resulting software and educational materials enable other
researchers to simulate shape evolution in several emerging fields involving
soft matter and other areas including active materials, soft robots,
programmable materials and extreme mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the
Division of Materials Research within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.