* 2003493
* RUI: Coherent Spectroscopy of Defects in Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christopher Smallwood, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 328,216.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;Color centers in diamond are defects that
absorb and emit light in an otherwise transparent crystal. Besides contributing
to the striking visual characteristics of gemstones like fancy colored diamonds,
these centers—and related defects in other materials—offer great promise for use
as hardware elements in quantum computers and networks. This project aims to
characterize the properties of defects in solids using laser-based measurements.
Outcomes of the project include the discovery of information about these
materials that will be used to fabricate more effective quantum devices, thereby
enhancing American international competitiveness in information technology. The
PI’s research team comprises a diverse group of undergraduate researchers and
master’s students who take on leading roles at every stage of the scientific
process, developing workforce skills and analytical abilities that are well-
suited to the challenges and opportunities of the 21st-century economy. Data
from the project are used to facilitate classroom instruction and outreach
efforts at the PI’s institution. Finally, the PI conducts additional outreach
efforts with the local academic community, including community colleges, and
with the public at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, defects in solid-state materials have
drawn attention because their relatively long electron excited-state lifetimes
and coherence properties mark them as potentially useful in devices relevant to
quantum information processing and quantum computation. This project is oriented
toward understanding the coherent optical properties of defect states in solids
using equilibrium and time-resolved spectroscopic tools, with a special emphasis
on the construction and utilization of a novel interferometric measurement
system for conducting collinear optical multidimensional coherent spectroscopy
(MDCS). Material systems to be studied include Nd:YVO4, excitons and localized
states in transition metal dichalcogenides, silicon-vacancy (SiV) centers in
diamond, and silicon vacancy (VSi) centers in 4H-SiC. Scientific objectives
include extracting defect-state single particle dephasing times, measuring
interparticle interactions, developing an enhanced understanding of microscopic
mechanisms leading to decoherence phenomena in solids, and discovering
completely new types of defect state resonances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.