* 2003800
* Collaborative Research: CSSI Frameworks: SAGE3: Smart Amplified Group Environment for Harnessing the Data Revolution
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Maxine Brown, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2025
* USD 2,282,000.00

The Big Data revolution necessitates the use of sophisticated tools such as
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Data Visualization to harness the sheer volume,
velocity and variety of datasets that are becoming the norm. However, it is the
research community that must make sense of the data being amassed, so
cyberinfrastructure must extend to people. SAGE3 (Smart Amplified Group
Environment) puts the human in the loop by providing scientists with an
intuitive framework that integrates state-of-the-art AI technologies with
applications, workflows, smart visualizations and collaboration services to help
them access, share, explore and analyze their data, come to conclusions, and
make decisions with greater speed, accuracy, comprehensiveness and confidence.
SAGE3 augments every step of the scientific discovery enterprise - from quickly
summarizing large data, to finding trends and similarities or anomalies among
one or more linked datasets, to communicating findings to scientists, public
policy and government officials, and the general public, to educating the next-
generation workforce. Ultimately, it is the scientists and future scientists who
must Harness the Big Data revolution to solve the nation's grand challenge
problems that will benefit society as a whole - from studying the diversity of
life on Earth, to understanding the Earth and its systems from satellite imagery
of its poles, to developing response scenarios for natural disasters such as
landslides and pandemics that impact the citizens and economies of the
world.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SAGE3 development focuses on two fundamental
components: AI-enhanced smart services and advanced computing resource
orchestration to support reproducible work models for secure collaborative work.
SAGE3 amplifies user productivity, providing them with commercially available
and open-source AI solutions, which autonomously and transparently analyze data
while continually learning and improving through user interactions. SAGE3 makes
AI technologies broadly accessible, not just a privilege for the technically
savvy. SAGE3 further democratizes AI by using Data Visualization to help
interpret and explain AI models so users better understand how AI came to its
decisions, which engenders user trust and can help identify potentially
prejudiced or biased models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.