* 2003578
* Collaborative Research: Parabens as a Tool for Interrogating Halogenation in Environmental Systems: Products and Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* John Sivey, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 173,675.00

This project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program within the
Division of Chemistry, supports Professors Daniel McCurry of the University of
Southern California (USC) and John Sivey and Keith Reber of Towson University
(TU) to study chemical reactions related to water disinfection. When water is
disinfected with chlorine, halogenation reactions occur. Such reactions can
decrease levels of harmful chemical pollutants in water. Halogenation reactions
can also generate toxic chlorinated byproduct from natural or man-made
precursors in water. This project seeks to understand the rates and mechanisms
of these reactions. The focus is on parabens, which are used as preservatives in
shampoos, lotions, and other consumer products. Parabens can be washed down the
drains of showers and sinks as components of greywater. When greywater is
recycled, parabens can enter drinking water. Parabens resemble molecules that
are naturally present in lakes and rivers due to the breakdown of plant matter.
Therefore, studying how parabens respond to the chlorination process associated
with drinking water treatment can lead to insights into chlorination reactions
with other molecules. The research is conducted as a collaboration between a
large research university (USC) and a primarily undergraduate institution (TU).
The project also includes a teaching internship for a USC graduate student at
TU, and a summer research internship for a TU undergraduate at
USC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team studies fundamental aspects of aqueous
halogenation important for understanding the fate of parabens and other aromatic
nucleophiles. Specific questions addressed by this project include: (1) What is
the role of trace, highly reactive, often-overlooked halogenating species (such
as Cl2O and BrCl) in the halogenation of parabens? (2) During chloramination,
when ammonia-containing water is chlorinated, what is the role of individual
chloramine species? Is monochloramine, which dominates chloramine speciation,
essentially inert? (3) What fraction of active halogen consumption results in
halogenation versus oxidation and formation of inert inorganic halide species?
(4) What is the mechanism of haloform formation from substituted phenols
(including parabens)? The research tasks address both fundamental environmental
chemistry questions and applied concerns about the fate of parabens,
particularly during potable water reuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.