* 2003783
* A Crossover of Molecular and Extended Magnetism in Engineered Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Kirill Kovnir, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2024
* USD 489,187.00

Part I: Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials have shaped our
modern society because they are crucial for advances in the fields of renewable
energy, electric engines, sensors, and data storage. There are two types of
magnetic materials - molecular magnets, composed of isolated molecules, and
extended solid or itinerant magnets with infinite frameworks of chemical bonds
within the crystal structure. Molecular magnets are appealing due to their
synthesis at low temperatures and high tunability but suffer from weak magnetic
interactions. In turn, extended solid magnets exhibit strong magnetic
interactions and large magnetic moments in the ordered state but have limited
tunability. The current project is focused on bridging the gap between molecular
and extended solid magnets by synthesizing a unique set of hybrid compounds,
which combine advantages of both classes of magnetic materials. In the proposed
hybrid compounds, tunable molecular fragments will be sandwiched in between one-
and two-dimensional fragments of extended solid magnets. Understanding how
structure determines properties is the key step for design of emerging
materials. Thus, to achieve significant breakthroughs in the magnetic materials
development, we are establishing fundamental relationships between structure and
nature of interactions of molecular and extended fragments, and magnetic
properties of the produced materials. In the educational component of the
project, chemistry graduate and undergraduate students are engaged in chemistry
demonstrations at local elementary schools, the Iowa State STEM Program for
Women in Science and Engineering, and the Des Moines Science Center to foster
interest of K-12 students and adults in chemistry. This project is supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Exploration
of chemical factors that affect magnetic interactions in solids is one of the
major steps in the development of novel magnetic materials. Current solid state
syntheses lack the predictability and rationality of organometallic and
coordination chemistry. To achieve high predictability and rationally design
magnetic materials, hybrid magnetic materials comprising infinite Fe-
chalcogenide fragments separated by interstitial coordination metal complexes
are being developed. In this way, strong magnetic interactions and tunability
are segregated into two different sublattices of a hybrid material. The project
uses coordination chemistry methodology to tune molecular transition metal amine
complexes which are incorporated in between or connected to extended infinite
Fe-chalcogenide fragments of itinerant magnets. It is anticipated that chirality
and spin-crossover properties of coordination complexes will be translated to
the itinerant Fe-chalcogenide fragments. An advantage of the target hybrids is
that strong magnetic interactions and large magnetic moments present in the Fe-
chalcogenide sublattice will either amplify the weak magnetic signatures of
spin-crossover transitions or produce chiral magnets. In the educational
component of the project, chemistry graduate and undergraduate students are
engaged in chemistry demonstrations at local elementary schools, the Iowa State
STEM Program for Women in Science and Engineering, and the Des Moines Science
Center to foster interest of K-12 students and adults in chemistry. This project
is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division
of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.