* 2003807
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: SHARING THE STRAIN - SYNTHETIC LIQUID CRYSTALS AS SOFT BIOMATERIALS
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Nicholas Abbott, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
advances fundamental materials research that is bioinspired, involves biological
materials, and addresses synthetic materials intended for application in contact
with biological systems. The work is motivated by the observation that living
materials (cells and tissues) are soft and dynamic, and provide a range of
useful functions by coupling shape, internal organization and mechanical strain.
Specifically, the project seeks to advance the design of new synthetic materials
that dynamically regulate their mechanical interactions with living cells (as a
type of synthetic exoskeleton), thus providing new ways to instruct the
behaviors of living cells or, alternatively, report on changes in the mechanical
properties of cells. The initial effort is directed at the creation of
reconfigurable, soft material interfaces with red blood cells, with a focus on
elucidation of the complex and non-linear mechanical interactions of soft
synthetic and biological materials. The approach involves a convergence of
perspectives from biology, physics, chemistry and mathematics. In the long term,
the work has the potential to lead to the creation of new classes of materials
that can be used to rapidly screen for those diseased states of cells which are
associated with increased cell stiffness. The project will also provide
outstanding opportunities to educate the next generation of STEM students and
researchers, including Native American youth in the Ho-Chunk Nation and other
children and parents in underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the interactions of
anisotropic and reconfigurable biomaterials based on chromonic liquid crystals
with mammalian cells. The research will investigate the use of chromonic liquid
crystals as primitive, synthetic exoskeletal materials, with a focus on
understanding the interplay of hydration, osmotic pressure and mechanical
interactions with red blood cells. These fundamental insights will inform the
interpretation of measurements of the shape-response of single red blood cells
dispersed in chromonic liquid crystals, providing new insights into how these
novel biomaterials share strain with red blood cells. We will test the
hypothesis that individual red blood cells differ in mechanical properties and
exhibit distinct shape-responses in the liquid crystals. The overall approach to
these challenging questions relies on close integration of experiment and
modeling. The use of liquid crystals as biomaterials to strain living cells such
as red blood cells has the potential to provide new ways to rapidly identify
cell-to-cell variation in the mechanical properties of single cells in a
population. The numerical methods developed in this project will be broadly
useful for studying complex fluid-body interactions encountered in a variety of
materials-related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.