* 2003354
* Measurements of Electron Weibel Instability in a Laboratory Plasma Using Relativistic Electron Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Chan Joshi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 760,682.00

Most of the matter that one can observe in the universe is in a plasma state
comprised of electrically charged particles, electrons and ions. It is therefore
imperative to understand the behavior of plasmas in order to explain galactic
formation, gamma-ray bursts, and our own Sun. Often, the temperature of
electrons in a plasma is hotter in one direction than in the other. Such plasmas
are said to be anisotropic. An anisotropic plasma eventually becomes isotropic
-- reaching the same temperature in all three dimensions of space -- by a
process known as the Weibel instability. The Weibel instability was predicted by
Weibel almost 50 years ago, but it has been impossible to check the theory of
how rapidly this instability grows and why it eventually stops growing
(saturates) because it has not been possible to generate a plasma with known
temperature anisotropy in the laboratory. This project aims to measure the
generation and saturation of the Weibel instability for the first time. This
experimental work will be performed by the University of California - Los
Angeles team at the Accelerator Test Facility at Brookhaven National Laboratory,
and will involve training of a graduate student and a postdoctoral associate in
plasma and accelerator science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly anisotropic plasmas
can be produced by optical field ionization of He gas using a circularly
polarized laser pulse, resulting in a plasma that is very hot in the transverse
direction but rather cold in the direction of propagation of the laser. Such a
plasma undergoes a hierarchy of plasma kinetic instabilities, starting with the
two stream instability and current filamentation instability that reduce the
plasma anisotropy from ~100 to less than 10 in a pico-second. Thereafter, the
electron Weibel instability begins to grow, seeded by coalescence of currents
associated with the filamentation instability. The pure Weibel instability is
characterized by rapid growth of a static magnetic field with a broad wavenumber
spectrum. This wavenumber spectrum quickly narrows to a fairly well defined,
most unstable mode that has helicoid topology. This work will measure the
exponential growth and saturation of this magnetic field and its topology for
the first time. To measure the dynamics of the Weibel B-field, a relativistic
electron beam will be used as a probe. During its passage through the plasma,
the probe electrons will be deflected by the transverse component of the
helicoid magnetic field. These deflections can be visualized as probe electron
density structures on a screen placed some distance away from the plasma. From
images taken at different times, the evolution of the k spectrum, its spectral
amplitude and 2D spatial profile of the B-field can be obtained, thereby
allowing a quantitative comparison of experiment with kinetic theory of the
Weibel instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.