* 2003077
* Sorting and Assembly of Nanomaterials on Polymer Substrates Using Fluidic and Weak Ultrasound Fields for Fabrication of Flexible Electronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Qianhong Wu, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 569,957.00

This grant supports research that generates new knowledge in the manufacturing
of flexible electronics, promoting national prosperity, health, and safety.
Flexible electronics represents a manufacturing technology that builds circuits
and devices on flexible polymer substrates. Flexible devices have applications
in health monitoring, drug delivery, energy storage and personal entertainment,
and has the potential to reshape human lifestyle. Nanomaterials have been
enthusiastically embraced in flexible electronic manufacturing due to their
outstanding functionalities and small size. However, the inherent size variation
of nanomaterials presents a significant challenge for repeatable and reliable
device manufacturing. Traditionally, a separate nanomaterial sorting process is
required, which is not only costly but also slows down the manufacturing
process. This award supports fundamental research to generate knowledge for the
development of a highly efficient sorting-assembly manufacturing process that
selectively assembles nanomaterials with similar sizes into nanostructures for
flexible electronic and other devices. Importantly, the unique feature of
utilizing low-cost raw nanomaterials with large size variations into high-
quality device structures can lead to manufacturing of affordable flexible
electronic devices. This research integrates nanomanufacturing, material
science, and fluid mechanics. The knowledge gained is applied toward the
education of underrepresented STEM students and the development of undergraduate
and graduate manufacturing curricula, thus educating and training the future
workforce in advanced manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
combines a novel fluidic control mechanism with a weak sono-assisted assembly
process that achieves assembly of nanomaterials, such as, zero-, one- and two-
dimensional materials, with precisely controlled particle size and assembly
rate. Microfluidic devices that are typically used in cellular biomechanics
research are utilized in the nanomanufacturing process. Transport models that
are typically applied in drug delivery research are utilized to study the
transport, deposition and assembly of the nanoparticles in the fluidic-assisted
systems. This research uncovers the interaction and synergy between the fluidic
and weak sono fields and their influences on the sorting and assembly processes.
This is done through the integration of the theoretical modeling and numerical
simulation of nanoparticle transport and deposition with experimental
validations. This unique approach can be transformative to a wide range of
nanomaterial assembly systems including ceramic, metal, and organic
nanoparticles. This research advances knowledge in nanomaterials assembly and
promotes the field of nanomanufacturing, offering more choices of materials and
functionalities, better device repeatability, significantly enhanced
manufacturing efficiency and affordable flexible
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.