* 2003861
* CAS: Enzymatic Hydrolytic Dehalogenation of Chlorinated Aromatic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Richard Holz, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 488,754.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes in the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Holz from the Colorado School of Mines to investigate how the enzyme
chlorothalonil dehalogenase (Chd) selectively converts under ambient conditions
an aromatic carbon-chlorine (C-Cl) bond to an aromatic carbon-hydroxide (C-OH)
bond on chlorothalonil (TPN; 2,4,5,6-tetrachloroisophthalonitrile). TPN is a
fungicide that is widely used in the US; more than five million kilograms of TPN
are sprayed every year on fruits and crops in the US. TPN is strongly absorbed
in soil, particularly soil with high organic matter such as that found in
aquatic environments, where it can remain and contaminate groundwater for years.
TPN is highly toxic to fish and other aquatic species as well as to birds and
invertebrates. TPN is also an irritant for human skin and eyes that can cause
severe gastrointestinal issues and has been classified by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) as a probable human carcinogen. Chd is an important
enzyme in the bioremediation of TPN and is thus becoming increasingly recognized
as a new “Green” biocatalyst. Dr. Holz’s research will use an interdisciplinary
experimental approach to gain insight into how TPN is hydrolyzed by Chd.
Understanding the catalytic mechanism of Chd would provide insight into its
bioremediation potential and potentially facilitate the expansion of this
catalytic chemistry through biomimetic and protein engineering approaches. These
research activities create a stimulating intellectual environment for the
undergraduate and graduate students who implement the work. Dr. Holz also
focuses on (i) broadening participation of students from backgrounds
underrepresented in STEM careers via student recruitment, and (ii) increase
undergraduate participation in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halogenated
aromatic compounds are known to be major organic pollutants given their high
toxicity and carcinogenic properties. These compounds enter the environment as
contaminants derived from industrial processes where they are widely used as
solvents, defatting agents, and fungicides. The removal of these compounds from
the environment is challenging because of their chemical stability, resistance
to degradation, and lipophilic properties. Use of an enzyme such as
chlorothalonil dehalogenase in the bioremediation of environments contaminated
with halogenated aromatic compounds is conditioned upon the understanding at
molecular level of the mechanism of the Chd-catalyzed hydrolysis of TPN. The
research supported by this award will focus on answers three specific questions
about the Chd catalytic role: (i) What are the determinants of the recognition
and binding of the halogenated aromatic reaction substrates to Chd?, (ii) Does
substrate bind to the Zn(II) ions in the active site of the enzyme and what is
the structure of the transition state?, and (iii) Which residues in the active
site of Chd are important for the catalysis? Dr. Holz and his team will use a
combination of protein biochemistry, spectroscopy and enzyme kinetic analysis,
computational chemistry, and X-ray crystallographic studies. The successful
completion of this project will enhance our understanding of the catalytic
mechanism of Chd and stimulate development of engineered catalysts for
deployment in synthesis, biocatalysis and
bioremediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.