* 2003668
* Bulk and Thin Film Self-Assembly of Core-Shell Block Brush Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mahesh Mahanthappa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,797.00

Part 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Derived from linking two or
more polymers with different chemical structures, block polymers are an
important class of specialty materials that self-organize into repeating
patterns at the nanometer (1/100,000,000 of an inch) length scale. Applications
of these structurally periodic materials include advanced water purification
membranes, templates for petrochemical refining catalysts, and pattern transfer
materials for next-generation integrated circuits. Within an interdisciplinary
research environment situated at the crossroads of chemistry, chemical
engineering, and materials science, this research project will broadly train
young scientists and engineers in hypothesis-driven, rational design of block
polymer materials with specific physical attributes. Project participants will
use precision synthesis techniques to make new block polymers, in order to probe
their nanoscale structures and consequent properties. A key goal of this project
is to develop approaches to direct polymer self-organization into periodic line
and dot patterns with spacings less than 20 nm, with potential applications for
integrated circuit manufacture. Project participants will also engage in
scientific demonstration activities for K-8 audiences to cultivate an
appreciation for the unusual yet useful properties of polymers, with the aim of
broadening participation of traditionally under-represented groups in STEM
fields. Additional outreach activities focus on enhancing science literacy
around contemporary issues related to plastic waste, recycling, and sustainable
plastics use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block polymer self-assembly presents opportunities
for molecular design of technologically-relevant materials with spatially
periodic nanoscale domains, which stem from the frustrated free energy balance
established by covalently linking immiscible polymer segments into a single
macromolecule. In linear A/B multiblock polymers, ordered phase selection,
stability, and microdomain periodicity depend on polymer composition, degree of
polymerization (N), and the energy penalty associated with unfavorable A/B
segment contacts. The choice of monomer chemistry sets the A/B contact energy,
thereby dictating a minimum N for melt-phase self-assembly and a lower bound on
the periodicities of their nanoscale morphologies. Applications of such periodic
patterns in nanomanufcaturing of next-generation integrated circuit and bit-
patterned data storage media have stimulated development of linear block
polymers, which form sub-10 nm features. The ability of brush polymers, in which
polymer side chains are densely grafted from a polymer backbone, to assemble at
sub-20 nm length scales is less well-explored. This project focuses on detailed
studies of molecular structure/self-assembly relationships in core-shell block
brush (csBB) polymers, which arise from linking ABA triblock polymers through
their chain midpoints. New csBB polymers will be synthesized and characterized
by X-ray scattering, rheology, and electron microscopy, in order to quantify how
their architecture-induced ordering power depends on the backbone length and
structure, and side-chain segmental dispersity. Additionally, fundamental
surface wetting and thin film self-assembly characteristics of csBBs will be
compared to those of their linear triblock analogues, potentially informing
future nanotemplating applications. &lt;br/&gt;.ÔÅ∑&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.