* 2003950
* Building quaternary structure in heme proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Juliette Lecomte, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 536,000.00

Proteins are essential biological molecules that function as individual entities
(protein monomers) or assemblies (dimers, trimers, tetramers, etc.). The ability
of a protein monomer to become a part of a higher-order assembly is essential to
biology, but to date, we still have only a limited understanding of how complex
protein assemblies have evolved from simple monomers. A well-known protein is
human hemoglobin, a tetramer which is precisely tuned for oxygen transport. With
this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in Chemistry is funding Dr.
Juliette Lecomte of Johns Hopkins University to explore the modifications
necessary to transform monomeric hemoglobins into dimeric assemblies endowed
with new chemical properties. The hemoglobins that will be at the focus of the
study are from unicellular organisms and artificial proteins with enhanced
thermal resistance. The research applies a combined computational and
experimental approach to the study of the hemoglobins. The university-level
students who conduct the research become versed in the use of biophysical
methods. An additional effort is directed to the integration of the results of
the research into undergraduate courses in biochemistry and biophysical
chemistry. High-school students from Baltimore City and surrounding areas are
engaged by Dr. Lecomte and her students in scientific investigation during
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Truncated hemoglobins (TrHbs) are
small proteins endowed with enzymatic activity related to the processing of
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. Some TrHbs adopt or sample a multimeric
state in aqueous solution, suggesting a transition to an assembly with
cooperative ligand binding properties. The focus of the research is the analysis
and design of such multimeric states. Starting points are natural sequences from
the piezophile Shewanella benthica and the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii,
and artificial hyperstable sequences derived from multiple sequence alignments.
Electronic absorption and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopies are used to
inspect nascent dimeric properties and the consequences of subunit association
for ligand binding. The study provides fundamental information on the evolution
of multimeric proteins and the control of their thermodynamic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.