* 2003550
* Spectroscopy-guided Design of Biomimetic Fluorescent Probes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Chong Fang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 390,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Dr. Chong Fang at Oregon State University to use
calculations and sophisticated light measurement methods to guide the design and
synthesis of fluorescent probes. Inspired by "glowing" biomolecules obtained
from jellyfish and reef corals, the creation of new probe molecules that emit
fluorescent light over a range of colors has enabled numerous chemical and bio-
imaging advances. Although chemical synthesis allows for some level of control
over the color and brightness of the fluorescent light emitted by new chemical
probes based on these natural molecules, the current bottleneck for solving
challenges in imaging applications is the lack of chemically-informed design
pathways. This project provides new information about how to make fluorescent
probes that are appropriate for imaging applications in biological environments.
Training of undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral scholars is
integrated into research activities to reach the project's aims to develop
powerful "molecular movie technologies" that are key to the tailor-making and
use of fluorescent probes. Lessons learned are made part of chemistry and
biophysics courses, as well as K-12 student outreach programs, including an
annual Juntos Chemistry Overnight Camp for Latinx high school students in
Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current development of fluorescent probes for
imaging across disciplines is largely trial-and-error and lacks molecular
insights because fluorescence is intrinsically an ultrafast process. The
research in this project led by Dr. Chong Fang at Oregon State University aims
to establish a powerful discovery and development platform to achieve rational
design principles for redder, larger Stokes-shifted, and brighter fluorescent
probes. The real-time tracking of correlated electronic and vibrational motions
of protein-derived synthetic chromophores with various functional groups at
strategic atomic sites, enriched by the newly proposed "double-donor-one-
acceptor" strategy, is facilitated by tunable femtosecond stimulated Raman
spectroscopy (FSRS), transient absorption, quantum calculations, and
collaborations with chemical biologists. Such a feedback loop effectively
bridges generalizable mechanistic insights to biomimetic molecular engineering,
which leads to an emerging group of versatile fluorescent probes with diverse
donor-acceptor scaffolds. This project at the interface of chemistry, physics,
and biology has broad technological applications and science appeal to engage
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) learners at all levels.
Strategies include implementing evidence-based instructional practices in
physical chemistry, enhancing graduate student communication skills, and
developing a Juntos Chemistry Overnight Camp for Latinx high school students
across the state of Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.