* 2003491
* Super-Resolution Photochromic Switching for Bicontinuous Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Chaitanya Ullal, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 444,948.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Chaitanya Ullal and Edmund F.
Palermo at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute are using visible light to precisely
direct the synthesis of large nanostructures. The synthesis method utilizes a
combination of several different light-based techniques and is reminiscent of
classical photography, with the exception that it does not require a projected
image using a photomask. The approach can create extremely small patterns, down
to a few tens of nanometers in size. Precise control of the shape and size of
the objects it creates is also provided. Additionally, patterns can be printed
over an entire surface cost-effectively. Research associated with this award has
the potential to enable super-resolution printing in 3D without the need to
utilize expensive state-of-the art equipment. The new techniques could advance
the design of biomedical devices and other advanced manufacturing applictions.
The research team is continuing their commitment to education and community
outreach, with a particular emphasis on promoting women and under-represented
minorities in science through innovative family-based learning activities and
design projects. The educational broader impacts include the creation of hands-
on learning activities, the development of educational videos, and the
mentorship of K-12 students, all of which inspire and promote participation of
under-represented students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
goal of this research is to create 3D bicontinuous nanostructured materials
using a combination of functional macromolecular chemistries and advanced
optics, especially super-resolution optics and interference lithography. In the
first objective, a deeper fundamental understanding of the underlying chemical
kinetics needed to enable super-resolution 3D interference lithography is
developed. A library of spirothiopyran derivatives with systematically varied
structural features is synthesized in order to precisely tune the kinetics of
photo-switching and click reactions leading to a cross-linked polymer gel or
thermoset. The second objective focuses on the development of a self-consistent
computational model that captures the coupled interaction of the three
dimensionally varying light and chemical concentration fields as a function of
time. Self-consistent solution of differential equations results in an
electromagnetic simulation at each time step of the chemical concentration
evolution; This is a departure from conventional finite-element (FEA) or finite-
difference time-domain (FDTD) techniques (prohibitively long computation times).
The last objective concentrates on bicontinuous super-resolution nanostructures
in which the configuration of 3D super-resolution interference lithography
consists of a uniform excitation exposure and a depletion pattern that is
obtained by the interference of multiple beams of coherent light. Control over
the formation of nanostructured materials using unmasked light, with precision
over large areas, has a potential to advance the development of photonic
crystals, microtrusses and biomedical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.