* 2003588
* Polyelectrolyte brushes: Stabilization through Controlled Charge Placement
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 442,821.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Christopher K. Ober at Cornell
University is developing and studying polyelectrolyte brushes with controlled
charged placement. Polymer brushes are special, large molecular structures with
polymer chains densely tethered to a surface. They have unique and useful
properties including wormlike conformation, compact molecular dimensions, and
notable polymer chain end effects due to their compact and confined structures.
These particular polyelectrolyte brushes can interact with a biological
environment actively or passively depending on the nature of a living system. As
such, the brushes are promising materials for biomedical devices, chemical
sensors and drug-delivery systems. In this research, synthetic methods are
chosen to construct charged polyelectrolyte brushes, allowing systematic
investigations of how charge placements changs the swelling, shape, mobility,
and stability of the synthesized brushes. Characterization is carried out using
sophisticated chemical measurement techniques and also includes the effect of
solution acidity and metal ions on brush behavior. This research is
interdisciplinary in nature and includes international collaborations with
researchers in Germany and the United Kingdom. The research program exposes
graduate students and associated researchers to international science
perspectives. Graduate students serve as mentors and role models to
undergraduate students, while at the same time gaini supervisory skills.
Undergraduates from Cornell University take part in the research during the
academic year while students from other schools with an emphasis on
underrepresented communities participate in research during the summer months.
Outreach activities include high school students and teachers through organized
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on the preparation and
study of a series of model poly(electrolyte)(PEL) brushes with carefully
tailored placement of cationic and anionic groups used either alone or in
combination in a single strand and bottle brush architecture based on acrylamide
and styrene-maleimide polymers. Characterization includes study of the effect of
pH and metal ions on brush behavior of these new architecture PEL brushes.
Neutron and X-ray reflectometry studies of swollen polymer films are used as
tools for understanding brush behavior. Neutron reflectivity using labeled
polymer chains to separately gather information about the different components
(brush, sidearm, ions) of the polymer brush is also employed. Brushes are grown
from surfaces by means of controlled radical polymerization of charged or
protected monomers. Ionic groups are attached to acrylamide or maleimide
backbones through tailored amine functional segments including peptoid units of
selected lengths and ionic group content. Longer peptoid side chains on a
polymer backbone form bottle brush-like architectures while controlled charge
spacing and location selectively add coulombic stress near to or away from the
polymer backbone. In addition to conventional vertically grown brushes, the
research team is capitalizing on new lateral brush growth geometries through
demonstrated microfabrication capabilities that enable parallel optical and
X-ray or optical and neutron characterization of brush swelling under a range of
wetting and electrolyte conditions. This research addresses important questions
on the conformation of dense polyelectrolyte brushes, including the effects of
chain confinement and charge spacing. The results have the potential to further
advance fundamental understanding of the factors affecting the stability and
stimulus-responsive nature of surface-grafted bottlebrush
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.