* 2003784
* Quasiparticles in Mott Insulators, Strange Metals and Spin liquids probed by Low Temperature Spectroscopic-Imaging Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Vidya Madhavan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 623,880.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;An exciting area of current condensed matter
research is systems where the particles participating in transport bear little
resemblance to conventional electrons. One example is fractionalization where
electrons split into two separate pieces; one part carrying the charge and the
other carrying the spin as is predicted to happen in spin liquids. While such
fractional particles have been postulated to exist for many decades, the fact
that correlations are usually important in such systems makes theoretical
handling difficult. This combined with a lack of experimental data (with the
exception of the fractional quantum Hall effect) has slowed progress. Another
example of is that `strange metals’ where transport properties show unexplained
behavior. In these materials, resistance varies linearly with temperature down
to quite low temperatures. So far there is no accepted theory for this linear
resistivity. Some theories have suggested that the phenomenon may result from
the breakdown of basic quantum mechanical ideas, in a state where the particles
become entangled with each other – a phenomenon described as “unparticle
physics”. The behavior of particles in the strange metal phase and the spin
liquid ground state, thus remain open interesting problems at the frontiers of
condensed matter physics. So far, most experimental data on these systems has
been obtained by transport and other bulk probes and there is very little
nanoscale spectroscopic data on these systems due to multiple reasons including
the dearth of suitable samples. In the last few years however, some of the
established Mott insulators have been shown to exhibit behavior consistent with
strange metals/spin liquids, opening up new possibilities for their exploration.
The goal of this project is to use low temperature scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM) and spectroscopy (STS) to investigate the physics of such systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The materials being studied
include the Sr3(RuxIr1-x)2O7 system and bilayer graphene (BLG) where transport
shows linear resistivity up to high temperatures; and 1T-TaS2/1T-NbSe2
monolayer- and few-layer films which are Mott insulators where the spin-liquid
phase may be realized even at high temperatures. One of the biggest advantages
of STM is that one can probe the real space electronic structure and obtain
simultaneous information on momentum-space (k-space) dispersion. By applying
powerful technique of quasiparticle interference to these materials classes, the
goal is to obtain spectroscopic data that will help distinguish between
different theories and provide new insights into the physics of these elusive
phases. Recent theory on spin-liquids has provided concrete predictions for
signatures of spinons in the charge channel which makes this an exciting time to
study such systems with STM. The success of the project will enhance the
research experience for women and minorities in physics. The new course being
developed will train students in modern ideas and techniques in condensed
matter. The PI's integrated outreach and education activities will expose
talented high school students to cutting edge science. The students working on
these projects will be trained on materials and instruments at the forefront of
today’s research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.