* 2003946
* Gold Reagents for Protein-Polymer Conjugate Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Heather Maynard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 535,395.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Heather Maynard, Alexander
Spokoyn, and Kendall Houk of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at
University of California-Los Angeles are developing gold chemistries to attach
the strands of artificial polymers to naturally occurring proteins and peptides.
The attachment of synthetic polymers to proteins and peptides create desirable
properties in the biomolecules. Applications of these novel biomaterials include
use as therapeutic agents with improved stability or solubility. This project
has the potential to advance knowledge for commercial healthcare applications.
The broader impacts of this research include increasing the number of students,
particularly female and underrepresented minorities, with doctoral degrees in
chemistry. Other efforts include outreach to girls by working with the Los
Angeles Brownie and Junior Girl Scout Troops and the development of a program
for Girl Scouts called Curieosity. Girls already interested in STEM are provided
with mentorship and networking opportunities through the Mayor of Los Angeles’
program WiSTEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on developing gold
reagents to synthesize polymer-protein conjugates. Organometallic gold(III)
reagents are optimized using a combination of theory and experiment to
understand the mechanism of cysteine arylation. Ligand design expands the use of
these operationally-simple organometallic reagents in the synthesis of protein-
polymer conjugates in aqueous solutions. These reactions are carried out by
synthesizing protein and peptide-polymer conjugates by both “grafting to” and
“grafting from” methods. Furthermore, non-native amino acid genetic encoding
techniques are examined to place gold reagents at the protein surface for
further modification with thiol-end-functionalized polymers. This research has
the potential to develop new and highly efficient synthetic methodologies to
prepare polymer-protein conjugates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.