* 2003735
* Creating Functional Nanocrystal-Molecule Interfaces for Spin-triplet Energy Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sean Roberts, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Sean T. Roberts at the University of Texas at Austin
to study light-triggered processes that occur in materials. Light provides the
energy that fuels plant growth via photosynthesis, is used in electronics for
wireless communication, and even forms the basis for noninvasive medical
treatments, such as photodynamic therapy used to treat cancer. However, light
transmits its energy in a peculiar manner, via particles known as photons.
Different colors of light contain photons with different amounts of energy, and
it is important that photon energies be matched to their intended applications.
Photons with too little energy are unable to meet their intended task while
photons with too much energy waste energy and can cause damage to components.
This research project develops materials that reshape light’s energy content by
combining pairs of photons into a single high-energy one or converting
individual photons into multiple lower-energy photons. Once formed, these
materials can serve as energy transfer agents improving solar energy harvesting
and quantum computation. In addition to working with students closely on the
research projects, Professor Roberts also founded and participates in the GReen
Energy At Texas (GREAT) program, which was formed between the University of
Texas at Austin and Austin Community College. GREAT aims to increase the number
of community college student that earn degrees through targeted mentorship and
research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor quantum dots chemically
functionalized with organic dye molecules offer an ideal interface for photon
conversion. Quantum dots energized by light absorption can pass their energy to
molecules at their surface, promoting them into spin-triplet exciton states. If
formed in high quantity, pairs of spin-triplet excitons can undergo triplet
fusion, a process that combines their energy to form a single high-energy spin-
singlet state that can radiate light. Likewise, photoexciting the dye molecules
can fuel triplet fusion’s inverse process, singlet fission, which creates pairs
of triplet excitons that can each pass to the quantum dot to drive infrared
light emission. These schemes require a key step, the transfer of a spin-triplet
exciton across the quantum dot:molecule interface, yet an understanding of how
the structure of these interfaces impacts the rate and efficiency of spin-
triplet exciton transfer is elusive. To address this need, Professor Roberts at
the University of Texas at Austin directs a team that employs controlled
chemical synthesis, 2D NMR and femtosecond time-resolved spectroscopies, and
electronic structure calculations. The research team investigates how the
chemical structure of quantum dot:molecule interfaces formed by two
complementary quantum dot materials of PbS and Si impact spin-triplet exciton
transfer. This project contributes to the creation of new hybrid
organic:inorganic junctions for light-driven production of energy and fuels as
well as materials that use spin entanglement for quantum computation and
information storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.