* 2003518
* Synthesis and Properties of Regioregular Conjugated Ladder Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Samson Jenekhe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2025
* USD 741,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers that have a ladder-
like, double-stranded, and ribbon-like molecular chain architecture are termed
ladder polymers. They have been the object of scientific quest since 1966
because they are predicted to have far superior heat resistance, mechanical,
electrical, optical and other physical properties, compared to their non-ladder
counterparts. However, such ideal ladder polymers have remained unrealized
materials because of the difficulty of making them. This project aims to develop
a novel chemistry for making various ladder polymers. The project will also
investigate the structural and physical properties of the new materials. The
resulting new ladder polymers will enable testing of longstanding predictions of
their properties. The new materials could also find applications in areas such
as electronics, biosensors and wearable devices, aerospace structures, 3D
printing, electrical energy storage (batteries and supercapacitors), and
photovoltaic devices. The research project will also facilitate education of
graduate and undergraduate students, including women and underrepresented
minorities, in emerging science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conjugated ladder polymers are predicted to have far
superior structural and physical properties, compared to their non-ladder
counterparts, due to their ribbon-like topology. However, these materials have
largely remained a dream because the challenge of making them directly has
remained unsolved. This research project aims to tackle this scientific
challenge by exploring a novel approach. The overall goal of the project is to
develop new chemistry for the synthesis of diverse well-defined, soluble,
regioregular conjugated ladder polymers and investigate their properties.
Specifically, the PI and his group will: (1) design and synthesize new
multifunctional monomers suitable for making the regioregular conjugated ladder
polymers; (2) develop polymerization methods for the one-step synthesis of the
conjugated ladder polymers; (3) investigate the effects of regioregularity on
the structure, morphology and physical properties of conjugated ladder polymers;
and (4) investigate the morphology, charge transport and photophysics of the new
conjugated ladder polymers. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.