* 2003236
* Monooxygenase/arylamine N-oxygenase activity within a single non-heme diiron enzyme (MiaE)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/16/2019,07/31/2022
* Brad Pierce, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 267,200.00

With this award granted by the National Science Foundation-Chemistry Division,
Chemistry of Life Processes Program, Dr. Brad S. Pierce at The University of
Texas at Arlington will investigate the factors influencing the extent of
biological oxidations. The proposed activities provide an opportunity to better
understand structural factors driving biological oxidations and thus provide a
framework for the rational design of biologically-inspired or bioengineered
oxidation catalysts. Oxidations result in a net transfer of electrons from the
initial molecule (or substrate) to molecular oxygen. From an accounting point of
view, the "extent" of an oxidation can be defined as the number of electrons
transferred. It has been previously noted that changes in structure around iron
dramatically influence the extent of substrate oxidation by catalysts. The
proposed biochemical studies utilize an iron catalyst to compare the factors
directing 2- and 6-electron oxidations within a single, simplified platform.
Beyond training for graduate/undergraduate students in biochemistry, biophysics
and chemical catalysis, broader impact activities for this award include
training and practical experience in scientific communication for the PI and
students (undergraduate and graduate) participating in NSF-supported activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-heme diiron enzymes are a ubiquitous family of enzymes
capable of catalyzing an amazing diversity of biological oxidations. Among these
enzymes, it has been observed that single amino acid perturbations within the
first Fe-coordination sphere have a profound impact on the nature of transient
intermediates produced following O2-activation and the extent of substrate
oxidation. For example, within the bacterial multicomponent monooxygenase (BMM)
superfamily, the hydroxylase component diiron site is coordinated by 2-histidine
and 4-carboxylate (Asp or Glu) residues [2-His/4-carboxylate]. The reduced
(diferrous) active sites of these enzymes are capable of reductively activating
molecular oxygen to catalyze the 2-electron oxidation of its specific substrate.
By contrast, a small number of enzymes have been identified which contain an
additional His-residue coordinated to one of the two Fe-sites; resulting in a
[3-His/4-carboxlate] diiron cluster. Among these are the arylamine N-oxygenase
class of non-heme diiron enzymes AurF and CmlI. These enzymes catalyze a
remarkable 6-electron oxidation of arylamine substrates to yield a nitroaryl
product. The proposed studies utilize an unusual non-heme tRNA-hydroxylase
isolated from S. typhimurium (St MiaE) to compare the relevant factors directing
(6-electron) arylamine N-oxygenase and (2-electron) monooxygenase chemistry
within a single, enzymatic platform. This comparison is made possible by a
single amino acid substitution (L199H) within the St MiaE active site which
yields a [3-His/4-carboxylate] first Fe-coordination sphere and imparts
6-electron arylamine N-oxygenase activity. Beyond training for
graduate/undergraduate students in biochemistry, biophysics and chemical
catalysis, broader impact activities for this award include training and
practical experience in scientific communication for the PI and students
(undergraduate and graduate) participating in NSF-supported activities.