* 2003509
* OP: Spatial Light Modulation using Reconfigurable Phase Change Material Metasurfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Arka Majumdar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Many emerging applications, including autonomous driving, augmented reality
visors and glass-free 3D displays rely on optical beam steering. While most
existing solutions rely on mechanical movements, such as rotating a light source
on top of a driverless cars, such moving parts require a large amount of energy
and often limits reliability and speed. Steering light without moving parts can
be extremely energy efficient, fast, and with virtually an infinite lifetime. At
the heart of such a non-mechanical beam scanning technology is an optical phase
shifter: a device that changes the optical path length by changing the
refractive index of the material. Unfortunately, the index change of most
existing materials is very small. This project aims to explore a new class of
materials, called phase-change materials, which can provide almost 1000 times
larger index change compared to most known materials. Moreover, the change is
non-volatile, i.e., once the material is changed, the state is retained. This
can reduce the energy consumption, and the complexity of the control circuit.
Such materials are already being explored in the electronics community to create
next-generation flash memory. This project, however, studies the optoelectronic
properties of this material. To further enhance the phase shift, the project is
developing hair-thin optical structures, also known as metasurfaces. These
metasurfaces consist of millions of nanoscale structures that can modify
incident light, and by making these structures out of phase-change materials the
light beam can be steered. Along with advancing the current state of optical
beam steering, this project trains a diverse, interdisciplinary workforce on
novel material characterization, as well as design and nanofabrication of
optical nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shaping an optical wavefront with
sub-wavelength spatial resolution is important for various applications with
far-reaching scientific and technological impacts (e.g., in adaptive optics and
imaging through turbid, disordered media) and commercial interests (e.g., Light
Detection and Ranging for autonomous transportation and pixelated holography).
The primary enabling technology for such capability is a compact optical phase
shifter, which can change the phase of the incident light by a full 360 degrees
at low energy (pico-Joule) and high frequency (MHz). Existing tunable optical
technologies cannot provide this functionality; mechanically tunable modulators
can reach a speed of only a few kHz, whereas liquid-crystal based modulators
operate at 100â€™s of Hz. The pixel size of the spatial light modulator is also on
the order of tens of wavelengths, which increases the energy consumption per
pixel. To that end, this project studies emerging, non-volatile, chalcogenide-
based phase-change materials and nanophotonic metasurface architectures with the
goal of creating fast, low-power spatial light modulators. The sub-wavelength
scatterers in a metasurface enable mapping complex curvatures onto a flat,
wavelength-scale thick surface by converting them into a discretized spatial
phase profile. In addition to their compact size and weight, metasurfaces are
fabricated using a single-step lithography procedure with mature, highly
scalable nanofabrication technology developed by the semiconductor industry.
Phase-change materials can provide a large, non-volatile change in their
refractive index with minimal crosstalk between neighboring pixels, as the
transition only happens when a certain threshold temperature is reached. The
non-volatile change also can significantly simplify the control complexity of
spatial light modulators. This project combines numerical electromagnetic
simulation of metasurfaces, nanofabrication, and characterization of phase-
change materials and their phase transitions. The research team is developing
novel metamolecule pixels and metasurface architectures and characterizing new
non-volatile phase-change materials to demonstrate electronic reconfiguration of
metasurfaces. This research on novel phase-change materials and their electronic
reconfiguration are important to enhance our understanding of these materials
and add new materials to the gamut of reconfigurable optoelectronic materials.
Enhancing optical phase shifts via metamolecules and optical resonators can
uncover fundamentally new knowledge on tunable nanophotonic structures and their
design principles. Such design principles can be easily translated to other
tunable photonic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.