* 2003709
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: HyLoC: Objective-driven Adaptive Hybrid Lossy Compression Framework for Extreme-Scale Scientific Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sheng Di, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2024
* USD 256,761.00

Today's extreme-scale scientific simulations and instruments are producing huge
amounts of data that cannot be transmitted or stored effectively. Lossy
compression, a data compression approach leading to certain data distortion, has
been considered as a promising solution, because it can significantly reduce the
data size while maintaining high data fidelity. However, the existing lossy
compression methods may not always work effectively on all datasets used in
specific applications because of their distinct and diverse characteristics.
Moreover, the user objectives in compression quality and performance may vary
with applications, datasets or circumstances. This project aims to develop a
hybrid lossy compression framework to automatically construct the best-fit
compression for diverse user objectives in data-intensive scientific research.
Educational and engagement activities are provided to develop new curriculum
related to scientific data compression and promote research collaborations with
national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing an efficient, adaptive,
hybrid framework that can always choose the best-fit compression strategy is
nontrivial, since existing state-of-the-art lossy compression methods are
developed with distinct principles. The project has a three-stage research plan.
First, the project decouples the state-of-the-art error-bounded lossy
compression approaches into multiple stages and effectively models the working
efficiency (e.g., compression ratio, error, speed) of particular approaches in
each stage. Second, the project develops a loosely-coupled framework to
aggregate the decoupled compression stages together and also explores as many
compression pipelines composed of different stages as possible, to optimize the
classic compression efficiency, including compression quality and performance.
Third, the project optimizes the synthetic data-movement performance regarding
the external devices and resources, such as I/O performance. The team evaluates
the proposed framework on multiple extreme-scale scientific applications,
including cosmological simulations, light source instrument data analytics,
quantum circuit simulations, and climate simulations. The project may create
technologies that can increase the storage availability and improve the
performance for extreme-scale scientific applications, opening opportunities for
new discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.