* 2003345
* Collaborative Research: Heme Distortion and Protein-Protein Contacts in Oxygen-Dependent Globin Coupled Sensor Signaling
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Yilin Liu, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2023
* USD 163,740.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Emily Weinert from Pennsylvania State University, Dr.
Christine Dunham from Emory University, and Dr. James Kincaid from Marquette
University to investigate bacterial oxygen sensing proteins. Bacteria are
integral to the health of ecosystems, plants, animals, and humans, and have
evolved to adapt to constantly changing conditions within their environment.
However, the mechanisms by which bacteria sense and respond to changes in the
levels of environmental gases are poorly understood. The research supported by
this award examines the roles of environmental signals in controlling bacterial
phenotypes; more specifically it examines the signaling mechanism and pathway of
a family of proteins termed globin coupled sensors that are responsible for
sensing oxygen. This project provides specialized training for students in
protein chemistry, spectroscopy, and X-ray crystallography. Additionally, the
participants in this project integrate research results into a board game and
create lesson plans that make elementary and middle school students aware of how
proteins help bacteria sense and react to changes in their environment.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to characterize the intra-
and inter-molecular protein interactions that control oxygen-dependent signaling
by a family of bacterial heme proteins termed globin coupled sensors. Globin-
coupled sensor proteins are widely distributed within bacteria and contain
output domains that are linked to important phenotypes, including biofilm
formation, motility, and virulence. A combination of research methods that
includes mutagenesis/screening, enzyme kinetics, resonance Raman spectroscopy,
and X-ray crystallography is being used to interrogate the oxygen-dependent
signaling mechanism within globin coupled sensor proteins and the transmission
of the signaling events to downstream partners. Results from this study provide
new information about bacterial gas-sensing proteins, signal transduction
pathways, and regulation of key bacterial enzymatic domains involved in
controlling biofilm formation and virulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.