* 2003897
* Chemical Functionalization and Polymerization of Peptide Particle Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Christopher Kloxin, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 446,848.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professors Christopher Kloxin and Darrin J.
Pochan of the University of Delaware to design and synthesize synthetic polymers
that replicate and ultimately complement some of the capabilities of naturally
occurring bimoacromolecules. Biomacromolecules have precise sequences, are
universal in nature, and have folded structures the perform numerous functions,
from molecular recognition to catalysis. Within these complex structures, there
are common reoccurring structural units such as alpha helices, beta sheets,
coiled coils and loops upon which the overall protein structure is build. While
nature uses folded substructures as a major design element, the majority of
synthetic polymers lack such modular design and are less functionally
sophisticated. To bridge this gap, this research designs and prepares complex
polymers using short peptide sequences that assemble into robust and well
defined coil-coil units called bundlemers. These sequences are rapidly produced
using microwave-based methods and are then incorporated into long polymer
chains. Computational modelling is used to design bundlemers. Structural
features of assembled polymers, such as stability and physical properties, are
also systematically investigated. Research activities provide undergraduate and
graduate students with valuable educational experience in polymer and materials
chemistry. The research team is further broadening the impact of their work by
contributing to various outreach activities and programs that involve K-12
students and broader community. Additionally, a database of functional coiled-
coils, analogous to the protein bank, is developed to provide new resources to
researchers and educators. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research team is
developing a new approach for designing and preparing complex polymeric
nanostructures using short peptide sequences that assemble into robust and well
defined coil-coil units called bundlemers. The research leverages concepts from
computational design of biological assemblies for the de novo design of
nonbiological nanomaterials with new crosslinking and functionalization
capabilities. The project involves three distinct objectives. The first
objective is to understand bundlemer functionalization and polymerization while
the second is to synthesize bundlemer bottles brushes and stars using atom
transfer radical polymerization (ATRP). The third objective is to introduce
bundlemer stapling by stabilizing assembled polymeric structures utilizing
crosslinking of amino acids with different peptide chains. Through these
objectives, the conditions and constraints for the assembly of click-
functionalized coiled-coil peptides to be implemented as a fundamental unit for
polymer design and synthesis may be established. Additionally, the effect of
non-biological residues and covalent linkages on coiled-coil formation and
stability as well as on reactive group accessibility, localization, and
confinement is investigated. Finally, stable supramolecular assembles with
precise exterior displays of highly efficient click functional groups are
created, providing routes to new macromolecular assembly pathways though
physical (noncovalent) interactions and subsequent stabilization via covalent
interactions. This new methodology for macromolecule fabrication has the
potential to impact a wide range of research areas and applications, ranging
from peptide-based therapeutics to catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.