* 2003890
* RUI: Synthesis and Host-Guest Studies of Face-Capped Metal-Organic Cages
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* John Thoburn, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 339,760.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Thoburn at Randolph-Macon
College (RMC) is studying how small molecules can spontaneously self-assemble
into larger complexes. Specifically, he is building molecules in the shape of
cubic containers that can encapsulate other molecules. Potential applications
include their use as capsules for the delivery of drugs to target organs, where
they can be selectively released. To realize such applications, Professor
Thoburn and his team of undergraduate students are studying the underlying
chemical reactions of these molecular cubes. They address questions such as how
the molecular cubes close and open to catch and release their guest molecules,
and how the guests can be used to probe the interior structure of the cube. In
addition to scientific advancements, this project features a number of broader
societal impacts including the development of an international collaboration
with Cambridge University, the preparation of undergraduate students for
advanced work in science, and the preparation of economically-disadvantaged high
school students for careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Thoburn is
investigating how an Fe8II(Porphyrin)6 metal-organic molecular cube encapsulates
large guests such as coronene and how the coronene re-orients within the cube.
To further probe the host-guest interactions, Professor Thoburn is synthesizing
tetracyanoazulene, which is capable of coordinating to Zn2+ ions embedded in the
porphyrin faces of the cube. Co-encapsulation of these electron-deficient
tetracyanoazulenes with electron-rich cyclic thiophenes can create charge-
transfer triads stabilized by the molecular cube. To make these metallocubes
more amenable to broader applications, Professor Thoburn is appending
polyethylene glycol chains increase their solubility. He is partnering with
Richmond Community High School (RCHS) to mentor college-bound high school
students from economically and socially disadvantaged backgrounds. Randolph-
Macon undergraduate students also help mentor the RCHS students. Additionally,
the RMC students have the opportunity to conduct research at Cambridge
University where they learn new techniques using resources not available at RMC.
All of these experiences help these students prepare for graduate programs in
chemistry and careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.