* 2003882
* On the Mechanisms of IsdG-based Heme Degradation and Inhibition of Heme b Biosynthesis in S. Aureus
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kenton Rodgers, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 385,466.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program within the Chemistry
Division of the NSF is funding research by Dr. Kenton Rodgers from North Dakota
State University to investigate how the bacterium Staphylococcus aureus
maintains the appropriate amount of heme in the cell. Heme is the iron-
containing molecule that gives blood its red color. Bacteria and nearly all
other organisms on our planet rely on heme being available to facilitate a wide
variety of cellular functions. Despite the absolute requirement for heme, having
too much of it is toxic for cells. Therefore, to avoid heme-induced cellular
damage, the amount of heme in an organism's cells is tightly regulated. Dr.
Rodgers research group gains insight into the molecular basis of heme regulation
by applying a broad array of chemical, biochemical, and biophysical experimental
methods to characterize the interplay between the proteins and enzymes involved
in the regulation. The scientific breadth of the project affords the
undergraduate and graduate students the opportunity to work at the cutting edge
of heme biochemistry and to learn sophisticated experimental methods ranging
from gene manipulation to LASER spectroscopy. The research is linked to an
outreach project implemented in collaboration with the largest media company in
the Northern Plains region. Concise mixed-media productions addressing current
science-based issues are carefully crafted in consultation with Dr. Rodgers to
educate and entertain consumers of commercial media. The goal of the new media
is to empower citizens to better dissect scientific information from
misinformation as they form their points of view on science-based, public policy
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
characterize the interactions between proteins of the heme importing and heme
biosynthesis systems involved in heme regulation in S. aureus. These proteins
include IsdG and IsdI, the terminal enzymes of the Isd heme acquisition pathway,
and the CpfC and ChdC enzymes, that catalyze respectively the penultimate and
final steps in coproporphyrin-dependent (CPD) heme B biosynthesis. This project
has two principal aims. First, the mechanism by which CPD heme B biosynthesis is
regulated through interactions of IsdG with CpfC and ChdC is studied by
thermodynamic, hydrodynamic and kinetic methods. Second, the mechanism of IsdG-
catalyzed O2-dependent heme degradation is probed by resonance Raman and EPR
spectroscopy of intermediates generated through step-wise cryoradiolytic
reduction of IsdG−O2 in frozen solution. The interactions between these enzymes
and the enzyme-catalyzed reactions being studied by Dr. Rodgers’ group are
central to understanding the balance between intracellular heme B production and
external heme B uptake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.