* 2003865
* How Socioeconomic Status Shapes Perceptions of Time: Consequences for Decision-Making and Academic Achievement
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Heidi Vuletich, Vuletich, Heidi A
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Amanda
Diekman at Indiana University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the psychological effects of poverty on
decision-making in academic contexts. Theory suggests that resource scarcity and
environmental unpredictability (characteristic of poverty) trigger a narrow
focus on the present at the expense of attention to the future. Although this
phenomenon is adaptive under many circumstances, academic success requires focus
on long-term goals, such as attaining good end-of-term grades, graduating, and
being competitive for college admissions. This project addresses how shifted
perceptions of time, prompted by socioeconomic conditions, might be one
contributing factor to the pervasive achievement gap between students of low and
high income backgrounds. This work contributes not only to theoretical
understanding of the psychological effects of poverty, but because time
perception is malleable, it also offers potential avenues to reduce income-
achievement gaps in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using survey methods, Phase I
examines the relation between socioeconomic status (SES) and adolescentsâ€™
perceptions of time (i.e., how distant the future is), valuation of time spent
pursuing academic goals, and prioritization of short-term versus long term
rewards. A central question is whether these indicators of a present-focus
account, in part, for SES differences in academic achievement. The project also
examines the unique effect of household conditions (e.g., crowding, foot
traffic, lack of routine) versus overall SES effects on time perceptions,
consistent with ecological models of adolescent development. Phase II of this
project aims to test interventions that might mitigate the effects of SES on
time perceptions. These include person-level interventions that make the future
appear closer and structural interventions that change the way classrooms
discuss, model, and manage time for students. Another goal of Phase II is to
learn how the effects of SES on time perceptions impact participation in STEM.
Given the long-term time investment required for many STEM careers
(undergraduate degree, graduate degree, postdoc, tenure), STEM fields might be
particularly unlikely to be favored by low-SES students. Perceived time
investments for success in different occupations could intersect with SES
differences in time perception to produce differential interest in these
pathways. Using experimental approaches, these studies will investigate whether
describing the same occupation as requiring different time investments narrows
the SES gap in interest, intent, or behavioral engagement in those
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.