* 2003360
* Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research Forum/Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference; Lakeland, Florida; February 25-26, 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

The 2020 Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research Forum (TCORF), the 74th
Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference (IHC) will be held on February 25 -26,
2020 at the Aircraft Operations Center - Lakeland, Florida. Topics will include
research addressing operational imperatives, challenges in observing and
forecasting during the 2019 hurricane season, Joint Hurricane Testbed
activities, and the Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program. A meeting of the
Working Group for Hurricane and Winter Storms Operation and Research, which
supports the annual update of the National Hurricane Operations Plan, will be a
part of the forum. The forum is sponsored by the National Science Foundation,
NOAA National Weather Service, and the Office of Naval Research

Intellectual Merit: At the TCORF/74th IHC, representatives from Federal agencies
and the academic research community will have the opportunity to discuss the
latest research into tropical cyclone observing, forecasting, and warning such
as: 1. 2019 hurricane/typhoon season challenges and the opportunities for
research that they offer. 2. Research priorities of the operational centers 3.
Observations and observing strategies 4. Tropical cyclone model development 5.
Transitioning research to operations 6. Advances in tropical cyclone forecast
and warning products and services.

Broader Impacts: The workshop is important to the United States because it
brings the academic research community together with Federal agencies, to
prepare for the upcoming hurricane season and make improvements to the US's
hurricane forecasting and warning program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.