* 2003662
* CAS: Self-amplifying depolymerizable polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* John Matson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor John B. Matson of Virginia Tech is building
synthetic polymers based on poly(thiourethanes) and poly(olefin sulfones) that
fall apart (depolymerize) upon application on cue into gases that are both
reactive and bioactive. Both classes of polymers are used in a wide variety of
industrial applications, including foams, adhesives, building insulation, and
even microcircuit fabrication. In this research, high molecular weight
poly(thiourethanes) are prepared from building blocks designed using
computational modelling. Chemical reactions are then developed to depolymerize
these polymers into hydrogen sulfide, a vital biological gas present in all
organs and systems in a human body. Hydrogen sulfide, in small doses, acts as a
relaxant of smooth muscle and as a vasodilator and is also active in the brain,
where it increases the response of some receptors and facilitates long term
memory formation. In a related approach, a polymerization technique is developed
to prepare well-defined poly(olefin sulfones) that are capable of depolymerizing
back into the compounds that they are originally made from sulfur dioxide and
small unsaturated hydrocarbons. Chemical approaches associated with this project
are of relevance to the ongoing environmental problem of plastic recycling, and
the results have the potential to advance the field of degradable polymers. The
educational goals of this research focus on increasing enthusiasm for polymer
science in elementary and middle school children in Appalachia. Outreach efforts
are integrated with the Virginia Tech Youth Experiencing Science (YES) summer
program that focuses on hands-on activities related to
plastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on depolymerizable
polymers, also called self-immolative polymers, that undergo end-to-end
depolymerization in response to a specific stimulus. Synthetic methods are
developed to make depolymerizable polymers in a controlled manner, which can
unzip to generate gases that are both reactive and bioactive, in some cases
enabling further depolymerization (self-amplification). A strong emphasis is
placed on two types of polymersâ€”poly(thiourethanes), which undergo
depolymerization to generate carbonyl sulfide or hydrogen sulfide, and
poly(olefin sulfones), which depolymerize to generate sulfur dioxide and alpha-
olefins. In the case of poly(thiourethanes), computational methods are used to
predict monomers with strong driving forces for polymerization, and their
polymerization is carried out such that the resulting polymers contain various
functional groups on the chain-end to trigger depolymerization. In addition,
well-defined poly(olefin sulfones) are prepared using reversible-deactivation
radical polymerization methods starting from alpha-olefins and sulfur dioxide.
Polymer micelles are also developed that contain specific end groups that enable
self-amplification of the depolymerization event. As a result, only a single
triggering event on one polymer chain-end leads to depolymerization of an entire
micelle core. This research has the potential to advance the development of
degradable polymers or block copolymers with a degradable block. Generation of
signaling gases such as sulfur dioxide and hydrogen sulfide during the
depolymerization process is also of relevance to many biological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.