* 2003733
* Collaborative Research: Synthesis and Rigidity Quantification of Ladder Polymers with Controlled Structural Defects
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lei Fang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 377,007.00

With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professors Lei Fang of Texas A&amp;M University and
Xiaodan Gu of University of Southern Mississippi are investigating how chain
flexibility influences the physical properties of conjugated ladder polymers.
Conjugated polymers are a unique class of non-metallic polymers with
semiconducting properties resembling that of the chemical element silicon. These
long chain carbon-based molecules can become conductive when external voltage is
applied (like in transistors) or light shines on them (like in photovoltaic
cells). Conjugated polymers are extensively used in solar cells, LED screens and
other applications that utilize the conversion of electricity to light. Ladder
polymers, on the other hand, are a type of double stranded polymers with the
connectivity of a ladder. This is achieved by interconnecting repeating units
along the main polymer chain by four chemical bonds, instead of the two bonds
typically seen in conventional plastics. In this research, conjugated ladder
polymers with varied structural features are synthesized. Control polymers are
prepared with deliberately introduced backbone defects that consist of small
molecules. Detailed studies are then conducted to correlate backbone composition
and length with the flexibility of the polymer chains. These studies are enabled
by employing neutron and light scattering techniques which provide accuracy at
lengths ranging from sub 1 nanometer (1/100,000 of human hair diameter) to well
beyond 10 micrometers (the width of cotton fiber). Correlations established as a
result of this work may provide knowledge that could lead to the development of
materials with better optical and electronic performance. Educational innovation
tackles the problems associated with outdated contents in undergraduate organic
chemistry laboratory courses. The newly designed “Nobel Prize Reactions” are
first implemented at both universities and then disseminated at national and
international scales. Outreach activities expose undergraduate and high school
students to modern chemical research. This work is specifically designed to
benefit a large number of underrepresented minorities and economically
disadvantaged students in Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
this research is to establish the fundamental correlations between backbone
constitution and the chain rigidity for rigid ladder conjugated polymers. The
research is conducted through the design and synthesis of model ladder polymers
with varied structural features, and controls with deliberately introduced
backbone defects, followed by quantitative evaluation of their chain persistence
length and correlation with structural features. Chain rigidity of the ladder
polymer models and controls is quantified using combined modern characterization
tools with an emphasis on neutron and light scattering. Studies are also
performed to understand the influence of chain bending energy on persistent
length for ladder polymers. Comprehensive structural-rigidity correlation
through iterative design-synthesis-measurement-design cycles is established.
Results associated with this award have the potential to advance knowledge on
how the chain rigidity (or flexibility) determines the fundamental properties
and practical applications of a wide range of
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.