* 2003481
* Collaborative Research: CAS: Understanding Polymer Additive Release and Transformations in Aquatic Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Howard Fairbrother, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2023
* USD 276,612.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of
Chemistry funds a collaborative project by Professor James Ranville at the
Colorado School of Mines and Professor Howard Fairbrother at the University of
Maryland. The team studies what happens to additives in plastics as the plastics
slowly decay in the environment. Complex chemical compounds are added the during
manufacturing of plastics to improve their properties, such as durability, color
and texture. The chemical composition of these additives is very varied and can
include small organic molecules as well as metal-containing organic compounds.
The accumulation of plastic waste in aquatic environments is a highly visible
problem of increasing global concern. When plastics are in contact with water or
exposed to sunlight, the chemical additives are slowly released into the water.
There they can undergo chemical transformation to form new compounds.
Unfortunately, a number of additives and their transformation products have been
found to pose a risk to the environment and to human health. Information from
this study can help improve our understanding of the science to guide the design
of new additives with reduced environmental impacts. The students involved in
this research acquire skills in materials chemistry and environmental science.
Students at the K-12 and university level participate in educational activities,
such as hands-on experiences with end-of-life issues with plastics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a molecular level
understanding of how the chemical composition and physical characteristics of
additives in polymers influence the release and subsequent photochemical
transformations of additives in aqueous environments. These goals are
accomplished by measuring additive release kinetics and sorption properties from
a selected set of well characterized additive/polymer composites. This is
complemented by measurements of phototransformation kinetics and transformation
products using a suite of highly sensitive mass spectrometry techniques. Model
organic and organometallic compounds are used to test hypotheses and develop
structure activity relationships related to additive release and photochemical
transformations. These models address the role of molecular level properties of
additives, polymer-additive interactions, and changes in polymer surface
properties in determining the behavior of additives in aqueous environments. The
results can be extrapolated to a wide range of additive/polymer combinations
relevant to plastic pollution in the aquatic
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.