* 2003875
* Design of Mixed-Graft Block Copolymers for Emerging Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Mingjiang Zhong, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2023
* USD 399,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic polymers have been
widely adopted as functional or structural materials due to their diverse
properties and facile processability. While there is great demand for developing
single polymeric materials with more than one independently-tunable property for
the fabrication of next-generation electronic and energy devices, scientific
challenges remain. This project aims to introduce graft-copolymers -- molecules
containing a polymer backbone tethered with multiple side chains -- as a
synthetic platform to realize organic materials in which the dependencies of
several properties are decoupled. Examples of such properties include
ion-/electron-conductivity, nanostructures, and mechanical properties. The
ability to independently tune multiple properties is enabled by the unique
molecular architecture of graft-copolymers with diverse chemical compositions
and structural parameters that can be precisely controlled. Tuning the backbone
length of these polymers opens a way not only to enabling the formation of
ultrasmall nanodomain spacing but also to realizing desirable thermomechanical
properties and processability. The proposed materials are closely relevant to
emerging applications such as electronic skin and components in soft
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop
processable and mechanically compliant polymeric materials with both ionic and
electronic conductivities that can be independently tuned and oriented. Mixed-
graft block copolymers (mGBCPs) consisting of two or more types of functional
polymeric side chains grafted on a linear backbone will be designed and
synthesized to achieve this goal. The incompatibility of distinct side chains of
mGBCPs results in phase-separation to form ordered nanostructures with the
backbone serving as the interface. A diverse range of side chain functionalities
that are responsible for different conductive properties are respectively
enriched in different nanodomains. The orientation of the conductive phases can
be regulated through directed self-assembly techniques, and the nanodomain sizes
are controlled primarily by the side chains lengths. Tuning the backbone length
of mGBCPs opens a way not only to enabling the formation of ultrasmall
nanodomain spacing but also to realizing desirable thermomechanical properties
and processability. This project tackles a grand challenge in the application of
classic linear block copolymers in which the bulk properties and nanostructures
cannot be independently tuned due to their mutual compositional
dependence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.