* 2003366
* Thermodynamics and Chain Dynamics in Spin-labeled Peptide Block Copolymer Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Daniel Savin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 599,999.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry is funding Professors Daniel A. Savin and Gail E.
Fanucci of the Department of Chemistry at University of Florida to explore the
self-assembly of spin-labeled, peptide containing block polymers to discover how
molecular level structure and interactions can result in global morphology
changes. Given the wealth of knowledge that peptide chemists have regarding
protein structure, folding, and function, polymer scientists can use this
toolbox and apply the same principles to synthetic polymer-polypeptide hybrid
systems. From an application standpoint, peptide-based hybrid materials have
shown potential as pH sensitive drug delivery vehicles and hydrogels that have
advantages in terms of&lt;br/&gt;biocompatibility. Responsive materials have
also been used to produce molecular actuators and switchable surfaces. The
training program in the Savin and Fanucci groups integrates teaching and
research in a broad range of disciplines including chemistry, physics,
biochemistry and polymer science, from K-12 to postdoctoral researchers.
Students gain a comprehensive understanding of polymers
and&lt;br/&gt;biomaterials in many areas of synthesis, characterization,
morphology, spectroscopy, scattering and rheology. This multidisciplinary
approach is essential not only from an educational standpoint, but also to
produce well-rounded graduates who are attractive to a variety of employers in
both academic and industrial settings. The team is committed to broadening
participation and strongly encourages research participation by undergraduates.
The outreach program continues two highly successful programs by Savin and
Fanucci at the K-5 and 9-12 levels, respectively, and adds a new program aimed
at mentoring local foster children at the high school level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on utilizing site specific spin-
labels as probes to characterize the local environment and monitor changes in
the self-assembly and morphological transitions in peptide-based block copolymer
assemblies. Macroinitiators are prepared that contain the radical spin label
agent TEMPO, and aminoethylpiperazine. Copolymers are then synthesized by ring
opening of N-carboxyanhydrides of amino acids. Spectroscopic tools such as
electron paramagnetic resonance and Overhauser dynamic nuclear polarization NMR
spectroscopy are used to provide local interrogation of end-to-end
distributions, hydration, accessibility, and segmental dynamics in responsive
block copolymer assemblies. This characterization is coupled with morphology
characterization where light scattering and electron microscopy are used to
determine critical parameters such as size, shape, aggregation number, and the
average chain density at the interface of the assemblies. Results associated
with this research could enable the establishment of a new analytical platform
to determine local conformational, thermodynamic, and dynamic properties of
polymers in assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.