* 2003308
* Uncovering Biophysical Mechanisms of Crosstalk in Pattern Recognition Receptors
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Emily Smith, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 11/30/2023
* USD 498,700.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Professor
Emily Smith at Iowa State University to reveal mechanisms of membrane protein
crosstalk that involve receptor clustering and diffusion in pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs). Cells must produce an immune response when they encounter
outside organisms and other invaders. Critical to the immune response are
proteins in the cell membrane. These membrane proteins not only detect the
invader, but they also control how the cell produces a response. The immune
response must be very carefully balanced to fight the outside invader while not
producing extensive inflammation, which is itself harmful. Professor Emily Smith
and her research group at Iowa State University are using optical microscopy to
study the involvement of two important membrane proteins in this immune
response, and to answer the critical question of how these two membrane proteins
work together to generate a response to chemically-characterized invading
species. A set of integrated activities provides outreach to high school
students from low-income families, as well as undergraduate and graduate student
training in research and science policy. The overarching goal of these
activities is to impart the skills necessary to pursue outstanding science while
acquiring specialized skills in protein chemistry and biophysical measurement
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves state-of-the-art biophysical
studies of membrane protein crosstalk and clustering and diffusion patterns
associated with the immune response. The two receptors that are the focus of
this work are the Receptor for Advanced Glycation Endproducts (RAGE) and Toll-
like Receptor 4 (TLR4). Both receptors are part of the inflammatory response in
the presence of heterogeneously diverse ligands containing damage associated
molecule patterns (DAMPs) and pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).
Crosstalk results when the function of one receptor influences the other
receptor. RAGE and TLR4 are known to share common ligands and signaling
pathways, but the details of their crosstalk are poorly understood. An important
aspect of this work is the use of chemically-characterized ligands to study RAGE
isomers and differentially phosphorylated forms of the receptor. Receptor
nanoscale organization and diffusion are being measured with single molecule
localization microscopy and single particle tracking. The research objectives
are integrated with the educational objectives of advancing the scientific
literacy of high school students from low-income families, as well as training
undergraduate and graduate students in chemical physics and data-driven science
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.