* 2003526
* Determining the Molecular Factors that Contribute to Nanoemulsion Formation and Stabilization by Carboxylic Acid Surfactants and Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Lawrence Scatena, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 569,941.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Geraldine L. Richmond of the
Department of Chemistry at University of Oregon, Eugene is studying molecular
factors that contribute to nanoemulsion formation and stabilization by
surfactants and polymers. Nanoemulsions are a class of colloids - mixture where
a one component is suspended as tiny particles in another substance. Milk is an
example of a colloid as small butterfat particles are dispersed in a watery
liquid. Colloids provide exciting opportunities for a wide range of biological,
medicinal, and technological applications. In these applications, colloids
typically consist of oil-droplets that are stabilized in water solution by
surface-adsorbed amphiphiles (compounds with water-loving and fat-loving
properties). Their tiny diameters allow them to serve as vehicles for a wide
range of compounds that are encapsulated in their interiors. In this research,
scientists seek to understand the forces and energy required for surface
adsorption and assembly of surfactants and polymers on spherical droplets of
unique size. Molecular-level characteristics of these systems are investigated
using a number of sophisticated measurement techniques. Knowledge associated
with this research has the potential to impact drug delivery, food science, oil
recovery and materials chemistry. The research team is broadening the impact of
their research through educational outreach efforts aimed at a variety of ages
and populations. The activities include public presentations and on-line videos
for students and the general public on topics such as emulsions in our everyday
lives, simple experiments in making and understanding emulsions, lasers in
chemistry, and the special properties of nanoemulsions. Research lessons are
incorporated into the outreach, networking, and educational activities through
the "Water First!" project. This project involves working and collaborating with
women scientists in Africa that are involved in water research, education and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is developing a detailed picture
of the molecular characteristics of the nanodroplet surface that contribute to
their formation and stabilization by surface adsorbed alkyl surfactants and
polymers. The main objectives is twofold. First they want to fully characterize
the molecular bonding, structure and orientation of emulsifying agents, oil and
water at the surface of nanodroplets prepared in their kinetically stable state
by ultrasonification. The scientists also compare the results with analogous
studies of these emulsifying agents and their effect on interfacial oil and
water at a planar oil-water interface that is in a thermodynamically stable
state. The emulsifying agents chosen for these model studies are carboxylic acid
containing alkyl surfactants and polymers. These fundamental studies are
designed to take advantage of the adsorptive properties of these weakly acidic
alkyl surfactants and polyelectrolytes whose surface charge and adsorptive
characteristics can be varied by pH, ionic strength and metal ion complexation.
Studies that involve the variation in length, size, hydrophobicity and rigidity
of the adsorbates provide additional information related to surface packing,
conformational ordering, and multi-layer formation. Both surface charge and
steric effects are known to be important factors in reducing the pathway of
these nanodroplets to coalesce and phase separate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.