* 2003241
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Role of Migration in Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Andrew Duff, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2022
* USD 25,200.00

Ms. Katie Richards and Dr. Andrew Duff, of Washington State University, will
explore how identity is created, maintained, and expressed in frontier zones as
they explore the origins and social organization of a native pre-Hispanic group,
referred to today as Fremont, They lived across much of what is today the state
of Utah. Archaeologists have studied the Fremont for over a century; however,
there is still considerable debate over who the Fremont were and where they came
from. This project will address fundamental, big-picture questions about Fremont
to help create a new foundational understanding about this group. Located at the
northern fringes of the more densely populated North American Southwest, the
Fremont region is ideally situated to explore how identity was negotiated and
created in prehistoric frontier zones. The academic debate over who the Fremont
were has also proved a stumbling block to educators teaching Utah state history.
Little information on the Fremont has been published for a public audience. Ms.
Richards will work with 4th grade teachers (the year when Utah state history is
taught) to create lesson plans that will help educators more effectively teach
about Utahâ€™s priceless cultural heritage and prehistory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Richards and Dr. Duff will use pottery to explore
Fremont origins, social organization, and identity in this northern frontier of
the North American Southwest. Frontier studies provide a dynamic and powerful
way to explore how identity is formed, negotiated, and maintained in regions
where disparate traditions meet, and will be used to explore the complex blend
of innovation and tradition present in Fremont material culture. Using both
high- and low- technology methods, the researchers will use a multi-scalar
approach to better understand Fremont. At the broadest scale, the researchers
will evaluate how Fremont fits into the larger history of the American
Southwest. Using attributes of Fremont and Southwestern pottery, they will
explore potential origins of the Fremont ceramic tradition and assess whether
painted ceramic technology was brought into the region as a result of migration
or was a locally produced emulation. They will then use instrumental neutron
activation analysis to chemically characterize Fremont pottery and reconstruct
Fremont production and exchange networks at a regional scale. At the finest
scale, they will explore how painted ceramics were used within villages across
the region. Combined, these analyses will create a robust and more complete
understanding of complexity and origins in this frontier
zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.