* 2003037
* Bioinspired Nanoparticle Polymer Coating to Enhance Targeting to the Lung Epithelium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Fiegel, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 491,323.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To effectively treat disease, drug
molecules must accumulate in sufficient amounts at a specific site in the body.
To achieve this, tiny vehicles called carriers are often needed, but unwanted
interactions within the body often limit their effectiveness. This project uses
knowledge of the molecular interactions between bacterial/viral pathogens and
human cells during human infection to design bioinspired polymer coatings for
drug carriers. The project will provide deeper insight into chemical structures
that simultaneously limit biofouling on the carrier surface and enhance
attachment of carriers to human cells. Longer term, these results will enable
the development of nanocarriers that can provide better treatment of disease by
decreasing the amount of drug required for treatment and limiting side effects.
This project will have a direct impact on the educational experience of students
at various levels. Two graduate students will perform research for their Ph.D.
theses and several undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will
participate in the research. Further, a K-12 outreach program in engineering and
science will utilize concepts from the research during camps throughout the
state of Iowa and provide graduate and undergraduate students with opportunities
for teacher training. Research results and discoveries will be disseminated
through publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at local,
national, and international conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Current drug delivery strategies to target
specific cells within the body are plagued by low levels of drug accumulation in
the areas they are most needed. When drug carriers enter the body and interact
with biological fluids, biofouling of the carrier surface occurs and new surface
properties develop that control the carrierâ€™s subsequent bio-interactions and
fate. Our lack of knowledge of how to design drug carriers with appropriate
properties to trigger and mediate their interactions within complex biological
environments has significantly hindered progress towards efficient drug
delivery. The goal of this proposal is to design a surface coating for
nanocarriers to simultaneously address issues of biofouling and cell uptake in
complex biological environments. Bioinspired polymeric ligands containing
molecular structures that mimic the surfaces of respiratory pathogens known to
efficiently penetrate human fluids and the lung epithelium will be developed.
The ability of ligand-coated nanoparticle to target lung epithelial cells
submerged in natural secretions will be experimentally observed and quantified.
Two independent techniques will be pursued to evaluate the molecular recognition
of the ligands. First, a high-throughput, optical biosensor technique will
quantify the real-time cellular responses to receptor-ligand interactions in
living cells. Second, a 3-D homology modeling approach will elucidate the
ability of the ligands to dock into the receptor binding pocket. Results from
these studies will provide insight into chemical structures that mediate the
binding and activation of receptor-mediated processes. Through biomolecular
mimicry, the proposed studies will lead to more efficient design of ligands that
will enhance nanocarrier delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Polymers
Program in the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.