* 2003379
* Mechanisms and Applications of Protein Analysis by Desorption Electrospray Ionization-Mass Spectrometry (DESI-MS)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Todd Barkman, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 396,842.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Andre Venter and Todd Barkmanâ€™s team at Western
Michigan University are devising sensitive methods for identifying and
characterizing proteins - key building blocks of life. By systematically
optimizing sample additives and probe parameters for analysis of proteins in
solution and on surfaces, Dr. Venter and his team is not only improving protein
analysis, but is also adding to the fundamental understanding of protein
solubility and stability, with important potential consequences for
bioanalytical measurements, recombinant protein expression, and applications
such as the development of protein therapeutics. Students participating in these
studies learn about chemistry and biology. In addition, Dr. Venter and
colleagues bring the research topics into the classroom, including an unusual
interdisciplinary course engaging aspiring scientists with students in the sonic
and visual arts. These exposures help prepare both groups for the
interdisciplinary nature of STEAM - science, technology, engineering, arts and
mathematics - in contemporary society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research draws
on the observation that adding serine either to the spray or to a deposited
sample can enhance sensitivity in desorption electrospray ionization (DESI) mass
spectrometric analysis of proteins. The underlying mechanism is assessed by
studying the effects of derivatization of the serine additive at all three
reactive sites. Signals derived from protein monomers and aggregates in native
and denatured states are monitored under basic, neutral, and acidic conditions
to probe which functional groups and molecular properties drive protein
dissolution and stability in solution. Drs. Venter and Barkman are also studying
the efficacious effect of adding ethyl acetate vapor to the atmosphere
surrounding the analyte, which has been found to increase protein signal
intensities and reduce the abundance of spectral features derived from clusters.
Better understanding of the mechanisms of these effects may enable novel high-
throughput strategies for identification of proteins and their enzymatic
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.