* 2003528
* Curves, Counting, and Correlations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Jayadev Athreya, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 308,000.00

Topology is a field of mathematics that studies those properties of a space that
remain invariant under stretching or bending. A surface of a fixed topological
shape can have many different geometries. For example, a two-dimensional shape
with no holes is a topological sphere, which could be a round sphere (like the
surface of a planet), a polyhedron (a crystal like-shape with facets), or an
ellipsoid (an egg-type shape). A shape with one hole (a torus) could look like
an inner tube, a tire, or a hula hoop. The collection of all possible geometries
is known as a moduli space, and these spaces occur over and over again in
fundamental physical questions. This NSF award provides funding for a project to
study questions of what typical, or random, surfaces look like, from the point
of view of understanding families of curves on these surfaces. The research and
outreach activities are mutually reinforcing; the project highlights bridges
between different areas of mathematics, and deep connections between research,
mentoring, and public engagement programs in mathematics. In addition the
project provide research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Starting with simple to state problems about
counting special trajectories on surfaces whose geometry comes from Euclidean
polygons and polyhedra, and motivated by theoretical physics (Newtonian
mechanics, electron transport, and supersymmetric quantum field theory), this
project connects to fundamental questions in many different areas of
mathematics, including Teichmuller and homogeneous dynamics; Diophantine
approximation and the geometry of numbers; probabilistic models and limit
theorems; and the geometry of moduli spaces of meromorphic differentials on
surfaces. Building on his prior collaborative work, the PI plans to explore
questions on the counting and distributions of curves in varying geometries on
higher-genus surfaces and higher-dimensional tori.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.