* 2003307
* CDS&amp;E: An Effective Thermal Simulation Methodology for GPGPUs Enabled by Data-Driven Model Reduction
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ming-Cheng Cheng, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 383,000.00

Demands for general purpose graphics processing units (GPGPUs) in recent years
have increased rapidly due to the needs for scientific, engineering and
statistical computing. Meanwhile, GPGPUs are also quickly becoming an essential
part of data centers around the globe. The number of data centers are growing
drastically due to the recent explosion of social networking, movie streaming,
online shopping, big data, internet of things, etc. With hundreds or thousands
of cores running in each GPGPU, severe heating is a serious challenge which can
significantly degrade GPGPU performance, reliability and energy efficiency
unless effective cooling is employed. However, effective cooling of data centers
requires enormous expenditure of energy. To ease all these problems, effective
thermal management and thermal-aware task scheduling for GPGPU operation are
needed, which however requires an accurate simulation tool that is able to offer
efficient dynamic thermal prediction with a reasonable spatial resolution.
Currently, there is a lack of thermal simulation tools that offer high
efficiency and accuracy with a reasonable resolution. The proposed work aims to
develop an efficient simulation methodology based on a reduced learning
algorithm that is capable of predicting accurate dynamic temperature
distributions with a high resolution in GPGPUs. With this novel approach
implemented in GPGPUs, effective thermal management and task scheduling will
become possible and will improve GPGPU performance and reliability. This will
also improve energy savings in cooling, computing and streaming and minimize the
earth’s environmental stress. This project will also contribute to
interdisciplinary workforce training and prepare students for the emerging
challenge of heating problems in GPGPU computing. Research related to the
proposed work will be integrated into several courses taught by the PIs. Course
projects will be developed by the Ph.D. and undergraduate students working on
the proposed work. This will offer undergraduate and graduate students a useful
learning experience beyond the textbooks and lectures. The PIs will also expand
and integrate several ongoing activities to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM, e.g. through the Co-PI's NSF REU site. A
special effort will be made to recruit and mentor Native Americans from an
Indian Reservation near the PI’s university to join STEM activities and to
pursue their careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
multi-block simulation methodology for efficient, accurate prediction of dynamic
thermal profiles of GPGPUs derived from a reduced learning algorithm. To reduce
simulation space and thus the computational time while maintaining accurate
thermal solution, the domain structure of a GPGPU is projected onto a functional
space described by a set of basis functions obtained from the reduced learning
method. This projection learning process however requires collection of massive
amounts of thermal data for the entire GPGPU and is computationally prohibitive.
Domain decomposition is therefore applied to partition the GPGPU domain into
hundreds of smaller generic building blocks. This building-block approach
enables more efficient training of the basis functions to develop the multi-
block thermal model. This methodology offers a reduction in the computational
time by several orders of magnitude for thermal simulation of semiconductor
chips, compared with the direct numerical simulation. Currently, thermal
simulations of GPGPUs rely on the efficient compact resistance-capacitance (RC)
thermal model that provides poor resolution and inaccurate thermal profiles. It
is expected that the developed thermal simulation model will be even more
efficient than the compact RC model. Also, the multi-block approach possesses a
natural advantage of effective parallel computing. This project will implement
the developed multi-block model in hundreds of cores in a GPGPU to perform
parallel GPGPU computing that will further speed up the thermal simulation of
GPGPUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.