* 2003814
* RUI: Photochemical and OH-initiated Processing of Aerosol Organic Coatings
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Juan Navea, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 243,984.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of Chemistry and the
Atmospheric Chemistry Program in the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace
Sciences jointly fund this award. Professor Juan Navea and his undergraduate
students study small particles suspended in air, known as atmospheric aerosols.
The goal is to improve our understanding of chemical reactions that take place
on the organic coatings of atmospheric aerosols. The layers of organic chemical
compounds that that often cover aerosols affect their role in air quality,
climate, and health. In particular, atmospheric reactions involving hydroxyl
radical (OH) and solar radiation can change the chemical and physical properties
of aerosols. This impacts their ability to scatter light, seed clouds, and
induce the generation of secondary organic aerosol. The research project uses a
state-of-the-art spectroscopy system to study, independently, reactions of
aerosol organic coatings with solar radiation, OH, and the combination of both.
This method provides information on the chemical changes in the organic coatings
as the reaction takes place. Reaction products can be characterized and the
mechanisms leading to atmospheric particle aging better understood.
Undergraduate researchers working on this project engage in fundamental and
applied chemistry research, travel to national conferences to disseminate their
findings, and receive mentorship and training, which ultimately helps broaden
and retain student participation in the sciences. Many of these students are
historically underrepresented in the physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses a newly developed non-
thermal plasma system to generate and measure OH species in a controlled
environment in the absence and presence of light. A multi-dimensional
spectroscopy flow system developed in Professor Navea’s lab allows time-resolved
vibrational spectroscopy of surface organic species on components of mineral
dust or combustion particles. In situ measurements allow for kinetic analysis of
OH reactions, photolysis, and the combination of these reactions. Ex situ
product characterization provides a mechanistic understanding of the oxidation
process on aerosol coatings. In particular, studies of photoactive components,
such as semiconductor metal oxide substrates and/or chromophoric organic
coatings, allow the investigation of potential synergistic effects of solar
radiation and OH on surface bound species. The results from this project provide
a better understanding of atmospheric particle aging
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.