* 2003454
* CAS: Harnessing the disordered state in block polymer materials for high-efficiency separations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Marc Hillmyer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 621,963.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ready access to clean water
is a pressing global challenge that represents one of the most important
sustainability issues we face as a society. Desalination of sea water and
wastewater remediation/reuse are two prevalent solutions that will benefit from
new advances in basic materials research. These approaches to generating clean
water for consumption rely on the use of membranes endowed with material
properties designed to optimize separations performance. This research project
focuses on new state-of-the-art polymeric materials designed to address key
limitations that must be overcome to further advance understanding and efficacy
of materials used in membrane-based separations. The objectives are to design
and advance the use of block polymer materials for membranes using a combination
of contemporary polymer synthesis, thorough materials characterization, and
integration of new macromolecules into practical separation membranes. The
research promises to benefit society through the eventual development of new
technologies that render water purification and remediation more economical and
more widely accessible. Membranes will play important roles in a sustainable
water future and the fundamental underpinnings achieved in this work will help
solidify the foundations from which new technologies will be built. The work
will also build diverse STEM talent though partnerships that include the
NorthStar STEM Alliance, American Chemical Societyâ€™s Project SEED, and the
University of Minnesota's Science for All
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work centers around the design,
development, and deployment of block polymer centric strategies that rely on the
self-assembly of novel compounds to take advantage of their nanostructured
morphologies. Co-continuous nanostructures are essential to advance the design
of materials for next-generation water purification membranes, and this research
will advance knowledge useful for the creation of co-continuous nanostructured
polymer materials that are useful for aqueous-based separations. The essential
feature of the program emphasizes the preparation of materials with co-
continuous nanostructures by capitalizing on the disordered state of block
polymer derived materials. The work will advance knowledge in two main
categories. The first is based on a thermodynamic approach that entails trapping
a disordered co-continuous morphology in the thermodynamically stable disordered
state using pre-formed block polymers. The second is based on a kinetic approach
that entails trapping the disordered state during the in-situ synthesis of block
polymers in a system that is conducive to chemical fixation through
crosslinking. The fundamental and basic research efforts will advance knowledge
in these two arenas, will contribute to the basic understanding of block polymer
thermodynamics, and will ultimately allow for new technologies to be built that
contribute to sustainable access to clean water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.