* 2003586
* Geometric Frustration in Isomerizations of Magic Sized Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Richard Robinson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 475,449.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Robinson and Dshemuchadse at
Cornell University are exploring how the atomic organization in nanoclusters—the
missing link between few-atom molecules and larger crystals—can change,
depending solely on their size. The atomic arrangement of most materials, from
nanoparticles to everyday bulk materials, is known. But for nanoclusters, which
are smaller than nanoparticles, surface effects can have a large influence on
the stability of the atomic structure. The origin of the atomic stability in
magic-sized clusters is investigated with experimental techniques and computer
simulations. The detailed control of nanocluster structures and the ability to
precisely manipulate the defined and rapid changeover from one atomic
arrangement to another could have applications in optical communications, energy
harvesting, or quantum computing. Professor Dshemuchadse and her group are
working on the visualization of nanoparticle growth simulations to be made
available to the public as interactive educational online materials.
Additionally, Professors Robinson and Dshemuchadse are designing a demonstration
kit on crystal structures, which illustrates the ordering principles that govern
the structure of materials for K-12 teachers across the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to determine the
relationship between the atomic ordering and isomerization in inorganic
nanoclusters and nanoparticles. In cadmium sulfide, nanoclusters of very
specific atomic arrangements of so-called "magic" sizes have been observed to
transform their structure. When cadmium chalcogenides are synthesized into
discrete cluster sizes, forming so-called "magic-sized nanoclusters", they are
able to coherently transform between two distinct structures, or isomerize. This
project is investigating the geometric frustration induced by the atomic
structural arrangements, and how the frustration may influence isomerizations.
The origin of this behavior is being investigated experimentally through
nanocluster synthesis and post-synthetic modifications, as well as Monte-Carlo
simulations to model the stability of different cluster configurations.
Understanding and being able to control the reversible crossover from local-
cluster to bulk-crystalline behavior in nanoparticles can lead to inorganic
materials undergoing solid-solid transitions designed for switching or sensing
behavior, which can find application in energy harvesting or quantum computing.
The team is making nanoscience accessible to the public by creating
visualizations of self-assembly simulations and providing interactive online
materials. They are also designing an educational demonstration kit on crystal
structures and their relationship with materials properties for lending library
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.