* 2003359
* Collaborative Research: Isotopologue Synthesis and Use for Elucidating Important Chemical Mechanisms of Organic Condensation Reactions in Atmospheric Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Regan Thomson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,001.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Scot Martin of Harvard University and Professor
Regan Thomson of Northwestern University. Their collaborative research addresses
the complex roles played in the atmosphere by volatile organic molecules that
are derived from plants. These molecules exchange between gases and particles in
the atmosphere in ways that are poorly understood. Atmospheric particles, also
known as aerosols, affect many important atmospheric processes, such as cloud
formation, and the Earth's climate. The research team utilizes synthetic organic
chemistry to make molecules thought to exist in the atmosphere and uses them in
experiments designed to simulate atmospheric conditions. The outcome of this
research may be an improved understanding of atmospheric processes, which allows
for more accurate modelling of the weather and climate system. The research
provides opportunities for students at both institutions as well as peer-to-peer
learning. Through the "Faces of Science" YouTube series the researchers
communicate science and personal stories to the general public, engaging diverse
audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration combines expertise in
synthetic organic chemistry with expertise in atmospheric science. The team is
advancing the understanding of the complex chemical processes in the particle
phase of secondary organic aerosol particles. The synthesis enables access to a
suite of complex, non-commercially available, yet highly atmospherically-
relevant molecules with isotopic labeling. In particular, pinene isotopologue
probes enable detailed studies of volatile biogenic terpenes. The aerosol
experiments provide detailed mechanistic information regarding the formation and
growth of atmospheric organic particles, as derived by use of the isotopologue
probe species under varying conditions. Competing hypotheses of the prevailing
chemical mechanisms are being tested and thus elucidate mechanistic aspects of
oxidation/accretion pathways and particle formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.