* 2003706
* Particle-Induced Fingering and Pattern Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Sungyon Lee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 04/30/2024
* USD 439,324.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of interfaces between two
fluids, such as air and water, exhibit diverse physical phenomena. Known as
interfacial instabilities, fluid-fluid interfaces can deform and generate
intricate and regularized patterns, such as tears of wine, fingers of paint as
it coats a wall, and droplets forming from a liquid jet. In particular, when one
of the fluid phases comprises particles, such as mud (a water and sand mixture),
the dynamics of fluid-fluid interfaces can be even more complex and difficult to
predict. In addition to their ubiquity, controlling interfacial instabilities is
of critical importance in many engineering applications, ranging from droplet
microfluidics, nanoparticle coating and printing, to manufacturing new
functional materials. While many of these diverse applications involve a liquid
phase comprising particles (also known as suspensions), the effects that
suspended particles have on the interfacial instabilities are yet unknown.
Hence, understanding the coupled dynamics between fluid-immersed particles and
fluid-fluid interfaces can impact a wide range of applications and even lead to
innovations that harness the instabilities for new applications. In addition,
interfacial instabilities constitute a class of visually stunning phenomena that
can be easily demonstrated in tabletop experiments or as part of an art project.
Hence, the visual aspects of the research are incorporated into an educational
module and outreach activities that connect art to core fluid mechanics concepts
for students of diverse backgrounds and ages. These educational activities are
designed to engage artistic students in science, to increase the diversity and
retention of student in STEM, and to enhance awareness and appreciation for
fundamental science and fluid mechanics in general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of
this proposal is to understand the physical mechanisms and conditions for
instabilities on the interface between the particle-liquid mixture and gas.
Despite the ubiquity of processes that involve suspensions and fluid-fluid
interfaces, the effects of fluid-immersed particles on the interfacial
instabilities remain poorly understood, with opportunities for making
fundamental advances. In this proposal, the PI experimentally considers two
complementary flow configurations that interface gas with the mixture of non-
colloidal particles and viscous liquid: 1) the suspension displacing air, and 2)
air displacing the suspension inside a vertical Hele-Shaw cell. Distinct from
the current state of the art, the two flow configurations are inherently stable
without particles, so that they can isolate the effects of suspended particles
on the fluid-fluid interface. The PIâ€™s preliminary experiments have demonstrated
the emergence of interfacial deformations and new particle-laden structures,
which are induced by the coupling of particles with the fluid-fluid interface.
Experimental measurements of the novel particle-induced instabilities are
combined with reduced mathematical modeling and additional parametric studies,
with the aim of discovering the basic mechanisms required to exploit the
instability and lead to new pattern generation. The results of this fundamental
study have the potential to transform the current understanding of the
interfacial dynamics of suspensions and enable the use of suspended particles to
control interfacial instabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.