* 2003337
* RUI: Modulation of cation exchange using oxidation/reduction to design plasmonic nanoheterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Katherine Plass, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2024
* USD 275,062.00

Abstracts for RUI: Modulation of cation exchange using oxidation/reduction to
design plasmonic nanoheterostructures DMR-2003337 &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 1:
NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;One route to create next-generation
nanomaterials is by taking single nanoparticles and transforming them into more
complex structures. The process starts with one form of nanoparticle and trades
out one type of atom for another. This leaves the nanoparticle with the same
size and shape it started with, but with additional chemical components. This
useful, but not yet fully understood, process is called cation exchange. This
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, uncovers how one can change the outcome of
cation exchange by altering the features of the starting nanoparticle. It is
expected that this will affect how much the particle changes in chemistry and
where the new components go. It will also change the way the particles absorb
light. The insights into how cation exchange works gained through these
experiments will allow control over chemistry and structure on the nanoscale.
This will eventually make it possible to design and create complex nanodevices
that have a broad range of applications that are important to society,
particularly in sensing and solar energy conversion. In addition to the benefits
that come from directly from the science, training in materials chemistry will
be strengthened through undergraduate research and an innovative partnership
between laboratories at a primarily undergraduate institution and at an R1
university. Research infrastructure in the Central Pennsylvania region will be
supported and barriers to broad participation in chemistry and materials will be
reduced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Starting with
copper sulfide nanoparticles, designed nanoheterostructures are created through
selective introduction of new components through cation exchange. Preliminary
data show that iodine oxidation of roxbyite nanoparticles alters the propensity
for cation exchange with cadmium and zinc ions as it simultaneously alters the
localized surface plasmon resonance of copper sulfide particles. It is proposed
that oxidation/reduction processes can be employed as tools to modulate chemical
and spatial selectivity of partial cation exchange. This project, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials
Research, seeks to reveal structure-property relationships affected by the
alteration of copper sulfide nanoparticles through redox processes and to
utilize these relationships to design novel plasmonic nanoheterostructures. The
project examines various means of oxidation and reduction and elucidates the
effects on structure, Cu-ion vacancy concentration, plasmonic behavior, and
propensity for cation exchange in copper sulfide nanoparticles. The fundamental
insights uncovered by the proposed work will advance our ability to control
chemistry and structure on the nanoscale. The particles investigated have the
potential to act as catalysts, solar energy absorbers in PV or solar water
evaporation, NIR absorbers in photothermal cancer treatment, or sensors.
Training in materials chemistry will be strengthened through undergraduate
research with close student-faculty interaction and an innovative partnership
between laboratories at a primarily undergraduate institution and at an R1
university. Research infrastructure in the Central Pennsylvania region will be
supported and barriers to broad participation in chemistry and materials
research will be reduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.