* 2003854
* Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Unreceptive Nuclei from Across the Periodic Table
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Robert Schurko, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 435,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor Robert
Schurko and his group at Florida State University are working to expand the
range of applicability of solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (SSNMR), an
important tool for the analysis of a wide range of chemical compounds,
biological samples, and advanced materials. Many kinds of atoms potentially
observable with SSNMR are said to be unreceptive, meaning that data acquisition
can take days, weeks, or even months to complete. The new methods being
developed by the Schurko group accelerate the NMR experiments greatly, thereby
expanding our ability to characterize the molecular level structures of
materials important to society. This increase in understanding can, in turn,
lead to improved pharmaceuticals, catalysts, nanoparticles, energetic materials,
and other materials. Undergraduate and graduate students engaged in this
research receive interdisciplinary training in state-of-the-art measurement
science. Dr. Schurko is also involved in STEM outreach activities at the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (MagLab), where he is the Director of
the NMR and Magnetic Resonance Imaging User Program. These efforts seek to
inform the general public about NMR, and include MagLab internship programs for
high school students, K-12 Research Experiences for Teachers, and the Magnet
Academy Program. These programs engage diverse groups of people from different
socioeconomic backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Schurko group focuses on
the development and application of new methods for the acquisition of high-
quality SSNMR spectra with ultra-wideline patterns originating from unreceptive
nuclei from elements across the periodic table, aiming at maximizing uniform
signal, reducing data acquisition times, and improving ease of execution for end
users. Protocols are being developed to carefully monitor nuclear spin behavior
via a combination of experiments and simulations. New pulse sequences and
experimental protocols are targeting spin-1/2, integer-spin, and half-integer
spin nuclei in the general areas of direct excitation/direct detection,
broadband cross polarization, and indirect detection methods. This research
requires careful consideration of pulse durations and timings, and the use of
specially designed frequency-swept pulses. Projects targeting the most
unreceptive nuclei exploit ultra-high magnetic fields – including the 35.2 Tesla
series-connected hybrid magnet. All new methods are made available to
researchers from many disciplines (both experts and non-experts), who can use
them for structural characterization of solid
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.