* 2003364
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Structural Impurities on the Reactivity and Transformation of Lower Valent Manganese Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Evert Elzinga, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 155,163.00

The Environmental Chemical Science Program in the Chemistry Division supports
this project by Professors Bojeong Kim and Elizabeth B. Cerkez at Temple
University and Professor Evert J. Elzinga at Rutgers University-Newark. The team
investigates the effects of metal impurities on the structure, reactivity, and
stability of manganese (Mn) oxides. Natural Mn oxides typically contain a range
of impurities, but the impact of these impurities on the chemical reactions and
mineral transformations are unknown. Mn oxides have important applications in
industry, such as in batteries, energy storage devices, and sensors. There are
potential industrial uses of minerals whose properties could be changed by
including metal impurities. This project engages graduate and undergraduate
students at both Temple and Rutgers Universities. The team makes presentations
to retirement communities in the Philadelphia area, which brings new and
interesting science to an often-overlooked demographic group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines hausmannite and manganite, the most
widely distributed Mn(II/III) oxides in the environment. The research team
examines how and to what extent metal impurities alter the minerals’ structure,
reactivity, and stability. They also examine the potential release of foreign
metals during various reactions. Hausmannite and manganite substituted with
varying trace metal types (divalent-only Ni and Zn versus redox-active Co) and
concentrations (1 and 2 wt%) are measured for As(III) oxidizing ability and
transition metal solubility to quantify the substitution effects. The
mineralogical transformation kinetics in substituted minerals are also compared
with pristine minerals. A variety of state-of-the-art analytical techniques are
employed to characterize the coordination chemistry and valence of metal
substituents, probe interfacial redox chemistry, and identify transformation
products. The project provides mechanistic insights into the effects of metal
impurities on the structure, reactivity, and stability of Mn minerals. The
project further highlights the role of the lower valent Mn oxides in the
geochemical cycling of Mn, trace metals, and metalloids in natural
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.