* 2003199
* Quantitative Analysis of Molecular Conductance in Molecular Junctions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* C. Daniel Frisbie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

Professor C. Daniel Frisbie of the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities is
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
of the Division of Chemistry to investigate electrical conduction in molecular
semiconductors over tiny nanometer length scales and to develop molecular
switching devices that may lead to new applications in nanoelectronics.
Molecular semiconductors are employed in commercial OLED (organic light emitting
diode) displays but their conduction properties on molecular length scales are
not well understood. The project adds to the fundamental knowledge base and
advances the molecular electronic principles needed for a wide range of
applications in functional electronic semiconductor devices. Integrating the
research with education provides the graduate students who perform the
experimental work with valuable chemistry, material research and nanotechnology
skills and expose them to an international research experience. The project
provides summer research opportunities for undergraduate students of diverse
backgrounds with special attention to females and members of underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint, the focus of this
award is on molecular structure-conductance relationships in two mechanistic
regimes, namely the quantum mechanical tunneling and the classical hopping
limits. These very different transport mechanisms are defined by molecular
structure, with the tunneling mechanism generally pertaining to molecules less
than ~5 nm in length, and hopping persisting for molecules longer than this
value, depending on bonding architecture. The principal investigator and his
collaborators have shown that analytical theory called the single level model
(SLM) accurately describes the current-voltage (I-V) characteristics for certain
benchmark molecular junctions in the tunneling regime. In this project, the
research team probe the generality of the SLM for describing molecular tunneling
in a variety of systems with particular attention to the impact of
intermolecular interactions and surface attachment chemistry. In the hopping
regime, the emphasis is on understanding the precise nature of the
intramolecular charge-transfer transition states in pi-conjugated oligomers,
particularly the transition state energy (height of the free energy barrier) and
the associated bond length and angle deformations. For this purpose, kinetic
isotope analysis of hopping conduction is combined with quantum chemical
calculations of the transition state. Both the tunneling and hopping thrusts
leverage unique synthesis, measurement, and analysis strategies developed by in
the principal investigator's laboratory with prior NSF
support&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.