* 2003563
* Mechanisms for enhancing n-type polaronic transport in transition metal oxides: ionic size, pair formation/clustering, and valence effects
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Frank Bridges, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 652,415.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project focused on
studying a group of materials called transition metal oxides. These materials
are promising candidates for making devices for storing energy such as lithium-
ion batteries and for converting energy such as solar cells. However, their
efficiency has been fundamentally limited by the slow movement of negative and
positive charges in them, restricting their use in practical applications. The
main reason for the restricted movement of these charges is that they get
trapped by the distortions in the materials’ atomic structure. This project will
investigate the use of dopants to improve the mobility of the charges in iron
oxide, a representative of these transition metal oxides. It will determine the
design principles of “good” dopants that improve the transport of charges in
these oxides so that they can be used in practical energy applications. The
project will train undergraduate and graduate students and will engage in
outreach activities involving high school students, emphasizing in broadening
participation of underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to quantitatively investigate the
mechanisms that limit charge transport, including how the clustering of
extrinsic n-type dopants takes place, how the interaction between electron small
polarons and (clustered) dopants affects the electronic transport properties,
and what steps might increase the carrier concentration in transition metal
oxides. This project will initially use hematite, a representative polaronic
oxide, doped with tin and other 4+/5+ ions as a model system for the study. The
dopant clustering is believed to be due to ionic size mismatch, and consequently
limit the carrier conductivity. The research team will use a “co-doping”
strategy to improve the solubility of dopants and avoid clustering and
correspondingly enhance carrier mobility as a function of doping concentration.
A crucial step in this project is determining the local environment about
extrinsic dopants and dopant clusters and if/how they are modified when the
second dopants are incorporated; this work will combine physical measurements
with first-principles simulations. The findings in this project can provide
rules for rational design of polaronic oxides with improved transport
properties, and more importantly, develop a fundamental understanding of key
factors determining whether an isolated dopant, dopant cluster or co-doping can
be beneficial or harmful for transport properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.