* 2003748
* Designed Expanded Co-Crystals for Guest Structure Determination
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Christopher Snow, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 422,890.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand biology and to
design medical interventions, it is essential to observe the structure adopted
by large biological molecules. One of the main methods for determining those
structures is to coax the molecules into arranging themselves into a crystal,
and then to collect the diffraction pattern that results when these crystals are
exposed to an X-ray beam. This conventional process has a high failure rate.
Researchers have therefore long sought to develop scaffold crystals that can
organize guest molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a new
class of candidate scaffold crystals. Technically, these new crystalline
superstructures are co-crystals, since they are composed of both protein and DNA
building blocks. To identify the most promising materials in this family, the
team will use computational design and all-atom simulations to evaluate
candidates for experimental validation. These new crystal materials will feature
a modular design where “DNA struts” with any desired sequence are exposed to
open channels that are large enough to permit the movement of guest proteins.
The research team will grow crystals in which these DNA struts have sequences
that are specifically recognized by certain DNA-binding proteins. When these
guest proteins latch onto their target DNA they will join the crystal lattice
and become observable via X-ray diffraction. This approach circumvents the
haphazard crystal growth process that is the basis for conventional
crystallography. The resulting materials may therefore provide a transformative
method for scientists to routinely and easily observe atomic details for the
complexes between DNA and DNA-binding proteins, complexes that drive critically
important life processes such as transcription and
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Precise control of the 3-D
position of functional molecules within a scaffold crystal opens the door for
materials with unprecedented performance for diverse additional applications
including biosensing, catalysis, energy conversion, biomedicine, and
biotechnology. To partially explore these alternative applications, the team
will provide mentorship and funding for 3 years of undergraduate-led
biomolecular design teams (2020, 2021, and 2022), with each project culminating
in the international BIOMOD competition. Inspiring and training the next
generation of students to innovate at the biomaterials design frontier will
directly accelerate the pace of discovery, to the benefit of the scientific
community and the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use atomistic modeling and
simulation to design “expandable” protein:DNA co-crystal structures. The
approach is pragmatic: re-engineering protein-DNA systems that are already known
to form co-crystals. Inserted DNA struts will be tuned to preserve existing
crystallographic contacts and symmetry. Co-crystals will be grown, optimized,
and stabilized using crosslinking and ligation chemistry. Critically, large
solvent channels in the resulting co-crystals will permit post-crystallization
additive molecular assembly, using the inserted DNA struts with the appropriate
sequence for site-specific capture of cognate DNA-binding molecules. This
approach circumvents the haphazard nucleation and growth that underlies
conventional crystallography. The team will determine if DNA-binding molecules
captured by the scaffold crystal become visible via X-ray diffraction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1. Design candidate engineered co-crystals. Use all-
atom simulations to prioritize variants for experimental
validation.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 2. Express, purify, and crystallize novel designed
crystals composed of engineered protein and DNA building blocks. Optimize
crystal growth by varying the length and sequence of the DNA
blocks.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 3. Stabilize designed co-crystals using chemical
crosslinking. Capture a guest protein that binds specifically to the DNA
sequences that were inserted into the struts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
materials have unique aspects that warrant investigation as a potential platform
technology. [1] The design and experimental validation of highly porous
protein:DNA co-crystals as scaffolds is unknown, as is [2] the subsequent site-
specific capture of DNA-binding proteins therein. Unlike conventional
biomolecular crystals, the proposed scaffold crystals [3] have pore sizes that
may be expanded by changing the number of base pairs present within DNA struts,
and [4] have topologies that are amenable to modular incorporation of arbitrary
DNA sequences. This project will focus on the structural biology application of
these materials, but side applications (e.g. biosensing or catalysis) may be the
focus of the 3 annual undergraduate BIOMOD biomolecular design teams for whom
the project will provide mentorship and funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.