* 2003688
* DNA Photoproducts as Intrinsic Probes of Non-B DNA Conformations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* John-Stephen Taylor, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. John-Stephen Taylor at Washington University-Saint Louis
to develop methods for establishing the existence and locations of
G-quadruplexes in cells. The double-helical B-DNA structure discovered by Watson
and Crick revolutionized the understanding of how genetic information is
replicated and expressed as RNA and proteins in cells. G-quadruplexes are labile
four-stranded DNA structures that have more recently been found, along with
other non-B-DNA structures, to add new dimensions to the fundamental
understanding of how the expression of genetic information is controlled. The
study uses a unique reaction of G-quadruplexes with light that leads to
indelible and unique molecular imprints in DNA. These distinctive imprints
provide direct evidence for the existence of G-quadruplexes in cells, allowing
their positions and dynamic behavior to be investigated within the human genome.
The existence of G-quadruplexes and other non-B DNA structures lead to better
understanding of their roles in disease development. Graduate students working
on this project receive multidisciplinary training in synthetic organic
chemistry, photochemistry, automated DNA synthesis, molecular and cellular
biology, and mass spectrometry. In addition, teaching modules and tutorials for
high school students are developed that use physical and computer models to
understand G-quadruplex structures and how their photochemistry differs from
that of standard B-DNA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a long-
standing program in the principal investigator's laboratory to use chemical and
biophysical tools to study the details of complex nucleic acis structures, with
a particular focus on G-quadruplex structures. The scientific approach takes
advantage of the observation that UV irradiation of G-quadruplex-forming
sequences containing thymine (T) and cytosine (C) bases in adjacent lateral
loops results in the formation of stable anti-cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers
(anti-CPDs), photoproducts that cannot form in canonical B-DNA. Highly sensitive
methods are developed to detect these anti-CPDs photoproducts in cells using
post-labeling and isotope dilution mass spectrometric methods. Their positions
within the genome are located through ligation-mediated polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) methods. Structure-photoreactivity relationships that serve as
unique molecular signatures of G-quadruplexes and other related non-B DNA
conformations are determined using enzyme-coupled mass spectrometry assays of
site-specific isotopically labeled DNA. The broader impacts include presenting
research opportunities to students from traditionally underrepresented
communities and the development of new materials to teach concepts of DNA
structure that align with educational standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.