* 2003675
* Manipulation of Precursor Coordination and Reactivity to Enable Phase-tunability in Colloidally Synthesized Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alina Schimpf, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Alina Schimpf at University of
California, San Diego is developing new strategies for the synthesis of
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). This class of materials has a wide
array of potential applications including advanced electronics, chemical
catalysis, and quantum information science. The properties of a TMD depend not
only on their atomic composition, but also on the specific atomic arrangement
(the crystal phase). To uncover their technological potential, the ability to
generate phases of interest in pure form is critical. Unlike traditional solid-
state syntheses, Professor Schimpf and her group use solution chemistry to
directly synthesize TMDs of the same phase. The information garnered through
targeted efforts on this type of TMDs is broadly applicable to and informs the
synthesis of other TMDs and inorganic materials. Professor Schimpf is also using
these studies as a platform to provide research experiences for community
college students by partnering with San Diego Mesa College, an Hispanic Serving
Institution. The educational outreach activity provides opportunities for
students to work alongside PhD chemists and learn about advanced chemistry
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are
poised to play an important role in emerging technologies, with potential uses
in electronics, optoelectronics, catalysis and quantum spin information science.
The various applications of these materials are derived from different crystal
phases, giving rise to unique and diverse electronic and photophysical
properties. Professor Schimpfâ€™s research uses colloidal chemistry to access
phase-tunable syntheses of group-VI TMDs with composition ME2 (M = Mo, W; E = S,
Se) by exploiting the coordination chemistry and reactivity of the molecular
precursors. This research explores the chemical principles that govern the
ability to synthesize and maintain metastable phases. The primary objective is
to develop a microscopic understanding of the chemistry that governs nanocrystal
formation in order to rationally synthesize TMD nanocrystals with the desired
properties. The insights gained from this research are being used to hone the
design principles and iteratively add complexity to the structural design,
enabling access to higher-quality and phase-pure inorganic materials. These
studies may ultimately enable new strategies to access new or exotic phases of a
wide range of TMDs. Professor Schimpf is also working with community college
students from San Diego Mesa College, a local Hispanic Serving Institution, by
engaging them in the research of designing and conducting syntheses of WS2
nanocrystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.