* 2003404
* Holomorphic Invariants of Knots and Contact Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lenhard Ng, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 359,965.00

Symplectic geometry is an area of mathematics that dates back to the 19th
century, with its roots in physics and Newtonian mechanics. In the past few
decades, symplectic geometry has emerged as an exciting and fundamental area of
mathematical research, due in part to close connections with many other parts of
mathematics as well as physics. It has had especially striking recent
applications to topology, the study of geometric shapes and spaces, and
particularly the theory of knots, loops of string that are tied together at
their ends. The Principal Investigator will apply ideas from symplectic geometry
to construct and study invariants of knots as well as geometric spaces in three
and higher dimensions. Preliminary past work suggests that these invariants
provide a surprising and unexpected bridge between several modern areas of
mathematics (symplectic geometry, algebraic geometry, and quantum knot theory)
and physics (string theory, a model for the fundamental forces that shape the
universe). This project will explore this bridge, with the goal of creating and
strengthening new lines of two-way communication between mathematics and
theoretical physics. As part of this project, the Principal Investigator will
also promote the training of early-career researchers in mathematics, especially
through research experiences in mathematics for undergraduate students. In
addition the project will provide research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supported by this award will focus on
several related lines of research, all centered around holomorphic curves, which
have become central to the modern study of symplectic geometry since work of
Gromov in the 1980s. One direction builds on the construction of Fukaya
categories, algebraic structures associated to symplectic manifolds that play a
key role in Homological Mirror Symmetry. The present project will construct a
version of the Fukaya category for contact manifolds, built out of knots in a
contact manifold. A key motivation for studying this category for contact
manifolds is that it can serve as a central repository for holomorphic-curve
invariants of the contact manifold. In particular, it will be a key intermediary
in a larger picture that brings together other categories, both geometric
(infinitesimal Fukaya categories) and algebraic (microlocal sheaf categories).
Another aspect of the project deals with a package of knot invariants called
knot contact homology, which has been studied by the Principal Investigator in
previous work. This project will investigate the connection between knot contact
homology and certain other knot invariants such as HOMFLY-PT polynomials, using
recent progress in topological string theory. Goals in this direction include
developing a formula for colored HOMFLY-PT polynomials in terms of holomorphic
curves and quantizing the augmentation variety, a knot invariant devised from
knot contact homology, to produce a recurrence relation for these
polynomials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.