* 2003458
* Investigating the Effect of Coronal Charge Patterning on the Solution Structure of Amphiphilic Polypeptoid Multiblock Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Donghui Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 650,592.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Donghui Zhang of the
Department of Chemistry at Louisiana State University to investigate the
structure of amphiphilic charged block copolymers in aqueous solution.
Amphiphilic copolymers are long chain molecules possessing both water-loving and
fat-loving segments. Artificial compounds such as soaps and detergents and
naturally occurring lipoproteins also have amphiphilic properties. The team
studies how the overall charge in these polymers controls the shapes of
aggregates formed in solution. Stimuli-responsive behavior of these aggregates
is also investigated through control of water acidity or pH. Polymers prepared
in this project could have a potential impact in the biomedical area, especially
in the field of smart drug delivery. This team provides an interdisciplinary
training environment for student researchers. Students who participate in the
research program gain experience in polymer synthesis and characterization.
Beyond research and mentoring in a laboratory, this project also connects with
ongoing outreach efforts. Activities include ChemDemo and You Be the Chemist
(YBTC) programs at K-12 schools aimed at increasing the awareness of the
importance of polymer chemistry in modern society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is focused on understanding the effects of coronal charge patterning
(the number and relative position of ionizable monomers on the coronal chains)
on the equilibrium aggregate structure of amphiphilic ionic block copolymers
(BCPs) in the dilute aqueous solution. This knowledge is attained by judicious
design and synthesis of amphiphilic polypeptoid multiblock copolymers (mBCPs)
where the coronal charge pattern is controlled by the block length and sequence
of ionizable monomers on the coronal chain, and the characterization of their
dilute solution structure by a combination of established experimental methods.
The central hypothesis is that the local electrostatic interactions encoded in
the coronal block sequence of amphiphilic mBCPs influences the equilibrium
aggregate structure by modulating the interchain packing, chain conformation,
and water distribution in the aggregates. There are three main objectives
associated with the project. The first objective focuses on the synthesis of
amphiphilic polypeptoid multiblock copolymers having defined block length and
sequence of ionizable monomers by sequential controlled ring-opening
polymerization methods. In the second objective, the effects of coronal charge
pattern on the equilibrium polypeptoid aggregate structures that result from
their solution self-assembly in water are systematically investigated. The last
objective concentrates on stimuli-responsive behavior of these polypeptoid
aggregate solutions, with a strong emphasis on the pH-induced structural
transitions. This research could lead to new design rules and reliable protocols
in producing polypeptoid-based nanostructures with controlled dimension,
geometry, internal structure and pH-responsive
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.