* 2003428
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Local Response to International Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Gregory Wilson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 23,150.00

This archaeological research examines the decisions and strategies employed by
Native individuals and communities in the context of changing colonial relations
during the early 19th century in California. Archaeology is well positioned to
evaluate this issue because its emphasis on space, time, and objects allows for
the reconstruction of how past social agents navigated significant shifts in
colonial strategies over time. This is particularly important considering the
broadscale social and economic shifts that occurred during the Mission period.
While the initial goal of the mission system was to convert local peoples into
loyal Spanish subjects, new policies helped free mission laborers from
Franciscan rule. The assessment of materials deposited within earlier and later
Mission contexts can thus not only provide new insights into the operation of
colonialism but can also be used to ascertain the political strategies and daily
practices employed by Native groups during these distinct periods in time. These
data can be used as a comparative to other regions throughout California, and
even across the globe, to understand the differing impacts of colonial policies
on indigenous populations and the way that local groups navigated colonialism
using their own system of meanings and values. The research will be conducted
with the Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians and California State Parks.

Given this broader context, this project undertakes research to study the social
organization of one Native community within a mission setting and evaluate how
they responded to the retreat of the Spanish frontier inside the mission space.
The study of indigenous experiences at Mission La Purísima Concepcíon offers an
ideal lens through which to investigate these issues because two distinct
stratigraphic/ chronological groups have been previously identified. By
exploring labor practices, foodways, craft industries, and trade and exchange
from these two distinct contexts, this project sheds light on how the Chumash
community at the Mission navigated new colonial policies and relations over
time. These results are used to understand evolving indigenous social identities
at the community level and regional scale given the broader historical
background of sea change happening in Alta California under colonialism.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.