* 2003654
* Hypervalent Iodine Based Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Kyle Plunkett, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Kyle N. Plunkett of Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale is creating new supramolecular assemblies based on
organic cyclic molecules that contain the chemical element iodine. Inspired by
nature, supramolecular chemistry utilizes hydrogen bonding to dictate assemblies
such as proteins, enzymes, and DNA. In this research, general strategies are
developed to prepare building blocks for assemblies based on amino acids
containing iodine fragments. These building blocks provide a framework for 3D
structures that have applications in gas/molecular absorption and sensing. The
bonding and properties are investigated using several experimental techniques.
This project contributes to the training of a diverse group of students. The
research team is designing 180-degree 3D videos of laboratory experiments and
demonstrations. The video content is used with virtual reality headsets to
immerse internet-connected learners in a virtual chemistry world. Outreach
activities focus on recruitment of local high school students to participate in
research stays over the summer, winter or spring
breaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on developing new
supramolecular assemblies based on hypervalent iodine macrocycles that are
synthesized from amino acid functionalized benziodazoles. These molecules self-
assemble through secondary bonding into macrocyclic structures, which are the
building block for the higher order supramolecular structures including
molecular cages and covalent organic frameworks. These macrostructures provide a
framework to build molecular cages by linkages made through non-natural amino
acid side chains. Specific goals of this work are to explore the dynamic
covalent bonding of hypervalent iodine macrocycles and identify expedient
synthetic routes towards molecular cages. The investigators also seek to
quantify guest ion/molecule binding affinity, reaction-promoted disassembly and
solid-state properties and characterize covalent organic frameworks based on
hypervalent iodine macrocyclization reactions. This research provides new
methods to guide supramolecular assemblies, which is of fundamental interest
because of the new bonding and reactivity possibilities that could provide
access to properties such as chiral recognition and reactivity. Additionally,
potential impacts of this research include the design and synthesis of high
surface area materials that have emerging properties for applications in
gas/molecule absorption and sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.