* 2003251
* Ion-transport mechanisms in adaptation to extreme salinities
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Craig Gatto, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2024
* USD 955,000.00

This project studies how the only two animal species that flourish in inland
salt lakes, like the Great Salt Lake, sense and respond to harsh changes in
environmental salt content. Brine fly larvae and brine shrimp must maintain a
much lower salt content than their environment, which is an energetically costly
process. However, the cellular mechanisms by which they achieve this unique feat
are poorly understood. The work in this project will deduce how these two
organisms adapt cellular mechanisms to retain water and expel salt within
environments that strongly favor the opposite. The ability to compare and
contrast the mechanisms utilized by these substantially different species to
combat this environmental stress will provide critical insights into their
adaptation. This collaborative study links research and teaching at Texas Tech
University Health Sciences Center and Illinois State University and will immerse
graduate and undergraduate students in a rigorous and interdisciplinary
educational setting, providing 1) a project-research-based course and 2)
continuing laboratory research opportunities for undergraduates, thus creating a
pathway to recruit undergraduate students into biological research. in addition
to their standard training in research methods. The graduate students involved
in the research efforts will also be provided with unique training on how to
teach (within a course) and to become a mentor (within the laboratory). Thus,
this project accomplishes a multilevel training experience that reinforces
scientific skills at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, while providing
training to graduate students as future mentors and faculty members. The results
from this project will be disseminated by peer-reviewed publications, invited
lectures, and presentations at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ion-transport mechanisms that allow brine shrimp and brine fly larvae adaptation
to extreme salinities remain largely unknown. This project utilizes novel
integration of bioinformatics, biochemistry, and electrophysiology, to identify
such ion- transporters, study their functional properties, and uncover their
role and cooperation to allow these animals to thrive in an environment where
all other animals die. Several hypotheses organized in three independent
research aims will be tested: 1) Identify the ion transporters required for
brine shrimp survival in high salinity 2) Identify the ion-transporters required
for brine fly survival in high salinity 3) Elucidate the molecular mechanisms of
amino acid substitutions linked to salinity adaptation. For aims 1 &amp; 2,
target ion-transport proteins will be identified in each organism by
transcriptomics, and their functional role evaluated by pharmacological survival
assays and siRNA methods and by expression of the identified transporters in
heterologous expression systems. An essential player in the adaptation of all
osmoregulating animals is the Na,K-ATPase. Most animals that adapt to both ends
of the extreme salinity spectrum present radical structural modifications in
regions that are critical for the interaction of the transported ions with this
protein. To test if and how these modifications may provide an adaptive
advantage to the extreme salinity-adapting animals that carry them, the third
aim of this project specifically evaluates the stoichiometry and functional
properties of Na,K-ATPases with the same structural specialties as those
observed in adapting animals. Graduate and undergraduate student trainees will
be supported at both institutions. Both PIs have outstanding track records
involving undergraduate and graduate students in scientific discovery while
authoring articles in high-impact journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.