* 2003863
* CAS: Polymers from biomass using monomers derived from lignin
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Andrea Kasko, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 350,745.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Andrea M. Kasko of the
Department of Bioengineering at University of California-Los Angeles is
preparing polymers from biomass using starting materials (monomers) derived from
lignin. Lignin is one of the most important structural polymers in nature. As
the second most abundant natural polymer after cellulose, lignin is an
inexpensive and widely available source of carbon. In this research, monomers or
polymer building blocks based on lignin are first chemically functionalized to
enhance their solubility in common organic solvents. These monomers are then
polymerized by themselves or in the presence of other synthetic monomers to
yield high molecular weight polymers and copolymers. The physical properties of
the generated polymers are then systematically evaluated and compared to other
high performance, commodity plastics. The properties that are being investigated
include mechanical properties, thermal stability, solvent resistance and
degradability or recyclability. The broader impacts of this work involve
potentially substantial societal benefits by transforming natural resources into
polymers, thereby decreasing society's dependence on petroleum resources for raw
materials. This project also broadens participation in a number of ways. The
multi-disciplinary nature of the research provides training to graduate and
undergraduate students in organic, polymer and physical chemistry. Undergraduate
students are involved in the project throughout the school year and during the
summer through undergraduate research programs at University of California-Los
Angeles. A strong emphasis is placed on recruiting and retaining under-
represented populations in research, and promoting research to non-STEM
undergraduates. A summer internship module on biopolymers is developed for
veterans who have re-entered civilian life and are pursuing STEM degrees at
local community colleges through the Project SERVES
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to
synthesize polymers and copolymers incorporating hydroxycinnamate monomers
derived from lignin. The team evaluates the properties of the generated polymers
and copolymers as plant-derived alternatives to commodity and high performance
polymeric materials. A series of substituted monomers and dimers based on
hydroxycinnamic acids (monolignol biosynthetic precursors) and monolignols are
first prepared, and then copolymerized via condensation polymerizations to
produce poly(ester amide)s, poly(ester)s, poly(ether amide)s and poly(amide)s.
Small molecules and polymers are also grafted to/from the double bond in the
backbone of these poly(ester amide)s, poly(ester)s, poly(ether amide)s, and
poly(amide)s. Flexible blocks (siloxane and poly(ethylene oxide)) are
additionally incorporated into the polymers to broaden the range of achievable
properties. The research team is also synthesizing benzoxazine-based polymers.
Lastly, the material properties of the polymers, copolymers, and their blends
and composites (mechanical properties, thermal stability, solvent resistance,
and degradability/recyclability) are characterized. This research could have a
positive impact on the environmental and economic sustainability because it
focuses on the synthesis of polymers from abundant renewable feed
stock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.