* 2003411
* Curved, Twisted and Doped Nanocarbons: Stepwise Build-Up of Charge and Metal Intercalation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marina Petrukhina, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2024
* USD 479,997.00

Professor Marina Petrukhina of the State University of New York (SUNY) at Albany
is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry to study a diverse set of nanocarbon
materials with inherent curvature and twist. Nanocarbon materials are
increasingly being used in a range of applications, particularly as electrodes
in alternative energy generation and storage systems such as Li-ion batteries
and supercapacitors. It is now generally agreed that the charge storage and
transport properties of these materials are highly dependent on the structural
features of their molecules and assemblies. The project is poised to advance
fundamental knowledge on the chemical and electronic properties of these non-
planar molecular nanocarbons. A better understanding of these systems and their
multi-electron acquisition and charge transport processes paves the way for
their utilization in practical energy devices. Beyond its fundamental
importance, a major objective of the project is the enhancement of the
educational and research experiences of graduate and undergraduate students at
the SUNY Albany to prepare them for future success in a highly competitive
workforce environment. The PI is actively involved in enhancing the
infrastructure across the State University of New York (SUNY) campuses to
strengthen the research portfolio and to facilitate innovation in nanoscience,
sustainability and energy related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
carrying out a broad fundamental investigation of stepwise chemical reduction
processes and multi-electron storage capacities of a diverse set of novel
nanocarbon materials. The project's three main objectives are: 1) the evaluation
of the structural transformations of curved, twisted, and doped molecular
nanographenes with different core topologies and pi-conjugation upon addition of
multiple electrons; (2) the investigation of the reduction-induced reactivity
and utilization of intra- and intermolecular Câˆ’C coupling reactions for the
synthesis of new extended polyaromatic systems; and 3) the study of self-
assembly and alkali metal intercalation of the highly charged carbon scaffolds
with embedded cavities and pockets for the development of new energy-storage
materials. The project provides new insights into electron acquisition abilities
and reactivity of novel molecular nanocarbons with contorted and strained
frameworks, as well as uncovers unusual structural transformations and new
coupling pathways upon stepwise build-up of negative charge. By improving the
fundamental understanding of the redox properties, self-assembly and alkali
metal intercalation processes, the project facilitates practical applications of
the nanostructured carbon materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.