* 2003297
* Label free, biomimetic sensors for hormones and neurotransmitters
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* S. Scott Saavedra, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Abnormal regulation of molecules such as hormones and neurotransmitters that are
secreted from cells in the human body leads to a wide range of debilitating
conditions, including addiction, depression, diabetes and many others. A major
challenge in understanding the normal and abnormal regulation of hormone and
neurotransmitter secretion is the inability to measure these molecules with
sufficient selectivity and sensitivity as they are released from cells. This
research project aims to overcome this challenging by developing a new
biomimetic sensor platform that can measure the secretion of a wide range of
important hormones and neurotransmitters that are biologically important, but
that cannot be detected adequately using currently existing methods. The
capability to make such measurements enables the research community to better
understand, and ultimately correct, the underlying biochemical mechanisms in
hormone and neurotransmitter regulation. The project provides educational and
interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
at the University of Arizona (a Hispanic Serving Institution) and Yavapai
Community College, thereby helping to build a diverse science, technology,
engineering and mathematics workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
sensors that are capable of detecting various single chemical compounds, as well
as multiple chemical compounds released simultaneously, from cells has proven
challenging for the vast majority of hormones and neuropeptides, and many
neurotransmitters. This research project addresses the critical need for new,
label-free measurement strategies for hormones and neurotransmitters by
developing a novel class of electrophysiological sensors based upon a new sensor
transducer concept that is readily modified to enable detection of a wide range
important biochemical analytes. These electrophysiological sensors are comprised
of protein transducers that generate a high-gain electrical signal upon analyte
binding, including ion channel proteins or ion channel-coupled receptor
proteins. The transducers are embedded in an ultrastable lipid membrane that is
integrated into a micropipette architecture. In addition to single analyte
sensors, sensors comprised of multiple, differing sensor elements that enable
quantification of multiple analytes are being developed. This sensor platform
provides a modular approach for developing highly sensitive and selective
sensors with high spatial and temporal resolution. The project focuses on
development and characterization of biomimetic electrophysiological sensors with
emphasis on key variables that affect sensor function and performance. The work
targets optimization of lipid membranes and protein transducers, the design of
multianalyte sensors and performance evaluation in model cellular
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.