* 2003631
* Degradation of Organic Semiconductors: Functional and Mechanistic Descriptions from Macroscale to Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Erin Ratcliff, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 670,235.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Organic materials capable of conducting
electricity – termed organic semiconductors - are used in many emerging, next-
generation technologies including organic light emitting diodes, organic-based
solar cells, thermoelectrics, and chemical sensors. The benefits of organic
semiconductors include lower cost, improved performance, flexibility,
transparency, and lower environmental impact, but concerns persist about their
long-term stability and lifetime. The focus of this project – degradation of
functional properties – is a fundamental materials chemistry challenge that must
be overcome to progress the field of organic electronic devices. With support
from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, the researchers advance the understanding of materials and
chemical degradation pathways at a fundamental level, which will eventually
facilitate development of new materials design criteria. Hence, this work
provides important new insights that drive the creation of new molecules and
polymers and contributes to long-term stability and technological relevance of
the United States in printable electronic materials and devices. Support from
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program also advances the development of
unique capabilities for in operando characterization of organic semiconductor
systems that are readily translatable to other active materials chemistry
applications and enable identification of the chemical pathways that accompany
degradation in materials at length scales from microns to nanometers. This
inherently interdisciplinary effort between chemists and engineers is a platform
for interdisciplinary training for the graduate and undergraduate students
engaged in research. New interdisciplinary graduate- and undergraduate-level
laboratory experiences are developed through this effort, and the properties of
this important class of materials are explored in K-to-gray public outreach
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Push-pull or donor-
acceptor-type molecular and polymeric architectures have become the dominant
class of active materials in organic electronics with performance metrics
superior to earlier molecular designs. However, little attention has been
devoted to understanding long-term stability. This fundamental effort directly
examines and compares chemical structure, electronic structure, and charge
transport characteristics of complex push-pull organic semiconductor (OSC)
architectures as a function of molecular building block composition to
understand the chemical, photochemical and photophysical mechanistic origins and
functional impacts of degradation. The secondary impact of this effort is
formulation of new design criteria for more robust OSCs. This work builds on
successful efforts through a previous NSF DMR award (DMR-1608289) in which a
collaborative, multi-disciplinary investigation of organic semiconductor
degradation was initiated. Previously-demonstrated approaches include surveying
functional characteristics under conditions that lead to degradation, coupled
with detailed spectroscopic analysis methodologies to understand mechanistic
molecular origins. In this project, capabilities are expanded to include local
physical structure with site-specific molecular and electronic imaging
capabilities, which enables investigation of fundamental materials chemistry
across length scales ranging from microns to nanometers. In addition to
improving materials design for emerging technologies, the broader impacts of
this work manifests through numerous education and outreach activities This
collaboration between chemists and engineers is a platform for interdisciplinary
training for the graduate and undergraduate students engaged in research. New
interdisciplinary graduate- and undergraduate-level laboratory experiences are
developed through this effort, and the properties and uses of this important
class of materials are explained and explored in K-to-gray outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.