* 2003126
* Advancing Refugee Youth's STEM and Social Capital Through Family-Focused Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Pamela Marshall, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,787.00

This project creates partnerships among multiple schools and centers at Arizona
State University with the Burundi-America Association for Humanity and
Opportunities (BAAHO) to bolster representation of refugee families in STEM
academic and career pathways. Refugee youth are sometimes overlooked by
educators because of their emerging language skills, but like other youth they
are capable of making important STEM contributions. This project recognizes and
leverages the STEM knowledge and perspectives of Burundian refugee adults
through a family-focused model that connects Burundian refugee families with
university faculty and undergraduate students. Families with children ages 12-17
will participate in: “living room outreach events” facilitated by students and
faculty, opportunities to meet and interact with STEM professionals, field trips
to multiple university campuses to learn about college life and various STEM
pathways, and informal STEM learning experiences of choice with other families.
Additionally, older children will participate in an innovative technology
experience that facilitates mentoring relationships between STEM professionals
and the youth through an electronic-based STEM Aspiration journal shared between
the mentee and mentor. At the core of the project are partnerships and
opportunities for reciprocal learning, where parents are able to share their
expertise while also learning more about how to be effective advocates for their
children; youth are able to learn from undergraduate and practicing professional
mentors, while undergraduates also learn from Burundian youth; and Burundian
leaders teach faculty and undergraduates about Burundian history and culture
while faculty and undergraduates share their experiences with navigating STEM
career pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances knowledge of refugee
families’ STEM experiences and aspirations through research framed around social
cognitive career theory. The investigators examine the composite and specific
effects of each of the project activities on the youth participants’ self-
efficacy, STEM identity, outcome expectations, and STEM interests, in support of
their STEM goals. Additionally, the researchers aim to understand how college
social capital and STEM capital among Burundian refugee families both directly
impacts and acts as a moderator on children's STEM aspirations. In this pilot
study, the investigators take a mixed-methods research approach, where
qualitative methods allow them to understand how different aspects of the
program impact the youth participants. In collaboration with Burundian leaders,
the researchers adapt survey instruments for cultural validity, and administer
the surveys for additional data related to the impact of the program activities.
Contributions from this project will include: a family-focused outreach model
that can be used by other universities and/or with other refugee communities, an
approach to facilitating remote mentoring through shared electronic journaling,
research findings related to how different aspects of the model impact refugee
participants, and research instruments that have been adapted for use with
refugee populations. The project will provide a foundation for possible future
scale-up with other refugee populations (and in other communities), informed by
the findings from this project and further supported by the International Rescue
Committee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts, and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.