* 2003931
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Beyond the BLAS: A Framework for Accelerating Computational and Data Science
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Devin Matthews, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2024
* USD 369,280.00

Traditional scientific and machine learning high-performance computing software
is often cast in terms of a set of fundamental operations, including the linear
algebra functionality that underlies many applications. For this reason,
research into and development of open-source linear algebra software libraries
has been a science infrastructure priority for decades. An emerging trend that
has disrupted this field is the recognition that scientific discovery can be
made faster and/or more cost efficient by lowering the precision of
computations, utilizing non-standard data types, and developing custom
computational kernels. The project will leverage insights into how to structure
the required software so that the combinatorial explosion in software complexity
remains manageable. The outcome of the project will be a modern linear algebra
software framework and application-focused libraries that will support future
generations of computational applications in academia, at the national labs, and
in industry. In addition, the project will impact the training of the next
generation of high-performance computing professions and help remove barriers
into the field for members of traditionally underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will build on previous NSF-
sponsored research in order to address the implementation of expanded precision
(EP), mixed precision (MP), and mixed domain (MD) algorithms simultaneously in a
single software solution. Insights gained from a recent demonstration of MP/MD
matrix multiplication will be extended by adding low precision types like
float16 and bfloat16 and extended precision types like double-double. The target
Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms (BLAS) functionality will be expanded to all
level-1, level-2, and level-3 operations which in turn will support new research
on how best to exploit MP/MD for LAPACK functionality. The new BLAS-like Library
Instantiation Software (BLIS) framework will also be updated to provide the
flexibility required to integrate extended dense linear algebra (DLA)
operations. This flexible DLA framework will then be used to implement key
functionality in computational and data science: tensor contraction and
factorization operations important to quantum chemistry (QC) and high-
performance primitives for machine learning. As a demonstration, these
capabilities will be used to build state-of-the-art QC codes to perform coupled
cluster polarization propagator and tensor-factorized coupled cluster
calculations with full EP/MP/MD functionality, and the machine learning kernels
will be integrated into computer vision and image recognition
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.