* 2003273
* MLWiNS: Cross-Layer Integrated RF-Based Data-Driven Wireless Device Classification Framework for Spectrum Access Awareness
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Weng-Keen Wong, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 522,566.00

The recent proliferation of wireless devices and networks calls for new
techniques capable of identifying devices that are transmitting over different
bands of the wireless spectrum. These techniques play a key role in supporting
spectrum access awareness applications that, for example, allow regulatory
agencies to enforce their spectrum access policies and enable wireless network
administrators to monitor for unauthorized network access. The goal of this
project is to develop novel machine learning methods for automated wireless
device identification that scale well with the massive and diverse numbers of
emerging devices. In addition, the project provides educational activities that
include graduate course development, teaching curriculum enhancement, and
professional training of graduate and undergraduate students. The project will
also provide research training opportunities for high school and minority
students through Oregon State University’s Apprenticeships in Science and
Engineering (ASE) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops holistic
solutions to cross-layer device classification that integrate all the different
system component capabilities together, including transceiver hardware, wireless
radio frequency (RF) domain knowledge, and deep learning. The first project
thrust leverages features that go beyond conventional in-band impairments to
include out-of-band distortions due to transceiver hardware imperfections. Using
wideband receivers to capture in-band and out-of-band signals, these impairments
can jointly serve as unique signatures for transmitters, thereby increasing
classification accuracy and scalability. The second thrust integrates hand-
engineered features with models acquired through RF domain knowledge and
leverages input-output function mapping acquired through deep learning to
assimilate meaningful representations from raw IQ data. The final research
direction is to develop novel deep neural network algorithms and architectures
that incorporate the domain-specific structure of the RF input data to increase
device classification accuracy and scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.