* 2003849
* Experimental and Computational Study of Pore Morphology Evolution Mechanisms in Nanoporous Metal Thin Films Under Thermal/Electrical/Mechanical Stress Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Erkin Seker, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 481,403.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Nanostructured metals have had a tremendous
impact on a variety of applications including battery electrodes, biomedical
implant coatings, and biosensors. Materials in these conditions are generally
subject to various external factors (e.g., temperature, electric, and mechanical
stress fields) that can gradually change the material's properties and
performance. The purpose of this project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of these processes using nanoporous gold (np-Au) as a model
system. The np-Au belongs to the emerging class of nanoporous metals that have
attracted significant interest for its catalytic, optical, mechanical, and
biomedical features. The expected outcome is the generation of scientific
knowledge that allows for precise control of shape and structure changes in
nanoporous metals; this will improve predictions of how material properties
evolve and in turn enhance the performance of nanostructured metals in
applications. The instrumentation and simulation techniques developed as part of
the project will be widely applicable to other material systems as well,
including other nanoporous metals and metallic nanowires. The broader impacts of
this project include societal benefits and educational opportunities, such as
undergraduate research opportunities with the principal investigators and
interactive educational tools that teach key concepts of micro-/nano-fabrication
and atomistic simulations via interactive computer
games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The morphology of
nanoporous gold (np-Au), typically produced by selectively dissolving a less
noble component of an alloy to create a bicontinuous porous structure, is
conventionally modulated via thermal annealing where the enhanced surface
diffusion of gold atoms leads to ligament coarsening. However, both the extent
of coarsening and the resulting morphologies can also be significantly affected
by the application of electrical currents and mechanical stresses at low
temperatures, though these effects have not yet been studied. The project
hypothesizes that morphological change in np-Au can be more finely modulated,
and novel structural features be developed, by applying heating, electrical
current, and mechanical stresses in concert. Initially subjecting np-Au to
varying temperature, electric, and mechanical stress fields will allow the
effects of the individual fields to be characterized. Subsequent experiments and
simulations will investigate synergistic or emergent effects from applying the
fields simultaneously. Key scientific outcomes of the project will include
characterization of the decoupled effects of heating, electrical current, and
mechanical stresses on pore morphology evolution, identification of the
underlying mechanisms and the corresponding kinetics, and a model supported by
experiments and simulations to predict the morphological evolution from the
combined influences of these fields. Precise control of morphology evolution in
nanoporous metals will expand the set of practically accessible nanostructures
and corresponding material properties that can be implemented as enhanced
biomedical device coatings, catalytic fuel cells, or as plasmonic materials for
sensors. In tandem, the project will employ classroom assignments to develop a
library of interactive simulations of experimental procedures that emphasize
micro-/nano-fabrication with a focus on nanostructured metals and visualizations
of the relevant atomic processes. In addition, through a scheme where
undergraduate students write a short research proposal to compete for a summer
internship, the students will be employed on customized projects under
mentorship of the principal investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.