* 2003324
* Tubular and Planar Approaches to Separations (TAPAS)
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2024
* Purnendu Dasgupta, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 11/30/2024
* USD 511,250.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Purnendu K. (Sandy) Dasgupta and his students
at the University of Texas at Arlington are working to improve the performance
and portability of a family of important instruments known as chromatographs.
These instruments are widely used for separating the constituents of complex
mixtures, enabling further analysis of the separated components. The underlying
science of chromatography is critical for applications such as assuring the
purity of reagents used in the semiconductor industry; environmental analysis
(including monitoring reactive pollutants that cannot survive a long trip to the
lab); monitoring water disinfection byproducts; manufacturing pharmaceuticals;
and monitoring food safety. The Dasgupta group is working to make such
instruments easily field-portable (small, lightweight, low-power, and low-cost)
without compromising their separation capabilities. The aim is on-site
measurement in such contexts as a physician’s office or patient's bedside;
industrial troubleshooting; and water-monitoring in submarines and even in the
international space station. Through involvement of students ranging from
junior- and senior-level high school interns through postdoctoral fellows,
Professor Dasgupta is also addressing the high demand for people trained to use
these techniques. As he develops new instruments and techniques, he is
incorporating them into laboratory curricula and working with instrument-makers
for commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dasgupta group is using moldable
ion-exchange polymers developed in the previous NSF-funded project to make ion
transport-driven nonmechanical nL/min - uL/min pumps and molded microchannels to
provide ultra-miniature suppressors and eluent generators. Open-channel columns
with helical and 2D/3D serpentine geometries are being systematically
investigated for their separations capabilities. These columns can be fabricated
by 3D printing and near-IR laser machining, making them inexpensive and amenable
to mass production. The team is exploring direct photothermal and
multireflection absorption measurements for sensitive detection, as well as
computational techniques to reduce dispersion. Finally, they are exploring the
use of porous tubes (where radial flow is induced by evaporation) and pressure-
driven axial flow in the presence of a transverse, time-dependent, electric
field as approaches to achieving the high separation efficiencies characteristic
of microchannels while operating at higher flow rates, so that extra-column
dispersion requirements are lessened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.