* 2003523
* Collaborative Research: Linking Host Life History, Movement Ecology, and Climate to Predict Epizootics in Megadiverse Tropical Amphibian Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Carlos Becker, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 06/30/2022
* USD 437,073.00

Understanding the spread of diseases in wildlife communities is fundamental to
the field of ecology and to predicting the stability of animal populations in an
era of global change. This research focuses on one of the most successful
pathogens of vertebrates - a skin fungus that is lethal to hundreds of amphibian
species - to resolve how generalist pathogens cross habitat and host species
boundaries, at times impacting entire ecosystems and watersheds. The project is
global in scope, with field sites in three megadiverse tropical frog communities
in Brazil, Peru, and Cameroon. By advancing disease transmission theory for
diverse wildlife communities, this research will provide novel insights into
impacts of emerging diseases and increase our capacity to forecast and respond
to disease outbreaks. The researchers will work with the multimedia magazine
bioGraphic to produce a video story detailing the motivation and progress of the
team’s research in Brazil, with an expected reach of &gt; 1 million views. The
researchers will also work with the education department at the California
Academy of Sciences to develop and disseminate an introductory video, lesson
plan, and interactive game for K-12 audiences that teach the concepts of host-
pathogen dynamics and showcase the tools scientists use to study and model these
systems. The projected reach is 35,000 K-12 teachers per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our three-tiered research approach includes 1) field
surveys spanning the old world and new world tropics to assess infection
patterns in diverse amphibian communities across space and time, 2) a field
experiment to isolate the effects of climatic variability on amphibian community
structure and disease risk, and 3) novel methods of disease modelling that
integrate observational and experimental data to forecast disease dynamics and
population demographics at the community scale. A cornerstone of our integrative
approach is to examine the disease dynamics of fully terrestrial amphibians.
This guild of tropical frogs has been experiencing cryptic population declines
and extinctions ostensibly linked to disease, droughts, shifts in host behavior,
spatial aggregation, and pathogen spillover. The field survey component will
compare spatiotemporal disease dynamics among co-occurring terrestrial-breeding
and aquatic-breeding amphibian species, focusing on divergent host movement
patterns and responses to climatic variability. The experiment in Brazil will
manipulate rainfall variability in large-scale field enclosures to test
hypotheses on host movement patterns and infection dynamics of terrestrial- and
aquatic-breeding leaf litter frogs. Field surveys and experimental data will be
integrated within a multi-host disease modeling framework. This framework will
apply recently developed N-mixture models accounting for imperfect host and
pathogen detection, together with a Bayesian population viability analysis, to
predict long-term host population stability exposed to pathogens under future
climate scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.