* 2003312
* Subgrains and Dynamic Grain Growth in BCC Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Eric Taleff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2024
* USD 429,710.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Metals and their alloys provide the load-bearing
structures needed in sophisticated machines that support our modern society.
Useful applications range from aircraft to automobiles to bridges. These
structural materials are composed of microscopic crystals called grains. The
sizes, shapes, and orientations of grains control a material's mechanical
properties, such as strength and ductility. These microscopic features, part of
the material microstructure, are determined by the manufacturing processes that
produce and shape materials into useful machine components. Manufacturing
frequently requires deformation at elevated temperatures, the modern equivalent
of hot forging by the ancient blacksmith, to control the material microstructure
and final component shape. During hot deformation, grains change size and shape
in ways that we cannot yet predict or fully explain. This project addresses the
fundamental science behind the changes in grain shape, size, and orientation
during hot deformation. The goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms
responsible for these changes. Through this scientific understanding,
opportunities are sought to: 1. improve material performance and 2. identify
manufacturing methods that create improved material microstructures. Both
graduate and undergraduate students are educated and trained through
experimental research. Primary-school teachers are provided summer research
experience, training, and resources to bring to their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic grain
growth involves changes in grain shape, size, and orientation during deformation
at elevated temperatures. It is critically important to the processing of many
technologically useful metals and alloys. However, the mechanisms that cause it
are not yet understood. This experimental study assesses the leading hypothesis
among several proposed for mechanisms that control dynamic grain growth. The
hypothesized mechanism of subgrains driving high-angle grain boundary migration
is investigated for (mechanically) steady-state plastic deformation of body-
centered-cubic metals at elevated temperatures. The goal of this study is to
characterize and quantitatively measure the effects of subgrain interactions
with high-angle boundaries during both dynamic normal grain growth and dynamic
abnormal grain growth. Recent advances in high-resolution analysis of electron
back-scattered diffraction data are leveraged to provide quantitative
characterization of subgrain interactions with grain boundaries. An improved
understanding of dynamic grain growth will provide capabilities for predicting
and controlling material microstructures during hot deformation processing. This
will benefit manufacturing and domestic competitiveness. Integrated with the
proposed research are training and educational activities for both graduate and
undergraduate students. Outreach involves primary-school teachers participating
in a summer program of research experience and curriculum development to
positively impact their own students. This outreach focuses on imparting an
accessible understanding of materials through hands-on projects and examples
that utilize the aesthetic beauty of microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.