* 2003582
* Participant Support for the First Penn State SETI Symposium; July, 2020; University Park, PA
* MPS,AST
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Jason Wright, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,404.00

The discovery of thousands of exoplanets has led to credible estimates of the
number of potentially habitable planets in our galaxy. Astronomers estimate that
there are up to forty billion of these worlds. Follow-up observations have
suggested the presence of water vapor in the atmospheres of some exoplanets,
lending new credence to the idea that there might be life elsewhere in our
galaxy, and new urgency for the search for life. Pennsylvania State University
will host the first Penn State SETI Symposium (PSETI2020), a gathering of
scientists to discuss plans and new approaches in this rapidly evolving field.
The aim of the conference is to put SETI research on firmer footing by
developing plans for rigorous technosignatures searches. The workshop will focus
on new efforts involving ground-based and space-based telescopes in a variety of
wavebands, emphasizing data-driven results and the training of new
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, will host the first Penn State SETI Symposium (PSETI2020). PSETI2020 is to
be the first in an annual series of conferences on SETI research. One of the
principal aims of the conference series will be the training of new and early-
career researchers. The conference organizers seek to encourage participation in
PSETI2020 by early-career researchers by offering NSF-sponsored funding for
travel and conference registration. The conference will last four days, and will
include sessions devoted to recent results, as well as reviews and short courses
in the current status of the field. There will also be workshops where early-
career researchers can learn about new data sets and analysis tools, and where
they can work intensively with experts in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.