* 2003592
* Collaborative Research: Development and Evaluation of a Miniature Coaxial Ion Trap Mass Analyzer for Portable Chemical Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kristina Lemmer, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 380,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Drs. Nicholas Taylor and Kristina Lemmer at Western Michigan
University and Daniel Austin at Brigham Young University are working to develop
a novel miniaturized instrument for field-portable chemical analysis based on a
powerful method known as mass spectrometry. Specifically, the team seeks to
develop a device capable of more detailed and yet faster analysis than is
currently possible in field-portable analyzers. The ability to provide industry
and the scientific community with a simple, lightweight, and portable tool
capable of rapid in situ chemical measurements can have a societal impact on
many areas including biochemistry, pharmacology, environmental monitoring,
threat detection, industrial monitoring and quality control, as well as
planetary exploration. The work is being conducted by undergraduate and graduate
students in chemistry and aerospace engineering, including members of
underrepresented groups. This cross-disciplinary collaboration resonates with
NSF’s goal to enhance convergence research while inspiring and helping train the
next generation of scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field portable
systems equipped with highly miniaturized ion trap mass analyzers will possess
the ability to rapidly and reliably make quantitative chemical measurements of a
wide range of molecular species. The novel coaxial ion trap being designed and
build by the Taylor team utilizes a rectilinear ion guide (RIG) for efficient
injection of internally or externally generated ions into a high capacity
simplified toroidal ion trap (STorIT) for ion accumulation and storage. Ions of
analytical interest stored in the toroidal trapping region are mass selectively
injected into a cylindrical ion trap (CIT) nested within the toroidal trapping
ring. The process of spatially isolating ions for MSn analysis can be repeated
for a range of species without having to repopulate the toroidal trapping
region, enhancing analytical efficiency. Since a single mass is injected into
the CIT for MSn analysis, there is an inherent reduction in chemical noise which
enhances the device’s detection limits and identification confidence. The system
is being modeled and experimentally evaluated through a collaborative effort
between Western Michigan University and Brigham Young University. Three target
applications will allow testing of key performance features: rapid analysis of
suspected illegal drug powders, sensitive detection of tracer compounds used in
natural gas and petroleum wells, and characterization of semi-volatile compounds
in atmospheric aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.