* 2003057
* Heteromolecular Interface Design for Better Multiferroic Molecular Spintronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Peter Dowben, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 486,234.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the interface between
a class of molecules which are magnetic, but where the magnetic properties can
be turned on and off, and a different group of molecules whose properties are
easily altered by voltage. The overall research goals are to better understand
the mechanisms that dominate the voltage manipulation of an unusual class of
molecules that can be flipped between being magnetic or not magnetic. There are
good reasons to pursue this better understanding. Suitable combinations of
molecules, that can be toggled between a state acting like a very small magnet
and one having no magnetism, with molecules whose intrinsic properties can be
controlled by an applied voltage make it possible to fabricate a molecular
"switch" that requires very little power to turn on and off. By choosing the
right molecule from each class, novel, low cost and extremely low power
electronic devices can be made, that can be switched on and off billions of
times without degradation. These are devices that can be reduced to the size of
a virus particle, or even smaller, which could lead to super high dense computer
memories. The cost is low since molecular films can be printed on a wide variety
of surfaces. The investigators, having developed this new technology, intend to
explore the principles for designing novel and even better molecular materials
where magnetism and voltage are intertwined. Student training will include
direct international experience in science. Other activities involve both
undergraduate and graduate students, including visiting undergraduates, in
cutting edge research at the interface of chemistry and physics and outreach
activities where the students learn how to communicate cutting edge research to
a nontechnical audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;This research team has demonstrated voltage controlled
nonvolatile transistor-like devices that use molecular spin crossover complexes
as the conduction channel. In these systems, the molecular spin state can be
tuned by the gate voltage, altering the magnetic properties and the conductance
by orders of magnitude. This success opens the door to obtaining deeper insights
into possible magneto-electric coupling in molecular systems. This research
focuses on a better understanding of the mechanisms that dominate the voltage
manipulation of the spin state of these metal-organic complexes. The ultimate
aim of investigating suitable combinations of ferroelectric and local moment
molecular systems is to find systems with super-large (large electric response
to a small magnetic field) or super-small (large magnetic response to a small
applied voltage) magneto-electric coefficients. But the core of this research is
how intermolecular interaction affects intramolecular configurations, resulting
in changes to the ligand field, the molecular dipole, and ultimately the spin
state. To accomplish this goal, the investigators will (1) identify what
determines the changes in spin crossover phenomenology with molecular film
thickness; (2) determine the energy barriers to spin state switching; (3) learn
how a heteromolecular system, where the spin state of the molecular overlayer is
altered by an applied electric field, reacts to competing processes; (4)
identify the smallest controllable domain size within a continuous film; and (5)
identify whether or not a spin orientation anisotropy barrier exists. The
combined molecular systems will be characterized by a variety of spectroscopic
techniques, magnetometry and scanning probe techniques to determine spin state,
ferroelectric polarization, as well as spin crossover activation energies, while
thin film heterostructure conductance and magnetic moment will be characterized
in the presence of applied magnetic and electric fields at various
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.