* 2003237
* MLWiNS: Ultra-Reliable Collaborative Computing for Autonomous Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Marco Levorato, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles (UAV) are expected to play a central role in many
applications of great interest, including urban and infrastructure monitoring,
precision agriculture and delivery services. However, making the operations of
these airborne platforms autonomous requires the execution of algorithms for the
real-time analysis of the surrounding environment and mission planning. The
complexity of these algorithms clashes with the inherent constraints of UAVs,
whose embedded systems have limited computing power and energy supply. The
proposed research aims at the development of techniques to make distributed
computing ultra reliable in the context of UAV systems. The project establishes
a layer of intelligence that controls in real-time how information is propagated
and processed across the layers of the systems to transform sensorial input into
decisions, as well as a semantic form of neural compression to significantly
reduce the amount of data transported over weak wireless links. This project
will have a broad impact in terms of education, mentorship and outreach. The
impact of this research effort will be broadened by providing unique outreach
and educational opportunities to students at the collegiate and high school
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project approaches the problem from two
complementary angles: (1) designing deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents that
learn to optimally communicate data across noisy channels, and (2), building
novel lossy compression algorithms based on probabilistic deep learning that are
specifically designed for distributed machine learning without a human in the
loop. For (1), one of the key challenges resides in the multi-scale nature of
the stochastic processes driving the system dynamics that present important
geographical and temporal trends at different scales. An innovative hierarchical
learning approach will be used to make the RL agent effective as the system
dynamics evolve across time and space. For (2), novel kinds of extreme neural
lossy compression algorithms based on Variational AutoEncoders (VAE) with
additional supervision will be designed. Instead of focusing on signal
reconstruction, the resulting compressor will aim at preserving only relevant
information needed for a specified supervised learning task, leading to the new
paradigm of supervised (or semantic) compression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.