* 2003879
* Supramolecular DNA Machines and Circuits
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Janarthanan Jayawickramarajah, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 442,851.00

Professor Janarthanan Jayawickramarajah of Tulane University is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division
of Chemistry to design and study the dynamics and programmable nature of
nanomachines that can transduce input signals into specific outputs, such as
motion and shape change. The introduction of different synthetic host-guest
components, minimizes the dependence on costly long DNA chains, expands the
types of inputs that can be utilized within the nanomachines and increases their
versatility. Potential applications include the development of DNA machinery
that have catalytic and chemical sensing functions. In addition to directly
impacting nanotechnology, the project broadly impacts multiple scientific
disciplines and provides the versatility needed for device development, such as
logic gate devices, sensing/diagnostic agents, and autonomous systems. During
the course of conducting this project, students are educated and trained in
inter-disciplinary chemical research. Furthermore, research is integrated with
teaching and community service via a chemistry-based service-learning course
that involves Tulane undergraduate students conducting demonstrations at New
Orleans K-12 public schools. In addition, the project includes a summer
undergraduate research experience for diverse groups of students from mostly
underrepresented minorities at neighboring Xavier
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops cucurbituril 7 (CB7)
based host-guest driven toehold mediated strand displacement (TMSD) as a guiding
principle to achieve dynamic supramolecular DNA machines. While conventional
Watson-Crick based TMSD has been foundational in the development of elegant
molecular devices (such as motors to carry and sort cargo, autonomous robots
that control protein activity, and systems that conduct computing tasks), these
DNA nanomachines have the drawback that they only harness genetic molecular
recognition and thus the scope of inputs that the systems can incorporate (or
respond to) is largely limited to nucleic acid sequences. This project utilizes
synthetic supramolecular surrogates that can replace (or serve in a
complementary fashion to) Watson-Crick base-pairing driven TMSD and thus
generates nanomachines that are responsive to a broader variety of stimuli
whilst also minimizing the length of the DNA domains that are used. Furthermore,
by harnessing host-guest based TMSD, in addition to other salient supramolecular
chemistry concepts (including multivalency and entropy-driven product
formation), the project develops (a) higher-order supramolecular DNA circuits
that are catalyzed by guest-linked DNA and (b) non-enzyme based sensors with the
capacity for catalytically amplified fluorescence
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.