* 2003999
* Collaborative Research: Lift regulation via kinematic maneuvering in uncertain gusts
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Francis Lagor, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 220,722.00

When a wing passes through a strong gust of wind, large amounts of lift are
generated very quickly. The resulting lift transient, and the speed at which it
builds, presents a challenge to maintaining vehicle control and can result in
structural deformation or failure. It is therefore of interest to equip wings
with ways to mitigate strong gust responses, i.e., to regulate lift. The long-
term goal of this project is to assess the sensitivity of lift production to
uncertainties in the gust flow, and to create new control strategies for
mitigation of lift transients during detrimental unforeseen gust encounters.
Results of this work will apply to a broad range of applications including wind
and water turbines operating in tides, waves, and wakes; and air and water
vehicles of all scales, from small aerial vehicles operating in urban
environments to manned vehicles operating in complex terrain, air wakes, and
extreme weather. The project will also encompass educational and outreach
activities, including elementary and middle school visits and a research and
mentoring program for undergraduate transfer students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to apply tools from fluid dynamics, reduced-order
modeling, and optimal and robust control theory to elucidate and model the
underlying flow physics of an unsteady and uncertain large-amplitude transverse
gust encounter, and to apply this knowledge to design control laws for
regulation of lift production through kinematic actuation during and after this
event. The technical approach is to (1) synthesize a physics-based low-order
model that includes leading- and trailing-edge vortex dynamics based on high-
resolution unsteady force, flow field, and surface pressure measurements on a
rigid wing in a large-amplitude transverse gust encounter; (2) construct an
optimal robust control framework for lift regulation in the gust that properly
accounts for uncertainties in the gust flow (e.g., width and amplitude) and the
wing's response thereto; and (3) implement the proposed closed-loop control
framework in real-time gust encounter experiments in the laboratory. Research
activities will explore methods of combining analytical and physics-based
aerodynamic models with data-driven techniques for more robust and extensible
models of wings passing through unsteady and uncertain large disturbances.
Contributions to the scientific community include (1) a flow model designed for
large-amplitude gust encounters with a high degree of uncertainty in the gust
flow, and (2) integration of this model into a robust real-time feedback control
loop for kinematic maneuvering in a wing-gust encounter without a priori
knowledge of the gust parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.