* 2003721
* Material Consequences of Distinct Interbacterial Modes of Aggression in Bacterial Biofilms
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Peter Yunker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 525,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria
often live in crowded communities, attached to surfaces. These communities are
themselves a living material, and may potentially be useful in industrial and
health applications. However, the utility of engineered bacterial communities is
currently hampered due to limited understanding of how to control the structure
of these bacterial communities. Here, the PIs will study a novel source of
design rules: microbial warfare. In nature, bacteria within the same community
compete for space and resources. As a result, many bacteria have evolved
mechanisms to kill each other. Killing events modify the structure of bacterial
communities. Broadly speaking, the mechanisms bacteria use to kill each other
fit one of two categories; they either act locally, and require direct contact
between cells, or they act at a distance, through toxins or antibiotics that
diffuse through liquid. The PIs will uncover the material consequences of local
and non-local bacterial killing, and thus develop an understanding of the design
rules connecting bacterial killing to community structure. Doing so will
facilitate the creation of next-generation synthetic bacterial communities with
optimized structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria are the most dominant form of life on
earth. They commonly inhabit biofilms, microbial consortia composed of densely
packed cells embedded in a matrix of extracellular polymeric substances and
often attached to a surface. These crowded structures are ubiquitous in
ecological settings and also serve as havens for host-associated bacteria that
promote health and also underlie many infections. Because biofilms are densely
packed, cell death and reproduction hold emergent materials consequences. When a
cell dies and lyses, the biofilm structure may partially 'cave-in;' and when a
cell reproduces, it pushes other cells out of its way. These cellular processes
create a dynamic process where death and reproduction modify biofilm structure;
and structural changes impact subsequent death and reproduction. The focus of
this proposal is on cell death within biofilms that is mediated by microbial
antagonistic interactions - killing. Broadly speaking, the mechanisms of
intercellular killing can be classified as either local or non-local. Local
killing mechanisms typically require direct contact between cells, and thus
depend on the nearest neighbor interaction network of cells in biofilms. Non-
local killing mechanisms typically feature diffusible secreted toxins, and thus
depend on the density of killer cells surrounding a target cell. Understanding
the dynamics of inter-microbial aggression will facilitate the design of
antagonistic probiotics, and help elucidate the ecological role of bacterial
antagonism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.