* 2003074
* Cavity QED of Spins in Diamond via Dark States
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In a quantum communications network,
information can be encoded on light pulses containing single photons. This
quantum information can propagate between individual nodes containing single
atoms, including artificial atoms. The transfer of quantum information between
single photons and single atoms in the network can be exploited to implement
secure communication and to solve computational problems that would otherwise be
difficult with conventional computers. This experimental project aims to
demonstrate this transfer process by developing and using an experimental
platform, in which special defect centers in an otherwise perfect diamond
crystal are used as artificial atoms. Single defect centers are coupled to light
pulses that are confined in dimensions less than 50 micrometers. This spatial
confinement greatly increases the light intensity that can be generated by a
single photon and thus enhances its coupling to the defect center. A specific
goal is to transfer quantum information from one defect center to another via
this enhanced coupling to single photons. Research activities of this project
also provide excellent training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students in areas including nanophotonics and nanofabrication as well as quantum
science and technology. This training prepares the students for careers in
academia, industry, or government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on controlling optical interactions of
a single spin at the level of single cavity photons via a dark state, which can
mediate reversible state transfers between spins and photons, while
circumventing decoherence processes such as spontaneous emission. The project
develops and explores a composite cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) system,
in which negatively charged silicon vacancy (SiV) centers in a 100 nm thick
diamond membrane couple to evanescent fields of optical whispering gallery modes
in a silica microresonator. The composite system can enable spin-state selective
coupling to the cavity mode as well as the realization of the good cavity limit,
in which the cavity linewidth is small compared with the single-photon dipole
coupling rate. Electromagnetically induced transparency will be used to probe
and characterize the dark state of the composite cavity QED system. The dark
state will then be exploited for reversible state transfers between spins and
photons, studies of higher energy ladder states of the cavity QED system, and
cavity-mediated coherent interactions between two SiV
spins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant
supports research to understand composite cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED)
systems with funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) program in DMR, the
Atomic, Molecular, and Optics (AMO) program in the Division of Physics (PHY),
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) of the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.