* 2003015
* Approximate Communication for Energy Efficient Wireline Links
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tejasvi Anand, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this project is to reduce the cost of a wireline communication
system by improving its energy efficiency. In pursuing this goal, the project
will investigate mechanisms to trade the accuracy of communication data bits
with the energy efficiency of wireline links and analyze how to do this trade-
off dynamically. The research is motivated by the fact that emerging data
applications such as recognition, mining, search, data analytics, and machine
learning are naturally resilient and can still produce correct output in the
presence of erroneous data. The concept of approximate computing has leveraged
this very resilient nature of data applications to improve the efficiency of
computing. This project will leverage the same resilient nature to improve the
energy efficiency of wireline data links by doing approximate communication. The
results of this research will open a new dimension for improving energy
efficiency by trading communication data-bit accuracy with energy efficiency.
The research outcomes will give software developers a control knob with which
energy-aware applications can be developed. The success of this research will
motivate computer architects and compiler writers to provide energy-accuracy
trade-off features to software developers with the aim of realizing an energy-
efficient computing platform running energy-aware applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate control knobs and optimal
parameters to achieve desired bit-error-rate (BER) with minimum energy per bit.
Reconfigurable transceiver architectures investigated as part of this research
will help support dynamic accuracy requirements of the data applications. This
project will also investigate energy-scalable universal transmitter
architectures, with the ability to support different pulse amplitude modulation
(PAM) formats (PAM-4/8/16/32), different pulse width modulation (PWM) formats
(PWM-4/8/16), and equalization methods on these modulations will be
investigated. Furthermore, time-domain processing circuits at the receivers will
be investigated, which can effectively trade-off energy consumption with
accuracy. The approach of this project is unique because it focuses on improving
energy efficiency through accuracy-energy trade-off, while other existing
approaches focus on improving the efficiency of individual wireline circuits for
a fixed accuracy. Energy-scalable techniques and architectures invented as part
of this research can also be used to achieve approximate optical
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.