* 2003785
* Probing Molecular Dynamics Near Plasmonic Surfaces by Optical two-dimensional Coherent Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jin He, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 511,833.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Chemistry
Division, with co-funding from the Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics -
Experiment Program in the Physics Division, is funding Drs. Hebin Li and Jin He
at Florida International University (FIU) to develop a novel integrated
ultrafast spectroscopy and imaging technique for studying molecular dynamics.
The ability to probe ultrafast chemical behavior of molecules and electrons at
the nanometer scale is essential for studying and understanding materials, such
as deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules, proteins linked to photosynthesis,
novel solar cell layers, and exotic quantum materials. Advanced laser
spectroscopy, such as optical two-dimensional coherent spectroscopy (2DCS),
excels in studying chemical behavior in complex systems, while the spatial
resolution is usually limited to the millionth of meter scale. On the other
hand, the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) provides nanometer resolution for
single-molecule studies, while the measurements in STM are limited to the
millisecond timescale. Drs. Hebin Li and Jin He and their research team
integrate optical 2DCS and STM-based single-molecule techniques to acquire
chemical information about surfaces with nanometer resolution spatial mapping
and femtosecond time resolution. The novel imaging technique enables
understanding and improving numerous chemical and materials systems. By engaging
students in active research and connecting to local science teachers, the
project also makes an important contribution to the goal of FIU, a minority-
serving institution, to strengthen the education of underrepresented groups in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, and to promote
public interest in science in South Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this project is to develop surface-enhanced optical two-dimensional
coherent spectroscopy (2DCS) to probe molecular dynamics on plasmonic surfaces
by implementing optical 2DCS on a metal nanoelectrode (NE) to achieve a high
spatial resolution. The developed technique has integrated advantages of both
STM and optical 2DCS, including high spatial resolution, high detection
sensitivity, femtosecond temporal resolution, and multidimensional capability.
Using this technique to study molecules on the metal NE surface and molecular
junctions in the nanogap between two metal nanostructures, the research enables
new capabilities to probe charge transfer dynamics at molecule-metal and
molecule-molecule interfaces, intermolecular interactions in small molecule
pairs, and the dynamics of hydrogen-bonding patterns and networks in proteins at
metal-molecule-metal junctions. The unique capabilities of this approach can
potentially lead to novel applications in studying other systems such as two-
dimensional and perovskite materials, photosynthetic proteins, and biological
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.