* 2003739
* Quantum Coherence Effects on Charge Generation in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Ryan Young, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 382,529.00

A fundamental understanding of energy and charge transfer processes in organic
semiconductors is critical to the development of versatile next-generation
photonic and electronic technologies, such as light-emitting diodes,
photovoltaics, and sensors. Coherence is a phenomenon resulting from the quantum
nature of semiconductors that plays an important role in determining energy and
charge migration pathways within these materials and thus influences device
performance. However, the role of coherence in charge transfer remains
underexplored. This project is investigating how coherences involving molecular
vibrations assist charge generation following light absorption by organic
semiconductors. The graduate student participants in this project are being
educated using an integrated approach that trains them to be problem solvers.
The students are being taught to prepare complex materials and at the same time
are learning the physical techniques necessary to answer the questions addressed
by their research. This approach is very effective in developing the kind of
intellectual flexibility necessary to meet the rapidly changing roles of
scientists in society. This project also engages the broader community through
outreach to elementary schools through to the collegiate level to educate and
inspire the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic
semiconductors suitable for photonic device applications must be designed for
ultrafast photo-driven electron-hole pair formation and subsequent rapid charge
transport over long distances. Many such materials are based on electron donor-
acceptor molecular components, such that optimizing the performance of organic
semiconductors requires a fundamental understanding of the microscopic aspects
of charge transfer in donor-acceptor systems at the quantum mechanical level.
The primary goal of this project is to investigate whether vibrational and/or
vibronic coherences assist symmetry-breaking charge generation following
photoexcitation of organic semiconductors. The secondary goals of the project
are to investigate 1) whether higher-order polygonal structures in solids, i.e.
tilings and tessellations, lead to coherences that assist charge separation in
organic semiconductors, and 2) whether excitonic coherences resulting from
energy transfer processes in organic semiconductors influence subsequent charge
transfer within them. While charge transfer is inherently quantum mechanical,
many of the salient features of electron transfer kinetics have been treated
classically. However, these treatments largely ignore the role of quantum
coherences between states as they are typically very short lived (~10-100 fs for
electronic states, up to several ps for vibrational/vibronic states) and as such
are assumed to have decayed prior to electron transfer. However, with
increasingly advanced spectroscopic techniques and improvements in time
resolution, it is now possible to probe these processes on the requisite
timescales and observe these coherences and their effects directly, which will
aid in the design of high-performance organic
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.