* 2003434
* Classification of injurious loading cycles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Amanda Esquivel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2024
* USD 398,953.00

Rates of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries continue to rise, especially
in female athletes who play multidirectional sports. For example, in high school
and collegiate athletes, the incidence of ACL injury is 2 - 6 times higher in
females than males. Recent studies have demonstrated that the ACL can rupture
due to overuse - specifically due to landing at high forces while pivoting the
foot as typically occurs during sports where athletes quickly change direction.
This project focuses on using wearable inertial measurement unit (IMU) sensors
to identify these types of potentially injurious landings. IMUs, which consist
of accelerometers, rate gyroscopes, and magnetic field sensors, can provide
information about the acceleration, velocity and position of one body segment
with respect to another and have been used to estimate various limb angles and
GRFs (Ground Reaction Forces). The first phase or the project is to study soft
tissue overuse injury using a wearable device in order to identify injurious
loading cycles in a cadaver model. Findings obtained will then be validated in
the field with female athletes. This project will produce new knowledge about
the relationship between measurements taken by wearable devices and
musculoskeletal fatigue loading. The results will lead to better methods for
preventing ACL overuse injuries and will provide a framework for the monitoring
and prevention of such injuries in athletic, military, firefighter and other
populations at risk for injury. Graduate and undergraduate students from two
universities (University of Michigan-Dearborn and University of Michigan-Ann
Arbor) will work together on this project, increasing their exposure to research
and helping to encourage enrollment in biomedical sciences graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to study soft tissue
overuse injury mechanisms using a wearable inertial measurement unit (IMU) to
identify injurious loading cycles and to validate this in the field with a view
toward developing injury prevention strategies. Although it is known that
fatigue failure of the ACL is possible, there is currently no way to identify
loading conditions that cause this failure in the field, what types of
activities athletes perform that put them at risk for this manner of loading or
what mechanism underlie the apparently random failure of the ACL during athletic
moves made hundreds of times before injury. To address these identification
needs and achieve the project's goal, the Research Plan is organized under three
objectives. The FIRST Objective is to identify injurious loading cycles using a
wearable IMU based on kinematic inputs of impact force, knee moments, angles or
anterior tibial translation in an in vitro model. Studies are designed to test
the hypothesis that IMUs secured to the lower leg and thigh can accurately
predict the occurrence of a loading cycle that is known to cause fatigue damage
to the ACL. Female cadaver knee specimens will be placed in a tibial torsional
device and instrumented with wearable IMUs on the tibia and thigh. Knees will be
subjected to repeated loading (100 cycles total) at targeted landing forces,
imposed by a drop weight to the end of the distal tibia, with a knee flexion
moment and tibial torque designed to simulate a pivot landing. The SECOND
Objective is to identify in vivo the athletic activities that correspond to
injurious loading conditions, correlate various parameters such as GRF and knee
moments to IMU measurements and examine error due to soft tissue motion. Studies
are designed to test the hypothesis that there are specific physical activities
that occur during multidirectional sports that correspond to known loading
conditions that cause overuse ACL injury and linear acceleration and angular
acceleration values measured by an IMU can be used to identify these movements
in the laboratory. Volunteers from college soccer and basketball teams,
instrumented with motion capture markers located on lower extremities and
wearable IMUs above and below the knee, will be asked to complete possible
injury related tasks, e.g. a jog with a pivot and sidestep and crossover cuts. A
6 degree-of-freedom kinematic model of the lower extremity will be created for
each participant using Visual 3D software. The THIRD Objective is to validate
the use of an IMU to detect and count potentially dangerous loading cycles in a
real-world setting. Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that severe
loading cycles can be identified using IMUs in a real-world setting and, unless
restricted, these loading cycles can occur at a rate which could cause injury to
the ACL because of inadequate time for healing. Adolescent female soccer players
who participate in a highly competitive travel soccer program will be fitted
with four wearable IMU devices during bi-weekly practices. Undergraduate and
graduate students will attend each practice over a one-year period to collect
data, video record the event, and provide technical support. The timing of
severe loading cycles will be examined using the video recordings to determine
whether this changes over time either due to activities in practice or fatigue,
as it has been suggested that fatigue may increase the risk of ACL injury. Data
will also be compared to determine whether there is a difference between the
dominant and non-dominant sides and to examine the effects of age and BMI (Body
Mass Index) on the number of severe loading cycles
experienced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.