* 2003581
* Engineering Band Gap Energy Through Structural Motifs in Nitride Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Steven Durbin, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 443,064.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor materials form the basis for
practically all electronics, from solar cells and solid state lighting, to
complex integrated circuits such as microprocessors. Nevertheless, despite a
century of investigation, researchers are still making fundamental discoveries
in this field â€“ discoveries which lead to improved device performance, reduced
manufacturing cost, or streamlined integration with other technologies. The
project activity is based on the unexpected discovery by the research team that
the fundamental properties of semiconductor materials stem directly from atomic-
scale structural motifs, and not deviations from periodicity as is generally
accepted. By shifting that viewpoint, it is possible to achieve a much larger
range of parameter values than previously realized. The result is a completely
new approach to selecting materials for specific applications. The project also
incorporates development of outreach activities for both middle school children
and teachers, involving the community directly in the project by investigating
how artificial intelligence/machine learning techniques are applied to image
recognition and data analysis, thereby helping to ensure a diverse and motivated
pool of young students for careers in science/technology/engineering/math (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;As part of a previous
study on how cation disorder changes the band gap energy of the earth abundant
element, sustainably-sourced ternary heterovalent semiconductor ZnSnN2, the
research team has discovered the unexpected role played by structural motifs in
determining this most fundamental of all semiconductor parameters. Carefully
designed experiments indicate that it is not only possible to close the band gap
of this material through systematic variation of the type and concentration of
motifs that make up the lattice, but it is also possible to access "negative"
band gap energies, corresponding to inverted bands. Further, preliminary
evidence indicates that the same effect is possible in other compound
semiconductors, including the commercially important InGaN family of materials,
again through the action of structural motifs. The project investigates the full
range of achievable band gap energies of both of these nitrogen-based material
systems using plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy based crystal growth in
conjunction with a complementary suite of optical absorption, Hall effect and
electron and x-ray diffraction techniques, with a view towards understanding the
ramifications for charge carrier transport, optical properties, and ultimately
material selection choices for devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.