* 2003333
* 2020 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (US FOE, Japan-America FOE and EU-US FOE)
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 02/28/2022
* USD 110,000.00

The Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) Symposia, organized by the National Academy
of Engineering, provide emerging engineering leaders from academia, industry,
and government laboratories the opportunity to share research insights to
facilitate an interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and research
methodologies. The nature of emerging technologies and how they fit together to
create products and processes that drive economic growth in an increasingly
competitive environment makes it essential that engineers understand each
other's disciplines. The symposia serve as a catalyst to spur engineering
innovation and foster collaborative networks of researchers within the United
States and between engineers from the United States and partnering countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide partial support for three
Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) symposia, to be held in 2020. These symposia,
organized by the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) in concert with
international partner organizations, are for early career researchers. The
meetings to be held in 2020 are: Japan-America FOE (June, 2020; Irvine,
California); US FOE (September, 2020; Golden, Colorado); and EU-US FOE (October,
2020; Murray Hill, New Jersey. The 2020 JAFOE will focus on Mitigating Sea Level
Rise, Machine Learning and AI for Mental Health, Blockchain Technology, Soft
Robotics. The 2020 US FOE symposium will focus on Bioengineering for Women’s
Health, New Approaches to Food Production, Cleaning up Ocean Waste, and Next-
generation Energy Systems Integration. Topics for the 2020 EU-US-FOE are
Advances in Deep Learning for ICT Problems, Modernizing the Electrical Grid,
Technologies for the Detection and Treatment of Dementia and Alzheimer’s
Disease, Applications and Uses of Graphene. Approximately 100 outstanding young
engineers for the U.S. symposium and 30 from each country for the bilateral
symposia will participate. Each two and a half day symposium will include
plenary sessions, tours, break-out and poster sessions, and opportunities for
developing collaborative research partnerships. Sessions will consist of
presentations on cutting-edge research, innovations, and emerging research
opportunities in engineering fields relevant to the symposium. FOE symposium
papers, abstracts, presentation videos, and slides will be made available on the
FOE website (www.naefrontiers.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.