* 2003976
* The Kinetics and Mechanism of the Halogen Initiated Oxidation of Gas Phase Elemental Mercury and its Role in Atmospheric and Combustion Chemistry.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Anthony Hynes, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 435,056.00

Professor Anthony Hynes of the University of Miami is being funded by the
Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of Chemistry to study
the chemical processes that oxidize gas phase mercury atoms. Their typical
background concentrations in the atmosphere are very low and they pose no threat
to human health. However, if the mercury atoms are oxidized, they form mercuric
compounds that are much more soluble and much more rapidly incorporated into
terrestrial ecosystems. The mechanisms of the atmospheric cycling of mercury are
one of the most poorly understood components of atmospheric chemistry. The
chemical mechanisms responsible for oxidation of elemental mercury and even the
actual identity of the compounds that make up oxidized mercury are not well
known. This research provides information needed to better model the chemistry
of atmospheric mercury and use the model to develop sound emission control
strategies. In addition to engaging graduate students in research, the PI
participates in educational outreach programs at his university which are aimed
at low-income first-generation college-bound students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
project involves a series of measurements of the rate coefficients, and, where
possible, the mechanisms of the halogen-initiated oxidation of gas phase
elemental mercury. The mercurous halides that initially form, HgCl and HgBr, are
weakly bound and the hence the rates of further reactions to form stable
mercuric compounds are critical. The reactions of the mercurous halides with
halogen atoms and NO2 to produce stable mercuric compounds have been proposed as
potential routes to oxidized mercury formation in the atmosphere. Professor
Hynes and his students measure the rate coefficients for these reactions and
determine the relative importance of oxidation and reduction channels. The
experimental approach utilizes the Pulsed Laser Photolysis-Pulsed Laser Induced
Fluorescence (PLP-PLIF) technique. This technique allows the rates and
mechanisms of the reactions to be measured over the range of tropospheric
temperatures and pressures, allowing them to be used in models without the need
for extrapolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.