* 2003211
* MLWiNS: Decentralized Heterogeneous Deep Learning for Efficient Wireless Spectrum Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Zhi Tian, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,999.00

As wireless networks evolve to be increasingly massive and complex, traditional
spectrum monitoring methods with model-based signal processing techniques have
become inadequate and may even fail to provide accurate wireless network
evaluation. Meanwhile, deep learning techniques have been proven successful in
standard centralized learning tasks (e.g., image classification), yet it is
barely explored for large-scale wireless sensing systems, which entail
unconventional node distribution, complex channel fading and user collaboration
opportunities. This project develops innovative decentralized heterogeneous deep
learning techniques for large-scale wireless systems. The outcomes of this
project lead to technical innovations that tackle several major challenges of
the state-of-the-art wireless sensing and management systems, including the
incapability of conventional sensing and management schemes in ultra-wide
wireless spectrum settings, the difficulty in handling heterogeneous tasks and
non-IID data with deep learning technologies, as well as the costly overhead of
communication and computation in distributed deep learning for large-scale
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the unique challenges of
large-scale wireless spectrum sensing by developing a revolutionary
decentralized deep learning framework. Three main thrusts are planned. In Thrust
1, major challenges of complex and large-scale wireless spectrum sensing
nowadays are investigated, and an innovative deep learning-based solution is
developed for practical spectrum sensing tasks. In Thrust 2, dedicated
communication and computation schemes are developed to optimize the performance
of the proposed decentralized deep learning framework. In Thrust 3, the very
first exploratory effort is made to understand and utilize the intricate role of
machine learning in spectrum management, based on the key observation that it
consumes wireless network resources to bring in added value to network resource
utilization. Experimental testing is demonstrated for practical spectrum
monitoring applications. The proposed wireless sensing and management system can
benefit a plethora of large-scale wireless network systems, such as a 5G
wireless network and other large-scale mesh networking systems. The education
plan enhances existing curricula and pedagogy by integrating interdisciplinary
modules on embedded systems, mobile computing, and machine learning with newly
developed teaching practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.