* 2003734
* GOALI: Innovative Interfaces for Two-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Dwight Stoll, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 693,089.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and in collaboration with Tom van de Goor of Agilent Technologies,
Professor Dwight Stoll and his group at Gustavus Adolphus College are working to
improve the capabilities of two-dimensional liquid chromatography (2D-LC) - an
important approach to separating the components of complex chemical mixtures as
part of the process of identifying and quantifying components. This
academic/industrial collaboration seeks deeper understanding of the role of
hardware interfaces in limiting the performance of current 2D-LC approaches. The
research also seeks to develop innovative interfaces that will improve the speed
and other performance metrics of analyses based on 2D-LC, while decreasing their
cost. These innovations may be useful to scientists and engineers facing the
need for detailed analysis of complex materials such as new protein-based drugs,
chemical products based on renewable starting materials, and biofluids
(including blood and urine) for which better analyses can enhance the
understanding and diagnosis of disease. Dr. Stoll involves students at the high
school and undergraduate levels in this cutting-edge research to prepare them to
become the workforce of the future. He also develops simulations to facilitate
learning about liquid chromatography and the more effective use of the technique
across many sectors of the U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the majority of
practical 2D-LC methods, the two separations are coupled using a valve-based
interface that transfers small fractions of material exiting the first column to
the inlet of the second column for further separation. Despite its critical role
in the effectiveness of 2D-LC separations, innovation in the area of interface
technology has been sluggish. The valves in common use today are conceptually
quite similar to those used for the first 2D-LC separations four decades ago,
and have weaknesses that negatively impact the performance of 2D-LC with respect
to reliability, ease-of-use, and separation power. In this project, the Stoll
Group is evaluating several innovative interface designs that either eliminate
the valve entirely, or redefine the function of the valve in ways that have the
potential to change the interface from a point of weakness to a point of
strength of 2D-LC technology. As part of these studies they are evaluating the
impact of different interface designs on other aspects of the system, such as
the lifetime of second dimension columns. Finally, they are building simulation
tools that recognize the unique features of the new interfaces to support facile
development of new 2D-LC methods that are suitable for addressing contemporary
separation challenges in the pharmaceutical, chemical, and life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.