* 2003266
* Defect Characterization and Control in Metastable GeSn Optoelectronic Alloy Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Paul McIntyre, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 481,231.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;An important area of application for
semiconductor materials is in optoelectronic devices; for example, in devices
such as lasers or light-emitting-diodes (LED’s) that use electrons to stimulate
the emission of light. There is great interest, both scientifically and
technologically, in semiconductors that can emit light with wavelengths somewhat
longer than visible light, i.e. in the mid-infrared part of the spectrum. Such
light sources, when fabricated on silicon chips, could become key components in
future ubiquitous chemical sensor networks, in speeding up data transfer between
and on silicon chips, and in motion sensors required by autonomous vehicles.
This research project focuses on a semiconductor material system, germanium-tin,
that holds great promise for mid-infrared light emission on silicon chips. The
efficiency of light emission by germanium-tin is limited by the presence of
atomic scale defects that grow into the material when it is synthesized. This
project characterizes the nature and number of such defects, and investigates
methods for annihilating or altering them to minimize their effects on
germanium-tin. Undergraduates are involved in these research activities, with
special efforts made to recruit highly competitive undergraduate researchers
from groups that are under-represented in the US science and engineering
workforce. The project includes a partnership with Stanford’s RISE outreach
program, to inspire high school students to consider further education and
careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Exhibiting a direct bandgap at sufficiently large (x ~ 10
atomic %) tin composition, Ge(1-x)Sn(x) alloys hold great promise for mid-
infrared (IR) light emitters and absorbers, while also being monolithically
compatible with silicon electronic and photonic technologies. Previous research
on germanium-tin epitaxial films grown on silicon has demonstrated mid-IR
optically-pumped lasing, and there has been a gradual trend of increasing Sn
content to access longer wavelength operation. The light emission
characteristics of Ge(1-x)Sn(x) are still far from optimal. Low growth
temperatures (&lt; 300°C) used to promote high Sn content alloys cause large
concentrations of acceptor-type vacancy defects to form. Strong pairing of Sn
atoms with these vacancies is predicted theoretically and will result in
enhanced non-radiative carrier recombination, reducing the efficiency of light
emission and absorption. This project uses strain-engineered core-shell nanowire
structures as a platform to study post-growth annealing to dissociate Sn-vacancy
pairs and to annihilate vacancies incorporated in the Ge(1-x)Sn(x) shells during
their growth. Shells of thickness up to 500 nm are of particular interest, to
achieve wire structures capable of efficiently guiding mid-IR light. Synchrotron
diffuse x-ray scattering is used to characterize trends in the relative
concentration of vacancies bound to Sn atoms, divacancies, clusters and
monovacancies in the alloys versus annealing time and temperature. A key goal is
to understand the rates and mechanisms governing the approach to vacancy
equilibrium in these alloys. Extended x-ray absorption fine structure analysis
provides an additional probe of local bonding around Sn atoms and the stability
of Sn-vacancy pairs. The project also examines atomic fluorine as a chemical
vacancy passivant, building on prior experience with F passivation of Si surface
states and vacancies in Ge. Coupling between x-ray and optoelectronic
characterization of the core-shell wires can reveal fundamental insights into
the connection between point defects and device-relevant properties.
Temperature-dependent photoluminescence, photoconductivity and ultra-fast pump-
probe measurements are used to probe Ge(1-x)Sn(x) band structure and the effects
of different vacancy defect populations on carrier recombination
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.