* 2003476
* Synthesis of Complex and Advanced Chalcogenide Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,500.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The continued advancement of society on
many levels relies on the steady use of new materials that can enable new
functions or solve long-standing problems and challenges. Solid state materials
underpin many products and processes on which our modern society depends. This
project deals with the broader question: How do we discover and synthesize new
solid state materials? It develops the fundamental science and principles of
synthesis and how they can be used as tool to design and synthesize useful new
materials. Specifically, the project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, focuses on
developing the chemistry of metal chalcogenides. Chalcogenides are compounds of
sulfur, selenium and tellurium and they are important in a broad variety of
scientific investigations and technologies. The project pursues chalcogenide
materials discovery as a science coupled with the study of crystal structure,
physical properties including ion-exchange, charge transport and photo-response
of the new materials. The primary goals are to learn how reactions leading to
solid state chalcogenides can be controlled so known materials can be avoided
and new materials can be accessed. This research activity enhances, as well as
challenges, our scientific understanding. It will also enhance the effectiveness
of existing technological applications and impact new applications. Possible
technological impact could be via new semiconductors, materials with high Li
mobility, quantum materials and ion-exchange sorbent materials for environmental
remediation. The project provides diverse opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented groups, to learn
critical thinking skills that will help advance future scientific research.
Additionally, the educational program encompasses outreach to high schools on
ion exchange materials and dissemination of YouTube videos on safe use of the
advanced synthetic methods used in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues chalcogenide materials
discovery as a science coupled with the study of crystal structure, physical
properties including ion-exchange, charge transport and photo-response of the
new materials. Within an overarching theme of contributing to fundamental
understanding of synthesis, particularly using flux-based methods, the project
studies: (a) the understanding the synthesis of complex Li-containing
chalcogenide phases; (b) the formation of stable boron clusters as building
blocks in chalcogenides; (c) the understanding of the synthesis routes that lead
to subchalcogenides with low-valent metals; (d) the rational design of ion-
exchangers. The expected benefits are: i) broad new insights regarding the
reactivity and stability of lithium-containing chalcogenide phases; ii),
expansion of the small class of the little-known boron cluster-based
chalcogenides; iii) new chemistry and bonding in subchalcogenides and their
impact on physical and chemical properties, and iv) delineation of the factors
involved in the selective binding of heavy soft metal ions by metal sulfides
ion-exchangers and use of this knowledge to create novel compositions using ion-
exchange chemistry. Possible technological impact of these materials could be
new semiconductors for radiation detection, materials with high Li mobility,
topological quantum materials, open framework systems, and ion-exchange sorbent
materials for environmental remediation. This project is supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.