* 2003358
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Characterization of the roles of mitotic associated histone deacetylation patterns
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Alon Goren, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

This international collaboration between scientists in the U.S. and Israel
investigates a key question about mitosis, the process of cell division in
animal, plant, and other eukaryotic cells. During mitosis, chromosomes duplicate
and have to be physically separated into two new offspring cells during
division. In order to physically separate the duplicated chromosomes, the
structure of the chromosomes must become condensed, which interferes with using
the DNA in the chromosomes as a template to transcribe messenger RNA. Cell
division thereby causes a temporary pause in most gene expression. A cell’s
activities are highly dependent on gene expression; for example a lung cell and
a skin cell have distinct physiological roles largely due to differences in gene
expression. A major unanswered question is the genetic mechanism by which the
two offspring cells restore gene expression, and thus all other activities,
following mitosis. The research approach for answering this question involves a
combination of laboratory experiments and computational analysis. The project
will teach the public about the power of interdisciplinary research through
producing professional videos in collaboration with the University of
California, San Diego-TV. To broaden the participation of all groups in science,
the US-based lab will also partner with UCSD’s STARS (Summer Training Academy
for Research Success) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitosis, a tightly
regulated cell cycle phase, is critical for ensuring that cellular identity is
correctly relayed to offspring cells. It involves key changes including a
decrease in transcription. Initial studies showed that mitosis includes global
deacetylation of histones, and that there is a mitosis-specific deacetylation of
the nucleosome entering the nucleosome-depleted region of most transcribed
genes. Otherwise, little is known about the roles that mitotic-specific patterns
of histone marks play in regulating the transcriptional changes during and
following mitosis. This project focuses on the involvement of mitotic histone
deacetylations. In particular, this work focuses on three candidate histone
deacetylase enzymes that are already implicated in mitosis. Pharmaceuticals will
be used to inhibit selectively each of the candidate enzymes and the PIs will
use genome-scale strategies to measure changes in the location and amounts of
histone acetylation during the cell cycle. The PIs will also examine the extent
to which the three candidates enzymes individually affect gene expression during
and immediately following mitosis. Lastly, the project will establish a system
to locally modify the acetylation of target loci at a specific time during the
cell cycle. Such a technique would allow future studies of detailed locus-
specific mitotic gene expression and reactivation kinetics. Together, the
integrative approaches will enable this collaborative project to address key
questions regarding the cellular means required for the proper execution of
mitosis and re-establishing cellular identity after
division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project is supported
by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.