* 2003573
* RUI: Tailored ROMP-based Solid Polymer Electrolytes and Single-Ion Conductors for Use in Ion Transport Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Dean Waldow, Pacific Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 230,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers that can conduct ions are
important for many emerging technologies such as such as lithium-ion batteries,
next generation batteries, as well as new types of polymer-based transistors
that could be used as sensors in biological systems. These materials may lead to
increased safety and performance of batteries, which is crucial as their use
grows. A variety of materials will be produced whose compositions can be
adjusted allowing for a balance between different kinds of properties. They
could contribute to batteries with materials that are less flammable, lighter,
flexible, or have more storage capacity than current materials. Additionally,
these new ion conductive materials could contribute to biological sensors that
depend on ion transport. This research will include collaborations with
scientists at other academic institutions and use of instrumentation at national
facilities as needed. Development of the scientific workforce will be supported
through the direct involvement of undergraduate students in all aspects of this
research and conducted at a predominantly undergraduate institution. Outreach
activities will involve underrepresented junior high and high school students
through involvement with the Mathematics, Engineering, and Science Achievement
program and professional development opportunities for early college STEM
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer electrolyte materials will be developed
for potential use as solid polymer electrolyte supports in lithium-ion or other
next-generation batteries as well as use in blends for organic electrochemical
transistors. These polymers will be based on dicarboximide oxanorbornene
monomers allowing for homo- and di-block copolymers to be synthesized using
ring-opening metathesis polymerization. This base monomer allows for design
flexibility where side chains will include flexible oligomeric ethylene oxides
(high salt solubility), single-ion conducting units, and other groups, which
allow for a higher glass transition temperature and modulus. A variety of
materials will be produced where copolymer composition can be adjusted allowing
for a balance between glass transition temperature and the ion concentration.
The best performing single-ion conductor solid polymer electrolytes will be used
as one component in a block copolymer with the second component having a high
modulus for dendritic suppression. Second, ion transport and blend morphology of
organic mixed electronic and ionic conductors will be studied using related
polymer electrolytes and a model Ï€-conjugated semi-conducting polymer to
optimize their performance in an organic electrochemical transistor device.
These new materials will be evaluated by dielectric spectroscopy, atomic force
microscopy, DSC, and potentially solid-state NMR. If scattering data (X-rays or
neutrons) are needed, this research will be conducted with collaborators or at
national laboratories. Undergraduate student researchers will be involved in all
aspects of this research and will participate in outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.