* 2003755
* Using Amphiphilic Semiconducting Polymers to Control Structure and Exited State Dynamic in Conjugated Organic Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yves Rubin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Chemistry Division is supporting Professor Sarah H. Tolbert and her team
at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) to develop artificial
photosynthesis systems to efficiently use light energy. The understanding gained
from this research may allow the future production of inexpensive solar cells or
the fabrication of devices that use sunlight to perform important chemical
reactions. In photosynthesis in plants, light falling on a plant leaf causes an
electron to be excited in a specific fashion, launching a chemical reaction
sequence that the plant utilizes to capture carbon dioxide (CO2) reductively and
convert CO2-moieties into the carbon atoms of the glucose. This project uses the
same ideas to create a variety of artificial photosynthesis systems to
efficiently harvest and utilize energy from visible light. The basic problem
with artificial photosynthesis is that even though it is relatively easy to use
light to energetically excite an electron, it is difficult to maintain the
required state; electrons often return to their original starting point without
performing useful chemistry. This work uses specially designed molecular systems
that self-assemble into predetermined structures in water. Those structures
control the motion of electrons after they are photo-excited to ensure that the
desired chemical state is achieved. In addition to the potential scientific
advances, this multidisciplinary project provides training for undergraduate and
graduate students in areas of national need. The project also helps bring
experiments on related topics of energy harvesting from sunlight and nanoscale
materials to Los Angeles area high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Tolbertâ€™s team is examining the assembly of organic systems with intrinsic
anisotropy, minimized charge recombination, and high light absorption. The
project is a three-way collaboration among researchers who have complementary
expertise in synthesizing the appropriate molecules (Yves Rubin - UCLA), in
understanding the structure and self-assembly of these molecular systems (Sarah
Tolbert - UCLA), and in monitoring the photodynamics and photochemistry of these
assemblies (Benjamin Schwartz-UCLA). In biological photosynthetic systems,
absorption of light leads to the requisite charge-separated state with nearly
100% quantum yield, thanks to evolutionary tuning of electron transfer cascades
that spatially separate charges, preventing recombination. This project examines
the creation of analogous artificial organic assemblies with intrinsic
anisotropy, that are designed to minimize charge recombination while optimizing
light absorption. One specific aim of this work is to synthesize a large family
of amphiphilic electron-donating semiconducting polymers and amphiphilic small-
molecule electron-acceptors that spontaneously form cylindrical micelles in
aqueous solution. These molecules are made with a range of sizes, charges,
electronic structures, and steric constraints, allowing them to self-assemble in
a predictable manner according to specific hydrophobic and steric interactions.
The next aim is to characterize the assemblies structurally and optically to
understand the geometries that are created. The final aim is to study the
assemblies spectroscopically and in functional opto-electronic devices to
determine what design changes can further enhance the efficiency of charge-
separation. Overall, these studies on the design and tuning of self-assembling
light-harvesting polymers are expected to contribute to the development of
artificial photosynthetic systems. In the longer term, advancements made through
these foundational studies are expected to provide useful knowledge and insight
for the fields of photovoltaics and photocatalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.