* 2003325
* Elucidating Structural Transformations in MoTe2 for Efficient Optoelectronic Memory
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Nathan Youngblood, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 501,953.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In the information age, affordable and
efficient optical and electrical memory is foundational to the preservation and
dissemination of knowledge and ideas. Materials which undergo a phase
transition, such as chalcogenides that are commonly used in DVDs, are especially
promising for emerging applications which combine memory with high-speed
computing but require relatively large programming energies which is
proportional to the volume of material switched. Encoding data in two-
dimensional (2D) materials such as molybdenum tellurides (MoTe2) provides a
direct route to overcome this fundamental limitation. Among available 2D
materials which can undergo a phase transition, MoTe2 is predicted to be the
most energy efficient, but there is a distinct lack of experimental evidence to
support conflicting theoretical models governing the mechanisms, dynamics, and
limitations of optically-induced phase transformations in MoTe2. The team
proposes to address this knowledge gap using dynamic optical measurement
techniques in combination with ultrahigh-resolution transmission electron
microscopy. The project overcomes the experimental limitations of prior works to
shed new light on related 2D materials for applications requiring high-speed,
reliable, and efficient optoelectronic memory. The team seeks to educate middle-
and high-school students on topics related to nanomaterials in daily life from
districts with historically under-represented minorities in STEM fields using a
combination of interactive workshops and virtual reality tools. This project
also provides training for two graduate students in nanofabrication and
characterization techniques and hosts undergraduates from underrepresented
groups during the summer months to broaden participation in STEM-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Phase-change
materials that enable optoelectronic memory have the potential to transform low-
energy, non-von Neumann computing architectures by processing information in
memory at the speed of light. A phase-change material that is atomically flat
(e.g. MoTe2 and its alloy Mo1-xWxTe2) would further reduce the energy required
to configure its state by drastically reducing the active volume undergoing a
phase transition. While optically induced phase transformations have been
observed in MoTe¬2 and related materials, these transformations have been
irreversible unlike similar observations employing electrochemical doping and
mechanical strain. Limited empirical evidence and theoretical modeling indicates
Te vacancies play a central role in the phase transition process, but a clear
understanding of the dynamics and physical mechanism of optical switching
between the 2H and 1T’ phases in MoTe2 remains elusive to date. The team
proposes that optically induced structural transformations can be controlled in
MoTe2 through material synthesis, encapsulation, and W-alloying, resulting in
higher operating speeds, improved reliability, and lower switching energies. To
test this hypothesis, the project contains the following three aims: (1)
determine the influence of Te vacancies on the optical switching power by
engineering the concentration of Te vacancies during the MoTe2 growth process;
(2) encapsulate MoTe2 to reduce Te loss during optical excitation—the expected
mechanism preventing reversible optical switching; and (3) alloy MoTe2 with W to
engineer an optimal 2D material for efficient and rewriteable optoelectronic
phase-change memory. The proposed approach overcomes the temporal limitations of
prior experimental techniques by probing the phase-transition process in the
optical domain. The proposed research is expected to enable the development of
high-speed, non-volatile, and efficient data storage by exploiting structural
transformations in MoTe2 to encode information. This study is the first to use a
combination of optical and electro-optical techniques to resolve conflicting
theoretical models regarding the phase transformation mechanisms, dynamics, and
optimal stoichiometry of MoTe2 and its alloy Mo1-xWxTe2. New insights into
phase-transformation process of MoTe2 are expected to have broad application to
fields beyond data storage, such as neuromorphic computing, electro-optic
conversion, flexible electronics, and reconfigurable topological and quantum
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.