* 2003292
* RCN-HERS: Research Coordination Network for Hurricane Ecosystem Response Synthesis
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* John Kominoski, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 12/31/2024
* USD 489,960.00

Tropical cyclones are one of the most severe disturbance affecting social and
ecological systems. These storms have huge impacts on both coastal ecosystems
and the people that use and enjoy those natural resources. However, the impacts
of each storm are unique in both the amount of damage and recovery time.
Furthermore, the frequency, intensity, and locations where tropical cyclones
occur are expected to change. Tropical cyclones may become more common in some
regions or more intense in others. This award will increase the understanding of
what storm characteristics and the aspects of the affected coastal ecosystems
result in the differential impacts among storms and rates of recovery. In the
Research Coordination Network for Hurricane Ecosystem Response Synthesis (RCN-
HERS) scientists from diverse disciplines and areas of expertise will contribute
their collective knowledge and the wealth of existing data on storm impacts on
coastal ecosystems to answer these questions. The data assembled through RCN-
HERS will be publicly available for other research teams to use for future work
and the project will build a collaborative network of researchers across
disciplines of ecology, sociology, economics, and natural resource management.
The understanding gained from this project will help researchers predict the
impacts of future storms and provide recommendations for managing coastal
ecosystems for greater resilience. The RCN-HERS website will serve as a publicly
accessible data warehouse and venue for sharing information about research
activities, findings, and products. Findings from the project will also be
disseminated to the public through local outreach presentations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research Coordination Network for Hurricane Ecosystem
Response Synthesis will have the overarching goal of linking terrestrial,
freshwater, and marine ecologists with economists, sociologists, statisticians,
modelers, and resource managers to develop a synthetic understanding of the
factors governing the resistance and resilience of coastal ecosystems to
tropical cyclones, as well as a coordinated approach to comparing among events
and their impacts. Participants will meet through a series of workshops and
webinars to bring together existing data on ecosystem responses to hurricanes.
Researchers will also work together to develop and implement a series of
thematic approaches to analyzing and comprehensively synthesizing this existing
data and information to build recommendations for future networked research to
continue to advance ecological understanding of how hurricanes will impact
coastal ecosystems in the future. Project activities will be centered around
three workshops to address topics focused on understanding 1) interactions among
antecedent conditions and storm characteristics on ecosystem responses, 2) roles
of eco-evolutionary history, life history, and biodiversity on ecosystem
responses, and 3) feedbacks among natural and social-economic systems that
confer resistance and resilience to tropical cyclones. Workshops will include
lead-up webinars and digital planning meetings followed by in-person development
of conceptual models, data analyses, and syntheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.