* 2003469
* Metal nanoclusters as size-resolved probes of quantum materials and phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Vitaly Kresin, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 459,333.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Lithium is the lightest metallic element. Its
uses are broad: in batteries, in medication, in metallurgy and pyrotechnics, in
nuclear power plants and weapons, in soaps and greases, etc. It is even a
superconductor: when compressed, it carries electrical current without
resistance. By being so light, lithium atoms display conspicuous quantum
effects. For example, their quantum “jiggling” makes the thermal expansion of
lithium metal unusually high. It is interesting and important to understand
lithium’s quantum behavior, to search for its novel manifestations, and to
harness it for future use. This research focuses on nanoclusters particles of
lithium: aggregates of tens to hundreds of atoms which can be size-selected with
atom-by-atom accuracy. By studying such microscopic metallic droplets, the
research team can precisely tune their properties and select the most promising
quantum configurations. The project’s aim is to (i) explore in detail the
thermal expansion of lithium; (ii) produce lithium nanoclusters which become
magnetic when heated (this is unusual, especially since bulk lithium is
nonmagnetic); and (iii) create nanoclusters which are simultaneously oblate and
prolate in shape, a unique and purely quantum effect. The graduate and
undergraduate students on the team receive training in a wide range of
scientific and leadership skills. In addition, the subject matter is used for
fruitful outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This project encompasses complementary experiments on size-,
isotope-, and temperature-controlled metal nanocluster particles. It aims to
reveal novel phenomena lying at the interface of nanoscale and quantum-solid
behavior. The optimal material for this purpose is lithium, which displays
distinctive behavior stemming from it being the lightest metallic element with
the smallest electron core. Measurements on individual free particles make it
possible to focus on the intrinsic properties of systems with a precisely
defined size and composition and to trace the emergent physical properties from
the nanoscale to the bulk. The research explores three inherently quantum
phenomena: (i) Temperature, isotope mass, and cluster size dependences of
thermal expansion as manifestations of the zero-point motion of ions at the
nanoscale; (ii) The ability of nanoclusters to undergo quantum shape
oscillations, i.e., to be in a linear superposition of two different shapes at
the same time; and (iii) Temperature-induced magnetism in nanoclusters: the
appearance of high-spin superparamagnetic states with increasing temperature.
The experimental approach employs photoemission, photoabsorption, and Stern-
Gerlach deflection of free nanoclusters. The results can serve as benchmarks for
microscopic theories of electronic and lattice structure. Potential areas of
applications include optical nanoelectronics, quantum sensing, and magnetic
storage and detection. The project offers graduate student training in
experimental and theoretical aspects of an inherently interdisciplinary field,
encourages involvement by undergraduates, and serves as a fruitful resource for
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.