* 2003750
* RUI: High-Speed Imaging and Spectroscopy of Single Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nathan Lindquist, Bethel University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 297,909.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program is funding Dr.
Nathan Lindquist and Dr. Nathan Lemke at Bethel University to develop single-
molecule measurement techniques capable of high-speed (approximately MHz)
imaging and spectroscopy with subwavelength (near 5 nm) spatial resolution using
SERS(surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy). The ability to image, track, and
analyze single molecules with microscopes that use light opens up a vast array
of new scientific possibilities. One promising area of research for probing
single molecules is called surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). In these
experiments, laser light is used to energize minuscule metal particles. These
metal nanoparticles can then transfer energy to nearby molecules, resulting in
their emission of light at specific energies. As a result, the molecules can be
identified. However, many single-molecule experiments show large and random
high-speed fluctuations in the amount of emitted light, which are not easily
understood and also complicate analysis. This project sets out to develop a new
microscope and detector system that can record super-high-resolution movies at a
million frames per second, which is fast enough to capture, locate, track, and
identify the fleeting signals from individual molecules. By using SERS, this new
measurement technology has the potential to reveal more fully how light and
matter interact on the nanoscale. This research is being performed at an
undergraduate institution and its activities are deeply integrated into the
curriculum through open-ended lab projects, summer research opportunities, and
public outreach activities. The project aims to inspire, motivate, and train
undergraduates for future careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of optical "hotspots" in laser-
illuminated metallic nanoparticles is central to the interpretation of the SERS
effect. However, while hotspots are generally portrayed as a static feature of a
metal/molecule system, single-molecule SERS is punctuated with very high-speed
(microsecond) fluctuations, both in signal intensity and spectral content. These
random fluctuations originate from different areas of a single nanoparticle and
can be uniquely activated with different laser wavelengths. Temperature and
laser power also play a role in the fluctuation dynamics. High-speed SERS
fluctuations are therefore interpreted to arise from single molecules
interacting with a dynamic and restructuring metallic surface that generates
short-lived, atomic-scale optical hotspots. Atomic-scale optical hotspots are a
relatively uncharted area of basic research and new measurement technologies are
therefore needed. This research uses image intensifiers integrated with multiple
lasers, detectors, and fast single-photon counters to analyze atomic-scale
optical hotspots and single-molecule SERS with unprecedented speed, sensitivity,
and resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.