* 2003830
* AF: Small: Distributed Algorithms for Dynamic, Noisy Platforms: Wireless Networks, Robot Swarms, and Insect Colonies
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Nancy Lynch, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 349,407.00

Distributed systems are now everywhere, in the form of wired and
&lt;br/&gt;wireless communication networks, distributed data-management
systems,&lt;br/&gt;social networks, coordinated robots, and controlled
transportation&lt;br/&gt;systems; their prevalence and importance will continue
to grow. This&lt;br/&gt;project is developing theory for distributed systems.
Most existing&lt;br/&gt;theory for distributed systems has focused on algorithms
that achieve high&lt;br/&gt;performance on relatively well-behaved computing
platforms, such as&lt;br/&gt;reliable, static networks or shared-memory
multiprocessors. In&lt;br/&gt;contrast, this project focuses on theory for very
badly behaved&lt;br/&gt;platforms such as wireless networks and robot swarms---
platforms that&lt;br/&gt;exhibit noise and uncertainty and that change
unpredictably over time. &lt;br/&gt;The project considers how one can design
good distributed&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for such settings. The approach is
inspired by the&lt;br/&gt;biological world, in which interacting entities, such
as cells or&lt;br/&gt;organisms, live in unpredictable environments, and must
contend&lt;br/&gt;regularly with noise and change. Wireless networks and robot
swarms&lt;br/&gt;are similar in many ways to social insect colonies (such as
ants or&lt;br/&gt;bees). In spite of their difficult environments, social
insects can&lt;br/&gt;solve sophisticated problems, for example, problems of
searching,&lt;br/&gt;construction, consensus, and task allocation. Understanding
how they&lt;br/&gt;do this should help computing researchers to design better
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for wireless networks and robots. Thus, this project
combines its&lt;br/&gt;study of algorithms for wireless networks and robot
swarms with a&lt;br/&gt;theoretical study of insect colony
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project seeks new algorithms by
which ad hoc&lt;br/&gt;wireless networks, robot swarms, and insect colonies can
solve&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problems of communication, construction,
reaching&lt;br/&gt;consensus, estimation, data processing, searching, shape
formation,&lt;br/&gt;task allocation, and more. It also seeks corresponding
lower bounds,&lt;br/&gt;especially bounds that highlight the costs of
accommodating changes&lt;br/&gt;and uncertainty. It looks for general insights
and principles for&lt;br/&gt;distributed computing in dynamic and noisy
settings, including metrics&lt;br/&gt;for measuring tolerance to noise and
change, strategies for designing&lt;br/&gt;algorithms, relationships between
different models and problems, and&lt;br/&gt;results articulating the inherent
costs of accommodating change and&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty. Algorithms that are
studied are mostly probabilistic and&lt;br/&gt;synchronous. They tend to be
simple, and not to use large local state&lt;br/&gt;or elaborate bookkeeping.
Ideally, they should be self-stabilizing,&lt;br/&gt;that is, able to recover
starting from arbitrary configurations. They&lt;br/&gt;may make extensive use of
estimation of environmental and system&lt;br/&gt;properties. The project uses
mathematical techniques from distributed&lt;br/&gt;computing theory and
probability theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.