* 2003583
* Imaging and controlling moire interactions in two-dimensional semiconductor heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Brian LeRoy, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 527,826.00

Two-dimensional (2D) materials are a single or few atoms thick. These ultra-thin
materials exhibit a host of new electronic and other effects that have
applications to new technologies, such as high speed computing, solar energy
harvesting, and quantum-based technologies. Over the past decade, many 2D
materials have been discovered, including 2D metals, semiconductors, and
magnets. Furthermore, these 2D materials can be stacked together to realize
properties that are enabled by the interactions between layers. These new
properties enable electronic and optical devices, like transistors, solar cells
and lasers. This research is focused on investigating multi-layer 2D material
samples that use these interlayer interactions to realize new electronic and
optical properties. In particular, by combining two different 2D semiconductors,
the research team will explore states with trapped electrons. These trapped
electrons can act as quantum light sources, which would help enable quantum
communication devices that are secure against cyber-attacks. This research
aligns with the NSF Big Idea of the Quantum Leap: Leading the Next Quantum
Revolution by developing material systems that have the potential to enable
these new quantum information technologies. Furthermore, the project strengthens
the STEM workforce both directly and indirectly by training and mentoring
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students through the proposed research,
and by encouraging interest in STEM at the high school level in southern
Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stacking of 2D materials in a vertical
heterostructure leads to the formation of a long wavelength moiré pattern due to
the lattice mismatch and relative orientation between the layers. This moiré
pattern modulates the electronic and optical properties of the heterostructure
leading to the confinement of electrons in one layer and holes in the other
layer. These confined indirect excitons are known to serve as resources for
quantum information science, and the PI will investigate how the novel physics
of moiré confined excitons in 2D semiconductor heterostructures can be exploited
to realize quantum devices with new functionalities. This project is focused on
2D semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide heterostructures consisting of
MoSe2 and WSe2 which form a type-II heterojunction. The research in this project
advances knowledge of quantum materials physics by developing a comprehensive
understanding of the role of twist angle and interlayer interactions in
transition metal dichalcogenide heterostructures. In particular, the research
has three aims: (1) Image the moiré potential in MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructures
using scanning tunneling microscopy, (2) Directly measure spatially modulated
moiré exciton emission using low-temperature scanning near field optical
microscopy and (3) Control moiré interlayer excitons in 2D heterostructures.
Lastly, modifying the interaction between layers and the potential landscape,
allows for the tuning of the interlayer bandgap, the charging of trapped moiré
excitons and the condensation of interlayer excitons in the moiré
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.