* 2003459
* RUI: Creation and Application of Nucleophile-Induced retro Diels-Alder LinKages in Dynamic-Covalent Polymeric Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Philip Costanzo, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 297,503.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Philip Costanzo and Daniel
Bercovici of the Department of Chemistry at the California Polytechnic State
University, San Luis Obispo, are developing synthetic approaches to prepare
novel polymers that are responsive to externally applied temperatures. Synthetic
polymers are commonly referred to as plastics and are widely used in our daily
lives. Polymers are long chain macromolecules consisting of many repeating
chemical units linked with carbon-carbon bonds. Their properties are controlled
by their chemical structures which can be tailored for different applications.
In this research, a number of chemically-distinct small molecules that trigger
temperature response are first prepared and their physical properties
investigated. These molecules are then incorporated into polymer chains at
precise locations. This efficient strategy allows the design of polymer strands
with chemical structures that can be pulled apart at one temperature and snapped
back together at a different temperature. The chemistry associated with this
award is broadly transferrable to many other polymerization systems and useful
to materials chemistry and any other fields in which thermally-responsive
plastics are of interest. This research is having a broader impact by providing
unique opportunities for undergraduate students to receive cutting edge research
training and education in organic and polymer chemistry. Apart from
incorporating the results associated with this award into chemistry laboratory
courses at the university, an outreach program called the Macromolecular
Alliance of Community, Resources and Outreach (MACRO) is initiated. The goal of
this program is to create a depository of outreach materials through which
individuals can spread their passion and knowledge of science to the general
population.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work is focused on the development of
dynamic-covalent linkages that can be incorporated into polymer systems to
enable switchability in polymer topology and bestow thermal responsive
properties. Several studies are carried out in order to achieve this goal. The
first objective focuses on the development of Diels-Alder linkage systems with
novel dienes and dienophiles and systematic understanding of the thermal
stability of the prepared adducts. In the second objective, the unsaturated
adducts are undergoing 1,4-Michael addition which favors the retro-Diels-Alder
cleavage followed by incorporation within polymeric structures using copper
catalyzed atom transfer radical polymerization. The last aim explores dynamic
covalent chemistry effects on the polymer topology and physical properties with
special emphasis on responsive polymer surfactants. Using nucleophiles such as
thiols to modulate bond-cleaving temperature is applicable to a variety of other
polymerization techniques and has the potential to generate a wide range of new
smart soft materials of industrial importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.