* 2003719
* Harnessing Abnormal Grain Growth for the Production of Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Ashwin Shahani, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2022
* USD 176,007.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;Most engineering materials are commonly found
in polycrystalline form, in which a solid consists of many tiny crystals with
different orientations. In some cases, superior properties can be achieved when
the material is made in a single crystal form, as in the case for jet-engine
turbine blades and solar cells. However, single crystals are expensive and time-
consuming to produce. Recently researchers have developed a method for the
production of single crystals by exploiting abnormal grain growth induced by
cyclic heat treatment, in which a metal alloy is heated and cooled repeatedly.
During abnormal grain growth, a few grains preferentially grow by engulfing the
neighboring grains. The goal of this project is to discover why and how this
process occurs. The project integrates emergent research in structural
characterization and simulations of grain growth, capitalizing on our ability to
watch the evolution of the grain network in real-time, and leveraging high
performance computing resources to simulate microstructural evolution.
Developing this fundamental understanding of abnormal grain growth could lead to
a paradigm shift in the manufacture of single-crystalline materials, and
therefore it promotes global competitiveness in manufacturing and technology and
national prosperity. The project also promotes the development of a highly
trained future workforce; two graduate students are trained in state-of-the-art
techniques in experiments, modeling, simulations, and data analysis. Outreach
activities are carried out through the Females Excelling More in the Math,
Engineering, and the Sciences program and Washtenaw Elementary Science Olympiad
and include a virtual reality demonstration that allows students to walk through
an evolving microstructure during heat treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;A cyclic heat treatment that
induces abnormal grain growth holds promise for solid-state processing of single
crystals and otherwise large-grained materials. However, its full potential has
not been realized due to the poor understanding of the mechanisms underlying the
process. The objective of this project is to advance the science governing the
growth of the abnormal grains during cyclic thermal treatment. The following
fundamental questions are addressed: What is the mechanism by which abnormal
grain growth is initiated during a cyclic heat treatment? Which grains are most
likely to become abnormal and what are their microstructural signatures? How
does the abnormal grain grow into new microstructural neighborhoods? To answer
these questions, emergent research in structural characterization, phase-field
and phase-field-crystal modeling, and graph theory methods are synergistically
integrated. High-resolution synchrotron-based X-ray diffraction microscopy is
utilized to visualize and quantify the evolution of the grain and subgrain
network in real-time and also enable microstructural evolution simulations based
on the measured space-, time-, and orientation-resolved datasets as initial
conditions. The resulting high-dimensional data is then distilled into a network
model that succinctly describes the microstructure and the local driving forces
for grain boundary motion. Scientific understanding of abnormal grain growth
upon thermal cycling will ultimately inform the process design of single-crystal
fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.