* 2003659
* Routes of Relaxation and Reconfiguration in Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 08/31/2024
* USD 528,406.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This materials research will unravel new
concepts about frustration and reconfiguration of disordered matter that could
lead to better control of magnetic materials, to creation of tougher glasses and
coatings, and to synthesis of responsive soft materials. Broadly, the
experimental project develops new ability to formulate and manipulate micro- and
nano-particles and macromolecules in solution. Moreover, the project develops
new ways to observe these materials based on cutting-edge optical and
computational techniques. The research thus strengthens the science that
underlies industries involved with sensing/actuation, microfluidics, drug
delivery, photonics, printing, coatings, cosmetics, and agriculture, and thereby
positively impacts US technology infrastructure and economy. Finally, this
activity will train a new generation of scientists and engineers in the areas of
soft materials behavior and formulation, optical microscopy, electro-optics,
microfluidics, rheology, and computation. The emerging PhD students and post-
docs will enter the nationâ€™s work force, and a diverse group of undergraduate
and high school participants will be stimulated to pursue STEM education/career
choices as a result of this research activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This experimental project explores fundamental properties of
complex fluids and soft materials. Reconfiguration, broadly defined, unifies the
research. The research will develop and use sample systems based on colloidal
particle suspensions, liquid crystals, and drops to explore the phenomenology of
assembly, reconfiguration, response-to-frustration, and relaxation. Importantly,
the soft systems offer unique experimental knobs that permit tuning of an energy
scale, force parameter, or boundary condition to answer physics questions. The
colloid research employs novel particle systems, state-of-the-art video
microscopy, and frontier computational analysis tools probe structural
relaxation and rearrangement in frustrated colloidal antiferromagnets, colloidal
glasses, and colloidal supercooled liquids. The liquid crystal research is
oriented towards drops containing liquid crystals. Reconfiguration research, in
this case, will develop understanding about the remarkable shape-transitions of
drops containing liquid crystal polymers and oligomers. Like the colloidal
systems, these behaviors are driven by the delicate balance of interfacial
energy, bulk elasticity, and geometry characteristic of soft matter, but they
have a new twist: molecular chain polydispersity drives the morphological
transformations. Knowledge gained should enable manipulation and crafting of
novel routes to assemble complex fluids and will make intellectual connections
to patterning effects in living matter that exploit molecular
heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR)
grant supports research to explore fundamental properties of complex fluids and
soft materials with funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in
DMR of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.