* 2003629
* Thermal and Structural Properties of Polyzwitterions, with Research Opportunities for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Interns
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Peggy Cebe, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 588,319.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is on a class
of polymeric materials called "polyzwitterions". They consist of long chains of
chemical units that carry both positive and negative charges. A number of new
polyzwitterions will be designed and made in the laboratory with different
chemical structures, and then studied to find the best ones for technological
applications. They will be tested for heat stability, mechanical strength, and
ability to absorb or reject water. The studies will provide a knowledge base
which is needed to more rationally develop new materials for a range of
applications. It is expected that the proposed research on polyzwitterions will
benefit society in important ways. Polyzwitterions may be useful for biomedical
uses such as hydrogels or wound dressings. In the field of water purification,
polyzwitterions may improve the properties of filtration membranes leading to
better water treatment systems. How polyzwitterion molecules interact with each
other in the presence of water or salts will be important information for the
field of energy technology, leading to new batteries for energy storage.
Societal benefit will also be derived from increasing participation in STEM
fields of persons from under-represented groups, such as women, minorities, and
persons with disabilities (with particular emphasis on a program aimed at deaf
and hard-of-hearing undergraduates).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced methods of thermal analysis, such as
temperature modulated and fast scanning chip calorimetry, will be used for
fundamental studies of thermo-physical properties of polyzwitterions (PZIs)
featuring sulfobetaine-type zwitterionic moieties. Thermal measurements will be
augmented with structural characterization. The technical objectives are to: 1.
synthesize an array of polyzwitterions and investigate fundamental thermal
properties of cast films in relationship to variations of chemical chain
structure and content of salt; 2. measure fundamental thermal properties of PZIs
using fast scanning calorimetry to minimize effects of degradation; 3.
investigate the structure of PZIs with respect to formation of intra- and
interchain cross-linking as functions of salt content, which can mediate this
cross-linking. High precision, high accuracy heat capacity measurements will be
made to quantify the solid and liquid states, and their dependence upon bound
water and salt content. Specifically, the role of LiCl salt will be investigated
as to its impact on the thermal and structural properties of PZIs. Temperature
modulated differential scanning calorimetry will be performed on PZI cast films
to provide fundamental thermal properties such as the solid state heat capacity.
Differential fast scanning chip calorimetry will be used to study these
materials at 2000 K/s to avoid degradation, to obtain the dry-state glass
transition temperature, liquid-state heat capacity, and heat capacity increment
at the glass transition. Glass forming ability will be studied for PZIs in the
presence or absence of added salt. Structure of the materials will be evaluated
using wide and small angle X-ray analysis and Fourier Transform infrared
spectroscopy. Educational and outreach activities will include a summer
internship program for deaf and hard-of-hearing
interns.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.