* 2003694
* Lassen Field Station Planning
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Jeffrey Clary, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 24,963.00

This award will support strategic planning for the new Lassen Field Station
(LFS), a partnership between the Lassen Volcanic National Park and the
University of California, Davis, and the newest member of the University of
California Natural Reserve System. LFS has potential for impact beyond that
typical of many biological field stations. Much of the research enabled by LFS
addresses a pressing research need in the western United States: forest
management and wildfire, in a region of California that has been repeatedly
decimated by wildfires in recent years. LFS also has unparalleled potential as a
site for research on volcanism, volcanic landscapes and their associated species
and ecosystems. The Park receives more than 500,000 visitors per year. An
explicit goal of the planning process is to identify means by which both
curriculum content and knowledge generated by researchers can be disseminated to
this receptive public, either through direct researcher-to-public interactions,
or interactions mediated through researcher contact with Park staff and
volunteers. The northeast corner of California is a largely rural area with few
economic engines; public and charter schools in the area already embed some
Park-based science into their curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning
process will identify ways that researchers and instructors from the LFS
partnership can enrich local communities with experiential learning for their
K-12 students. Funds will be used to convene a series of planning meetings to 1)
create a five to ten-year strategic vision for the field station, 2) identify
and prioritize research facility needs, and 3) identify, prioritize and engage
other agency and NGO partners for the field station. A strategic planning
effort, encompassing the next five to ten years, will establish goals and
articulate constraints to focus the efforts of both Park and UC Davis Natural
Reserves staff as research and teaching increase at LFS. For more information
about Lassen Field station visit https://naturalreserves.ucdavis.edu/lassen-
volcanic-national-park-partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.