* 2003488
* New Invariants of Knots and 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ciprian Manolescu, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 447,000.00

This award provides funding for a project in topology, a central field in modern
mathematics. The main goal is to use ideas from both algebra and theoretical
particle physics (gauge theory) to develop new tools for studying geometric
shapes. The PI plans to apply these tools to study the problem of which high
dimensional shapes can be triangulated, that is, decomposed into simple pieces
(similar to a decomposition of a surface into triangles). Triangulations have
applications beyond pure mathematics, for example in computer graphics. The
project will support graduate education and help disseminate mathematical ideas
to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, the project
concerns some of the homological invariants that are associated to knots and
three-manifolds. The PI will investigate extensions of Khovanov homology to
knots in manifolds other than the three-sphere, and study their properties with
regard to cobordisms and surfaces in various four-manifolds. In a different
direction, the PI will use Pin(2)-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer stable
homotopy and involutive Heegaard Floer homology to understand more about the
structure of the three-dimensional homology cobordism group, and thus shed light
on the classification of triangulations of high-dimensional manifolds.
Additionally, the PI aims to construct knot Floer stable homotopy types and
Heegaard Floer stable homotopy types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.