* 2003815
* Resonant many-electron dynamics on helium
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mark Dykman, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 485,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) electron systems are of
central interest for modern physics. The parameters of these systems can be
varied in a controllable way, enabling the exploration of a wide variety of
quantum many-body phenomena in a controlled setting. Understanding these systems
continues to be a major driver for progress, not only in fundamental physics,
but also in nanotechnology and quantum information science. Electrons on the
surface of liquid helium were the first two-dimensional electron system
discovered experimentally, and they still stand out as the most pristine known
2D system. Superfluid helium at low temperatures functions as a fantastically
clean surface without defects and imperfections that are unavoidable in almost
all other material systems. Electrons placed near this superfluid surface become
bound to it and float in vacuum about 10 nanometers above the surface. They
exhibit rich aspects of many-body quantum dynamics. One of the most attractive
aspects is the flexibility and tunability of the system. The effects of the
interaction between electrons can be effectively modified by changing their
density and the geometry of the system. This research work aims to use the
available controls to study fundamental problems of condensed-matter physics. Of
central interest is the interplay of interactions between different quantum
systems and how this interplay affects the electron dynamics away from thermal
equilibrium. No general principles underlying such dynamics have been
established. Because the system of electrons on helium is so pristine, it is a
unique tool for the studies of coupled quantum systems. This work will use
various tools of modern experimental and theoretical physics to reveal the basic
features of the system. The system of electrons on helium is also an ideal
candidate for incorporating into quantum devices and to potentially developing
novel quantum technologies. Of particular interest in this respect are devices
used in quantum information science. Because of these features electrons on
helium are also an ideal platform for training students interested in
fundamental science and QIS technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this joint experimental and theoretical effort
is to understand the resonant dynamics of the many-electron system on liquid
helium. These non-trivial dynamics result from the interplay the strong electron
correlations and the interaction of the electron system with the quantum
excitations of the helium surface. The research will address the question of how
this interplay modifies the behavior of the system if it is driven away from
thermal equilibrium. Specifically, the experimental and theoretical work will
(i) study the linear and nonlinear resonant response to high-frequency
excitation with the goal to understand the interplay of the strong correlations
and the many-body polaronic effect in a Wigner crystal driven by a strong dc
field which effectively strengthens the electron coupling to the helium
excitations; (ii) explore the nature of the giant nonlinearity of the electron
mobility in the crystalline phase and the effect of quantum fluctuations on the
crystallization using a single-electron transistor able to count individual
electrons as they move past it; (iii) utilize piezoelectric surface acoustic
waves to investigate resonant interaction between these waves and plasmonic
modes of the electron system and to study the high-frequency electron mobility;
and (iv) investigate how quantum and classical fluctuations in the many-electron
system affect the spectrum of the inter-subband electron absorption in an in-
plane magnetic field that couples in-plane and out-of-plane motion, making the
system mimic the optical response of color centers with controlled electron-
phonon coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.