* 2003006
* Partial support for IBBS18 with theme: Microbes, Man and the Environment: Societal Challenges and the Role of Microorganisms in the Anthropocene; September 7-10, 2020; Bozeman, MT
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Recep Avci, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2022
* USD 36,260.00

This grant will help support the International Biodeterioration and
Biodegradation Society (IBBS) triennial symposium and conference at Montana
State University, September 7-10,2020. The goal of the conference is to bridge
the artificial gaps between basic and applied research under the theme of
"Microbes, Man and the Environment: Societal Challenges and the Role of
Microorganisms in the Anthropocene." IBBS is a fifty year old non-profit
organization that promotes interaction between industry, academic and government
researchers concerned with the positive and negative effects of living organisms
on materials and processes. The conference will be preceded by a 1-day workshop
for early-career scientists, entitled, "Preparing for Your First Job in a
Science Departmentâ€”from Application to Interview to Negotiation". The workshop
will include practical advice on selecting the right institution, developing an
instructional philosophy and implementing active learning in STEM
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial metabolism underpins the science
associated with the biodeterioration and biodegradation of materials. Conference
sessions will include : i) impact of environmental change on biodeterioration;
ii) biodeterioration and multi-kingdom biofilms; iii) microbial deterioration of
fuels and fuel-system components; iv) metabolomic profiling of biodeterioraton
and biodegredation processes; v) environmental fate of perfluorinated compounds;
vi) plastic biotransformations in ecosystems. Accordingly, the IBBS conference
is relevant to the biogeochemical cycling of materials and elemental budgets,
the role of species in ecosystem functioning, climate-ecosystem feedbacks, and
the impact of climate and global environmental change on
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.