* 2003828
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Spin-gapless semiconductivity and half-metallicity in Heusler alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Paul Shand, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 236,290.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Current computing technology is based on the
manipulation of the charge of electrons for the purpose of information
processing. Hard disks, which are used in large-scale storage of data, function
by exploiting the intrinsic magnetism of electrons. Spintronics is a fledging
field that unites these two technologies to create a new computing paradigm that
could result in substantial enhancements in computing speed and attendant energy
efficiency. Spintronic devices such as magnetic random access memory (MRAM) have
already been commercialized but the potential of spintronics is far greater.
This project advances the field of spintronics through the systematic discovery
of new materials that possess the necessary electronic and magnetic properties
to undergird large-scale development of new spintronic devices. The project
combines both theoretical and experimental approaches to maximize the
effectiveness of the discovery process. In addition to its direct scientific
impact, the project positively influences the development of the future science
and technology workforce through the heavy involvement of undergraduate students
in all aspects of the research. Outreach programs involving K-12 students and
the general public further broadens the impact of the project via engaging
activities that emphasize and elevate the importance of science to the well-
being of humanity. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Materials
Research (DMR) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
this project is the identification and synthesis of new half-metallic (HM) and
spin-gapless semiconducting (SGS) materials for applications in spintronics. In
particular, this project investigates structural, magnetic, electronic, and
spin-transport properties of HM and SGS Heusler alloys in bulk and thin-film
geometry. This is achieved by performing comprehensive theoretical and
experimental investigations of candidate materials, using state-of-the-art
techniques, tools, and research methods, including X-ray diffraction,
transmission electron microscopy, Quantum Design VersaLab magnetometer, Quantum
Design Physical Property Measurement System, point-contact Andreev reflection,
and first-principles density functional calculations. The project is motivated
by recent discovery that certain Heusler compounds change their ground state
from metallic to SGS and/or HM upon modification of their elemental
compositions. This approach has a clear advantage over mechanical strain-induced
half-metallic transitions reported in the literature, as it requires no external
pressure. Second, this project provides experimental confirmation that certain
half-metals retain a 100% spin-polarization in thin-film geometry, contrary to
the conventional wisdom that reduced geometry destroys half-metallicity due to
the emergence of surface states. This could open a new page in spintronic
applications, e.g., in devices based on multilayer design, such as
magnetoresistive tunnel junctions. This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.