* 2003874
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Private Data Analytics Synthesis, and Sharing for Large-Scale Multi-Modal Smart City Mobility Research
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 367,000.00

Given the trend towards urbanization, understanding real-time human mobility in
urban areas has become increasingly important for many research areas from
Mobile Networking, to Transportation/Urban Planning, Behavior Modeling,
Emergency Response, to recent Pandemic Mitigation. Many analytical models have
been proposed to understand human mobility based on mobility data. However, most
of these data are proprietary and cannot be accessed by the research community
at large. Fortunately, based on the latest expansion of urban infrastructures,
such mobility data has been collected by city government agencies and some
companies that are willing to share the data for social good. However, a key
challenge is the privacy concern since such data usually have sensitive
information and system design details for potential privacy and security issues.
To address this issue, the project aims to generate realistic yet synthetic
mobility data through machine learning based on the real mobility data analytics
and then share these realistic synthetic data with the research community. The
objective of the project is to lower the entry barriers for interdisciplinary
researchers in mobility data-intensive research aimed at addressing major
scientific/societal challenges related to urban
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core merit of the project lies in integrating
two aims, i.e., privacy-preserving data synthesis and data integration, for
large-scale smart city mobility research. For the first research aim, the
project plans to utilize recent advances in Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) to enable large-scale mobility data synthesis. The goal is to achieve the
individual-level release of realistic synthetic mobility data by GAN-based
models targeting key characteristics of human mobility. The GAN architecture
proposed has novel technical components to augment basic GAN frameworks, which
optimize the fundamental trade-off between privacy (regarding
removing/obfuscating sensitive mobility features) and utility (in terms of
preserving non-sensitive mobility features) with long-range dependencies (in
terms of repeated mobility patterns) revealed. For the second research aim, the
PIs plans to perform multi-modal data integration based on aligned multi-tensor
decomposition under mobility semantics. The technical approach proposed is to
enable multi-modal data integration based on synthetic single-modal data for
comprehensive mobility modeling with a set of machine learning techniques
including novel mobility semantic learning and multi-tensor decomposition with
aligned spatiotemporal granularity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.