* 2003928
* Dynamic covalent self-assembly and self-sorting of 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional nanohoops and cages
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Darren Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 640,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Johnson at the University of
Oregon is developing a strategy to make stable, complex molecular cages and
macrocyclic structures. His strategy takes advantage of self-assembly, an
efficient process for assembling multiple copies of simple building blocks into
elaborate 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional structures. This process would look
like puzzle pieces (simple building blocks) that put themselves together into a
2-dimensional picture. Professor Johnson and his group seek to advance this
self-assembly strategy to include sorting among different building blocks. The
would also like to lock the structures in place (much like using superglue to
lock a puzzle in place). The building blocks used in this study may provide new
building blocks (monomers) for commercial polymer (plastics) manufacturing,
novel materials for organic electronics, and new fluorescent materials.
Professor Johnson also provides opportunities for his graduate student
researchers to conduct internships in the private sector, mentors junior
researchers, and support the Women in Graduate Sciences seminar and workshop
series at University of Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
accomplish several objectives. Dr. Johnson and his team will develop new
macrocycles and cages using self-assembly and covalent capture methods and study
self-sorting as a tool in dynamic covalent chemistry to isolate new,
unsymmetrical macrocycles and cages. They will also use these strategies to
assemble new conjugated cages and macrocyles and to develop methods to create
new mechanically-bonded or “threaded” nanohoop structures. The intellectual
merit of the research lies in several areas. These include the synthesis of
complex organic structures by efficient self-assembly and self-sorting methods
that advance the field of main group supramolecular chemistry. The team also
develops new assemblies featuring emerging properties in host-guest chemistry,
organic electronics, and polymer chemistry. They use the thermodynamic driving
force of these self-assembly methods to prepare new mechanically-bonded systems.
Translating basic science to applications is an ongoing broader impact of the
proposed research. This program expands internship opportunities for Ph.D.
students in industry and national labs and provides professional development in
innovation and technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.