* 2003444
* Reconfigurable Active Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Angelo Cacciuto, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 339,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical, computational,
and data-intensive research and education and education that focuses on the
design of reconfigurable active materials. When one thinks about molecules or
nanoparticles in a medium, very small objects that aimlessly move and vibrate
come to mind. Over the past decade, it has been discovered that it is possible
to chemically alter the surface of nanoparticles so that they can utilize
chemical energy in their surroundings, and they act like microscopic engines.
Thus powered, they can run through a medium like bacteria at very high speeds,
and in a controllable manner. This breakthrough resulted in the emergence of a
new field of research that is today called active matter and includes the study
of both man-made and biological microscopic systems. Because of the direct
analogy with biological systems, groups of activated nanoparticles are often
referred to as synthetic "living" systems, and their collective behavior is
indeed reminiscent of that exhibited by swarming bacteria or flocks of birds.
One of the most appealing features of these nanoparticles is that they can be
made into arbitrarily complex shapes, and with a wide range of mutual
interactions and speeds that can be turned on and off by exposing them to blue
light. &lt;br/&gt;The idea of this project is to use a combination of
theoretical and cutting-edge numerical and data-science strategies, including
machine learning, to study the properties of assemblies of active particles. The
goal is to design how these particles should be put together or linked to each
other so that they can form functional microscopic objects. So, the PI aims at
studying how to create microscopic “machines” that can not only quickly move
through a medium, but also acquire specific shapes, and, like proteins, change
their shape over time in a controllable fashion. This serves to define the term
"reconfigurable active materials". &lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will
help enable the development of robust strategies to design the next generation
of smart materials built from microscopic active machines that are put together
by spontaneous assembly of active nanoparticles. The applications of
reconfigurable active materials in our daily life are countless, and cover areas
ranging from stimuli-responsive materials, or sensors, to tissue repair and
wound healing devices. More generally, they may open new opportunities in the
field of nanomedicine. This project includes educational activities, including
training undergraduate and graduate students, mentoring postdoctoral research
fellows, and collaboration with on-campus organizations dedicated to the
advancement of women and other groups that are underrepresented in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical, computational, and data-intensive research, and education with the
aim of designing reconfigurable active assemblies from self-propelled
nanoparticles. Characteristic of active systems is the out-of-equilibrium nature
of its constituent parts which results in a phenomenological complexity that is
extraordinary and has no equivalent in the realm of equilibrium thermodynamics.
The study of the collective behavior of self-propelled particles, one of the
simplest realizations of an active system, has been at the forefront of recent
theoretical efforts. Ideas, and theoretical frameworks that have been developed
to study these synthetic units have found fertile ground in several biological
systems which are also inherently out of equilibrium, or occur in an environment
where significant active fluctuations can occur. The PI plans to use a
combination of theoretical approaches and numerical simulations to develop
rational design strategies to engineer reconfigurable active materials based on
the controlled assembly of self-propelled particles. This will be achieved
through investigating the role that hydrodynamic interactions can play in how
active agents interact with each other and behave when near surfaces and
colloidal cages, or in confining media, and harnessing it to design
reconfigurable active clusters. Inspired by recent experiments on 4D printing,
the PI will also explore an alternative path towards structure formation and
active reconfigurability that does not rely on self-assembly, but on the folding
dynamics of linearly connected active colloidal swimmers. The coupling between
active and elastic forces developing within a linearly, or two-dimensionally,
constrained set of active particles provides untapped potential towards the goal
of reconfigurability without self-assembly, and leads to intriguing analogies
with protein folding design and the physics of DNA origami.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI anticipates that the outcomes of this project will
help advance out-of-equilibrium statistical mechanics and provide insights into
design strategies for bottom-up assembly of active reconfigurable structures.
The tools and theoretical approaches that the PI will develop in this research
activity should be easily applicable or extended to other active systems, and
may have important implications for biological problems that rely on similar
physical mechanisms, such as tissue repair and wound healing, and in
nanomedicine. This project contributes to the education of undergraduate and
graduate students. An outreach plan in collaboration with the on-campus
organization Women in Science at Columbia, whose efforts are dedicated to the
advancement of women and underrepresented populations in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics is currently underway, and will be continued and
extended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.