* 2003257
* MLWiNS: RL-based Self-driving Wireless Network Management System for QoE Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Belding, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 609,599.00

The proliferation of Internet-connected devices and applications, which are
heavily reliant on high-speed, robust networks, have made the management of
networks difficult and complicated. While the incorporation of programmable
switches and machine-learning tools in data-centers and wide-area networks has
contributed to improvements in Quality of Experience (QoE), access networks,
which heavily rely on human operators for most network management tasks, remain
the final frontier for providing a high quality of experience to end-users. The
goal of this project is to design, implement, and evaluate RELIEF, a
REinforcement-LearnIng (RL)-based sElF-driving wireless network-management
system that can dynamically update network configurations to detect, diagnose,
and resolve network events that contribute to QoE degradation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new data-collection tools to
capture fine-grained network data, new metrics to quantify QoE for the network,
a scalable and explainable RL-based learning model to dynamically configure the
underlying network and data-processing pipelines for QoE optimization. This
project pursues fundamental contributions to the reinforcement learning area by
developing novel solutions to inherent statistical and computational challenges.
Finally, this project will design new programming abstractions and data
structures to build an end-to-end system that optimizes the use of limited
network resources to execute the trained RL models at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.