* 2003603
* Anion-pi and halogen-bonded complexes in thermal and photochemical reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Sergiy Rosokha, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2024
* USD 296,560.00

Professor Sergiy Rosokha of Ball State University is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to study weak interaction forces between molecules and their role in
chemical reactions that need heat or light energy to form products. The specific
non-bonding interactions under study (anion-pi and halogen bonding) enable the
aggregation of molecules in elaborate supramolecular structures. The project
helps define the requirements to efficiently incorporate the non-bonding
interactions into molecular design, producing a new tool for more efficient and
environmentally benign synthetic procedures for unique chemicals from charged
and halogenated molecules, which are ubiquitous in biological systems and the
environment. The project is expected to impact many fields, such as drug
development, environmental remediation and materials development. The
interdisciplinary nature of the project provides a diverse group of
undergraduate students in a primarily undergraduate institution with training in
a variety of modern experimental chemistry research techniques, as well as
computational chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the recent
findings by Professor Rosokha that, in addition to controlling the structures of
supramolecular complexes, anion-ÔÅ∞ and halogen bonding facilitate electron
movement between interacting species, which can initiate a variety of chemical
transformations. The specific objectives of the project are to identify and
characterize halogen bonding and anion-pi complexes in the systems undergoing
thermal or light-induced reactions (e.g., halogen and/or electron transfer,
nucleophilic substitution, etc.) and to determine the mechanistic role of these
complexes in such reactions. To achieve these objectives, the systems in which
formation of anion-pi or halogen-bonded complexes is followed by the chemical or
photochemical reactions between bonded species, are studied. Transient complexes
in such systems are isolated and characterized using low-temperature and
stopped-flow UV-Vis measurements and X-ray structural analysis. Together with
the measurements of the kinetics of thermal and light-induced reactions, as well
as computational analysis, this allows to establish the nature of the
intermediate complexes and their role in the reaction
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.