* 2003076
* Collaborative Research: An Experimental and Modeling Study of Inverse-Temperature Layer and Its Effect on Evaporation over Water Surfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Lian Shen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,533.00

Evaporation is a uniquely important process in the Earth System linking water,
energy, and carbon cycles. Monitoring and modeling evaporation over water
surfaces such as lakes and oceans remains challenging. Better quantification and
modeling of water evaporation requires improved understanding of the physical
processes across the water-atmosphere interface. An outstanding scientific
question is the role of the top water layer where temperature increases with
depth, known as the inverse-temperature layer, in evaporation. An
interdisciplinary team of hydro-meteorologists and fluid mechanics scientists
will use cutting-edge field and numerical experiment technology and various
modeling tools to address this question. The outcomes from this project will
benefit broad fields of the Earth Sciences, especially the study of water-
energy-carbon cycles. This project will train graduate students to gain all-
around research experience. The three participating universities will offer mini
projects, seminar series, and summer training courses for high school and
college students with diverse ethnic backgrounds pursuing science and
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objective is to
understand the physical mechanisms underlying the dynamics of the inverse-
temperature layer on the top of water-bodies and its effect on evaporation over
water surfaces at diurnal and seasonal scales through field experiments, large-
eddy simulations, and theoretical and modeling analysis. The project will use a
state-of-the-science facility over an in-land lake to measure high-resolution
water temperature profiles, above- and in-water fluxes of momentum/heat/water
mass and hydro-meteorological variables to reveal the behavior of the inverse
temperature layer. The project team will conduct large-eddy simulations to
understand the mechanistic links between atmospheric processes and in-water
fluid dynamics/thermodynamics regulating the inverse temperature layer and
evaporation. The team will also use field and simulation data to evaluate the
performance of classical and recently developed parameterizations of evaporation
in coupled land-ocean-atmosphere models. The findings will be disseminated to
scientific communities through journal papers and conference presentations to
promote more collaborative research on both long-lasting topics of geosciences
and critical emerging issues such as carbon emissions from global inland waters
and associated aquatic eco-systems. The proposed work includes engagement of PhD
students in research, integration of research findings into undergraduate and
graduate courses taught by the PIs, and K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and Physical and Dynamic
Meteorology programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.