* 2003837
* Experimental and Modeling Study of the Optical Properties and Phase Behavior of Heat and Cold Tolerant Eye Lens Crystallins
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Douglas Tobias, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 525,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to understand
and mimic the properties of structural proteins that are adapted to resist
extreme environments. A combination of experimental and theoretical techniques
will be used to explore the molecular mechanisms by which eye lens proteins from
different organisms maintain transparency. The scientific goal is to understand
how nature produces transparent, durable biomaterials, as exemplified by the
proteins making up the eye lens. The lenses of animals that live in very hot,
cold, or UV light-saturated environments can provide a guide to making robust,
biodegradable materials that withstand harsh conditions. The knowledge gained
from this project will guide the design of flexible materials with potential
applications to new biomimetic lens designs, in both the medical and analytical
chemistry contexts, flexible microlenses, and self-healing materials that resist
UV-light damage. In the future, it could enable the development of bioinorganic
hydrogel scaffolds, controllable membraneless bioreactors, and ocean-safe,
biodegradable sunscreen. The educational plan includes training of students at
the Ph.D. and undergraduate levels. These students will be trained not only in
the specific skills needed to complete the research, but also in critical
thinking, scientific communication, and problem solving across disciplinary
boundaries. Another important component is outreach to middle school and high
school students in grades 6-12. The goal of the outreach program is to increase
interest in science as a career among middle school students. The students, many
of whom are from disadvantaged economic backgrounds, visit UCI to participate in
a campus tour where they learn about undergraduate life, perform hands-on
activities in the investigators’ laboratories, and interact with undergraduate
researchers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to understand the solubility and stability of proteins that are
adapted to resist extreme environments. Experimental and modeling studies of
highly stable structural proteins that play the same functional role in very
different environments will provide insight into sequence determinants of
stability and solubility. Structural and refractive proteins are chosen
specifically to avoid interference from sequence features that are conserved to
maintain chemical activity in thermostable enzymes. The scientific goal of this
project is to understand how nature produces transparent, durable biomaterials,
as exemplified by the proteins making up the eye lens. Although the molecular
details of these proteins vary among different organisms, they are functionally
similar in their high stability and resistance to temperature extremes. The
specific proteins chosen for this effort are eye lens crystallins that are
adapted to extreme environments. The J2 crystallin from the box jellyfish
Tripedalia cystophora and the βγ-crystallin from the tunicate Ciona intestinalis
are extremely stable with respect to heat denaturation. These proteins are not
homologous but share a common function; we seek to understand the sequence and
structural determinants of thermal stability. On the other hand, the γS- and γM-
crystallins from the Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus mawsoni) resist cold
cataract at -2 C or lower, far below the temperature at which mammalian lenses
undergo cold cataract. These proteins exist in a complex mixture, with 13
paralogs in the fish lens. One goal is to understand and control the liquid-
liquid phase separation involved in cold cataract. The iota-crystallin from the
diurnal gecko Lygodactylus picturatus binds a modified form of the visual
pigment retinol to protect its retinae from UV light damage in bright sunlight.
NMR and optical spectroscopy, light scattering, and directed mutagenesis
experiments will be coupled with molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations
to elucidate the important structural factors and intermolecular interactions
that confer high stability and resistance to extreme conditions on these
proteins, guiding the future design of biomimetic materials. Understanding the
structural factors diverse lens proteins have in common will help guide the
design of future temperature- and UV-resistant biomimetic materials.
Furthermore, the ability to predict and control the formation and dissociation
of liquid-liquid phase separation in protein mixtures will be useful for
modulating protein aggregation and biochemical
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.