* 2003033
* Collaborative Research: MLWiNS: ANN  for Interference Limited Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mingyi Hong, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 192,254.00

Demand for wireless data services will continue to rise rapidly in the
foreseeable future. The goal of this project is to develop new advanced
solutions for wireless access networks with the objectives of increasing network
throughput and maximizing overall network utilities. Long-serving model-based
solutions are facing severe limitations due to delays in tracking the ever-
changing radio and network environment as well as measurement inaccuracies. The
main novelty of this project is to bring new tools based on artificial neural
networks (ANN) to meet those challenges. In particular, this project will
investigate when, how, and why ANN-based learning techniques can be applied to a
wide range of wireless networking problems with realistic constraints. This
project will pursue transformative solutions that aim to benefit academia and
industry alike. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will marry
supervised and unsupervised learning techniques with time-tested models of
physical resources, channels, traffic, and network utilities. An important task
is to exploit commonalities of ANN-based solutions for a number of subproblems
to develop a set of principled, holistic solutions for the overall wireless
networking problem, seeking solutions that are scalable, computationally
efficient, and highly adaptive. Pertinent learnability and complexity theories
backing the solutions will also be developed, in order to offer generalizable
design principles. The ANN-based solutions developed are expected to be a major
building block of next generation wireless access networks with associated
economic benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.