* 2003609
* Ligand Control Over Electronic Structure in Metallic Nanoparticles and Model Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Benjamin Lear, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 443,576.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Benjamin Lear at the Pennsylvania State University
to develop new measurement techniques important for tuning various properties of
nanoscale metals. In the history of mankind, metals have proven so useful they
mark epochs, such as the bronze, iron, and steel ages. Some of the advanced
applications of metals in our modern age utilize metal nanoparticles, small
metal particles that are 1000 times smaller than the thickness of a human hair.
At these scales, the properties of the metals change, giving rise to behaviors
that are used to sense and treat cancer, to aid in the production of high-value
chemicals, and to eliminate pollutants from the environment. A key challenge in
further developing these applications is the measurement of the metal
nanoparticles' properties. Professor Lear’s team develops new approaches to
measuring these properties and then uses these measurements to understand how
the chemical environment around metals can be used to tune their activity. In
addition to the technical impacts expected in the multidisciplinary areas of
chemistry, physics, and materials science, the team brings in high school
students from areas across Pennsylvania to participate in various aspects of
this research. This project contributes to training these students in modern
science as it allows them to make more informed decisions about pursuing careers
in science, technology, engineering, and math. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in
the Chemistry Division, the research team develops new measurement techniques
based upon the induced magnetic properties of metals. By applying magnetic
fields to nanoparticles, the team can isolate the electronic properties of the
metals that are tightly linked to their useful electronic behaviors.
Specifically, they use Pauli paramagnetism to study the density of states and
the nature of these states near the Fermi energy of the metal. This property
controls behaviors such as electrical conductivity and catalytic activity. The
team uses both electron spin resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance techniques
to achieve these measurements. The team first synthesizes metallic nanoparticles
and non-metallic atomically precise clusters, both stabilized by organic ligands
at the surface. The team then characterizes the size, shape, and surface
chemistry of these nanoparticles. Subsequently, the team measures the electronic
and magnetic properties and develops models to account for the influence of the
surface chemistry on the measured properties. The end goal is to produce new
tools for the scientific community and new insight that can guide the
development of applications based upon nanoscale
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.