* 2003310
* Directing the Synthesis of Emergent Colloidal Quantum Dots by Correlated Photophysics and Atomic Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* James McBride, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,999.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Sandra Rosenthal and her group at Vanderbilt
University to study new quantum dots that are free of toxic heavy metals.
Quantum dots which are nanometer-sized versions of semiconductors represent a
success stories arising out of the nanotechnology revolution. Quantum dots are
notable for their size-dependent light interactions. Quantum dots are tools for
neuroscience as they can be used to track individual proteins on a living cell’s
surface. Quantum dots occupy a growing portion of the electronic display market
due to the vivid colors they produce. While the use and importance of quantum
dots are growing, the best performing quantum dots are composed of cadmium, a
toxic heavy metal. Indium-based quantum dots are made from non-toxic materials
and show comparable color purity and brightness, but struggle in challenging
environments such as those found in biological systems. To accelerate the
development of new quantum dots, Professor Rosenthal and her research team are
using a method to directly correlate the structure of individual quantum dots
with their optical performance. In systems where every atom in each quantum dot
matters, this methodology can reveal new insights into how complex quantum dot
structures yield specific optical behavior. This research enables scientists and
engineers to precisely design and synthesize customized quantum dot light
emitters as part of advanced manufacturing efforts. As a part of this project,
the next generation of scientists are introduced to the growing field of
nanotechnology through undergraduate research opportunities and outreach
activities for the middle-school students in rural
Tennessee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program, Professor Rosenthal’s research group
develops and studies heavy metal-free colloidal quantum dots, including
transition metal-based systems. The heavy metal-free quantum dots are being
synthesized with complex architectures with the goal of tuning their brightness
and photostability. Ultrafast fluorescence upconversion and nanosecond
fluorescence spectroscopy are employed to probe both the short and long-time
scale carrier dynamics of the photogenerated electrons and holes revealing the
effectiveness of the surface passivation. Advanced analytical electron
microscopy in conjunction with aberration-corrected scanning transmission
electron microscopy (STEM) are used to reveal the chemical and atomic
arrangement of the synthesized quantum dots. Further, correlated single particle
nanocrystal spectroscopy with STEM imaging is being used to identify structure-
function relationships that provide guidance for subsequent
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.