* 2003769
* Collaborative Research: Mechanism and Target Recognition of Protein Arginine Methyltransferases (PRMTs)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Joan Hevel, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Joan Hevel at the Utah State University and Dr. Orlando
Acevedo at the University of Miami to determine how a class of enzymes known as
protein arginine methyl transferases or PRMTs selectively recognize their
targets and how their activity is regulated using advanced computational and
biophysical techniques. PRMTs impact nearly every aspect of cellular biology,
including cell development, repair, and maintenance. These enzymes function by
adding one or more specific markers onto select proteins at precise times.
Surprisingly, it is not understood how these enzymes pick out the specific
proteins to act on from a vast number of other proteins in the cell. This study
will integrate both computer simulations and biochemical experiments to identify
the rules that confer selective binding to PRMTs and to better understand how
the activity of PRMTs is regulated. The results of these studies will provide
foundational information that is required for novel inhibitor development, as
well as allow for an understanding of the sophisticated role that PRMTs play in
how cells communicate with each other and respond to an ever-changing
environment. On a societal level, students will receive cross-training in both
computational and wet biochemistry experimental techniques that will prepare
them for careers in the science and technology workforce. This project also is
integrated into an outreach program to introduce Hispanic-American high school
students and Native American undergraduate students to the research
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) are
integral to mammalian cell function, impacting nearly every aspect of cellular
biology. Surprisingly, the rules that govern PRMT target recognition have evaded
the field for more than a decade and the field is only beginning to understand
the complexities of this enzymatic chemistry. The first objective of this
application is to clarify how oligomerization and allostery play a role in PRMT1
methyltransferase activity. Determination of physiological concentrations of
PRMT1 will be used to calibrate biophysical studies. Use of strategically
designed oligomeric state standard PRMT1 proteins, site-directed mutants, and an
engineered pseudo-dimer of PRMT1 will be used with native PAGE (polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis), kinetics, and computational studies to explore the
relationship between oligomerization, allostery, and catalysis. The second
objective of this project is to establish a framework for understanding PRMT
target recognition by computationally and kinetically characterizing the roles
that substrate conformation and N-terminal PRMT domains have on PRMT4 substrate
selection. The studies will provide insight into how arginine methylation is
regulated in the cell. The development of a machine learning method that
accurately predicts the binding of peptides to proteins orders of magnitude
faster than traditional computational methods will have a large broader impact
for the scientific simulation community. Broader impacts of the study include
the training of students in the research enterprise, with special attention
given to Hispanic-American high school students and native American
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.