* 2004016
* Label-Free, High-Time Resolution, Single-Molecule Studies of RNA Folding and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Colin Nuckolls, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2023
* USD 540,000.00

RNA is a class of biosynthetic molecules that plays central roles in gene
expression, the process of using the genetic information stored in DNA to make
functional proteins. How RNAs function in gene expression is dependent on their
specific and complex three-dimensional shapes or structures and on their ability
to undergo precisely timed and executed structural changes (their dynamic
rearrangements). With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Ruben Gonzalez and Dr. Colin Nuckolls from
Columbia University to study how RNAs fold and/or undergo structural
rearrangements and how the dynamics of a particular RNA structural ‘switch’
controls the expression of a human gene. Drs. Gonzalez’s and Nuckolls’ research
team uses carbon nanotube-based field-effect transistors (smFETs) to follow the
detailed dynamics of individual RNA molecules in three-dimensional space and
across time. Notably, the smFET method allows the study of RNA dynamics without
the need to chemically modify the RNA or apply invasive external forces. A
deeper understanding of how RNA-based structural switches function to control
gene expression impacts the discovery and development of therapeutics that act
on important biomolecular targets and/or functions. In addition, the project
increases participation by women and underrepresented minorities in STEM by
leveraging existing outreach programs in New York City. Kits are developed to
demonstrate nucleic acid structures and single-molecule biophysics in K-12
community outreach, while education modules are developed to teach integrated
concepts of chemistry, biology, and computer science at local high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using smFETs, Drs. Gonzalez’s and Nuckolls’ research team
investigate the kinetic mechanisms with which RNA stem-loops, a fundamental
class of RNA structures, fold and undergo functionally important, dynamic
structural rearrangements at unparalleled molecular, spatial, and temporal
resolutions. The resulting model is used to determine the mechanism through
which the naturally occurring, post-transcriptional methylation of the N6
position of an adenosine in the stem of a RNA stem-loop found within a human
precursor messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) regulates the dynamics of this RNA stem-loop
as a means for controlling the splicing of the pre-mRNA. Specifically, the
proposed studies characterize the folding and dynamics of this stem-loop and
tests the hypothesis that the post-transcriptional, N6 methylation of the
adenosine alters the dynamics of the stem-loop (i.e., throws the ‘switch’ on) so
as to unmask the binding site of an RNA-binding protein that directs the
differential splicing of the pre-mRNA. The results of these studies provide a
general model for the function of RNA stem-loop based conformational switches
and a detailed understanding of the mechanism through which a post-
transcriptional modification of a stem-loop controls the alternative splicing of
a pre-mRNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.