* 2004947
* Expanding the Biomaterials Space of DNA through Polymerization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Ke Zhang, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 475,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA, a basic building block of life,
is a form of natural biopolymer. Yet, DNA research and polymer science are
separate scientific disciplines with very limited crossover. The lack of deeper
integration of the two fields stems in part from the incompatibility of DNA with
the conditions and reagents by which synthetic polymers are made. If this
barrier is overcome, DNA can be freely used to craft many DNA-polymer composite
materials, which can potentially lead to better disease diagnostics,
therapeutics, and biotechnology tools than currently possible today. In the
proposed project, the PIâ€™s team will develop a form of protected DNA compatible
with polymer chemistry, which can be restored to its natural form once the
polymer has been made. Using the protected DNA, several DNA-based polymers
previously deemed difficult or impossible will be synthesized to validate the
methodology. Finally, a DNA-peptide copolymer, to be enabled by the protected
DNA for the first time, will be prepared and tested as a vaccine in human cells.
The biomaterials developed here represents only the tip of an iceberg; the
successful marriage between DNA and the vast knowledge base of polymer science
should result in limitless possibilities. These research activities will
intertwine with educational programs to provide a diverse range of laboratory
training to graduate/undergraduate students (including undergraduates from
institutions lacking research capabilities) and to promote learning, awareness,
and interest in science-related careers among high school students and STEM
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA-based biomaterials are primarily achieved
through solid-phase reactions or aqueous couplings using pre-synthesized
oligonucleotides. Both methods pose limitations for certain types of constructs,
such as highly branched architectures and amphiphilic structures. The goal of
this proposal is to greatly expand the types of biomaterials accessible using
oligonucleotide building blocks by removing the barriers between nucleic acid
chemistry and polymerization. Towards this goal, the PI will design chemically
masked DNA structures that can participate in polymerization reactions (e.g.
free radical, coordination, etc) in the organic phase. The masked DNA can be
restored to native phosphodiester DNA under mild conditions following
polymerization. Thus, many difficult and/or unprecedented DNA-containing
polymers with controlled architecture, composition, sequence, and end-group
functionality are possible with this approach. Among the various DNA-based
materials to be prepared, a peptide-DNA brush copolymer will be investigated in
a biological setting as a self-delivering/adjuvanting peptide vaccine. By
facilitating the marriage of nucleic acids with the vast range of polymerization
reactions, a diversity of new structures with technologically useful properties
will become possible. From the educational perspective, the cross-disciplinary
nature of the project (design, synthesis, and materials/biological
characterizations) is a great teaching tool for the students at all levels to be
involved in the project. The PI will continue to create research opportunities
for undergraduate students and high school students/teachers through active
recruiting, internship programs, course development, and online
presence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.