* 2004454
* RUI: Metastability of Crystals in Double Crystalline PEO-b-PCL Films and Their Role in Transport Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Ryan VanHorn, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 260,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer films are an integral part
of technologies in the 21st century. The film’s ability to provide functionality
is tied to its physical structure, or arrangement of molecules. For example,
degradation of the film is slower in denser areas. Polymers contain some
crystals that are denser than the uncrystallized, or amorphous, regions.
Controlling the amount and location of the crystalline areas is important for
preparing the right material for each application. This research aims to develop
structure-property relationships based on the crystallization of the polymer in
the film. The amount and size of polymer crystalline aggregates will be
controlled by preparing films using different solvents and thermal treatments
including preparation temperature or melt-cool cycles. In addition, the
crystallinity of the film may change over time; therefore, films will be aged at
different temperatures to evaluate whether crystalline content increases or
decreases. The crystalline aggregates will be analyzed post-production using
spectroscopic and microscopic techniques to learn how the preparation method
influenced the crystal development. Once a better understanding of the
crystallization behavior is achieved, the film properties, degradation rate, for
example, will be tested to see the effect of the tailored changes in
crystallization. In addition to scientific discovery, major goals of this
research include the training of future scientists and engineers as well as
promoting STEM education for underrepresented groups. Undergraduate students
will participate in all aspects of the project from lab experiments to public
presentation of the results. Performing high-level research helps prepare them
for success in graduate school and industrial careers through strong independent
thinking and problem solving. Outreach activities will include hosting local
high-school students in research and engagement in a K-6 community outreach
program that brings students to campus for engineering
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(caprolactone)
(PEO-b-PCL) copolymer films are important crystalline polymers for a number of
applications. These copolymers serve as model crystalline-crystalline (CC)
diblock copolymers with similar melting temperatures. In these copolymers, the
crystallization mechanism is complicated, and final crystallinity can be
manipulated using solvent interactions and thermal treatment. The manipulation
of the crystal structure creates a new thermodynamically stable state within the
film. The metastability can be altered with minor changes in state variables,
such as temperature and concentration. Additionally, due to the mobile nature of
polymer crystal stems, annealing or aging of the films results in a shift from
one metastable state to another. It is important to evaluate and understand
these changes in metastability to develop reliable structure-property
relationships. In PEO-b-PCL, these metastable states are relatively similar, and
the interplay of double crystallinity should result in competition between the
most stable state for PEO compared to PCL. The goal of this research is to study
the metastability of PEO and PCL crystals when the minority block crystallizes
first, how aging affects the metastability of each crystal type, and initial
correlations between physical structure and macroscopic transport properties
like water uptake, degradation, and small-molecule release as models for e.g.
drug delivery. By manipulating the physical structure in new ways, changes in
the film’s transport properties may open up new avenues for PEO-b-PCL where
these characteristics could be tailored to specific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.