* 2004270
* Mass Incarceration and Violence in Families: Informing the Next Generation of Public Responses to Violence
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Christopher Wildeman, McKay, Tasseli
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Christopher
Wildeman at Duke University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist examining how mass incarceration has shaped the use of
violence in families and what the fallout of this historic period of punishment
and imprisonment can teach us about the social control of violence. Extending
innovative quantitative and qualitative methods to reveal the dynamic
relationship between the most common acts of violence and societal efforts to
prevent and respond to them, this work is designed to inform a next generation
of public safety strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To deliver rapid insight for
transforming public policy, the project focuses on capturing the richest
possible insight on violence from already-collected data and rendering it ready
for scholarly, policymaker, and lay audience use. Applying novel methods with
secondary data from three large-scale studies, this work addresses three
research aims: (1) to investigate how understandings of public and private
spaces and behaviors shape child maltreatment and partner violence in a time of
mass incarceration; (2) to identify family-level patterns of child maltreatment
and partner violence in families in which parents are and are not involved with
the criminal justice system; and (3) to examine how local-, family-, and
individual-level factors shape child maltreatment and partner violence in
affected families, including whether and how street and carceral violence spill
over into parenting and partner relationships. Building on the investigators’
prior research on mass incarceration and family life, this project applies
latent variable methods alongside structured, inductive qualitative analysis to
capture complex and difficult-to-measure experiences of interpersonal violence.
This work extends methods for the study of charged physical and social acts
(such as violence in families) in ways that reveal and respond to the subjective
meanings ascribed by those who experience them. Such work promises a richer
public understanding of private life in vulnerable and heavily system-involved
families—one that better accounts for the social hiddenness that shapes how
family dynamics (violent and otherwise) surface in research. Findings from this
research are intended to contribute to a more robust science of interpersonal
violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.