* 2004572
* Collaborative Research: Framework: Improving the Understanding and Representation of Atmospheric Gravity Waves using High-Resolution Observations and Machine Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Lakshminarayan Subramanian, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,194,936.00

Geophysical gravity waves are a ubiquitous phenomenon in Earthâ€™s atmosphere and
ocean, made possible by the interaction of gravity with a stratified, or layered
fluid. They are excited in the atmosphere when winds flow over mountains, by
thunderstorms and other strong convective systems, and when winter storms
intensify. Gravity waves play an important role in the momentum and energy
balance of the atmosphere, with direct impacts on surface weather and climate
through their effect on the variability of key features of the climate system
such as the jet streams and stratospheric polar vortices. These waves present a
challenge to weather and climate prediction: waves on scales of 100 meters to
100 kilometers can neither be systematically measured with conventional
observational systems, nor properly resolved in global atmospheric models. As a
result, these waves must be represented, or approximated, based on the resolved
flow that can be directly simulated. Current representations of gravity waves
are severely limited by computational necessity and the scarcity of
observations, leading to inaccuracies or uncertainties in short term weather and
long term climate predictions. The objective of this project is to leverage
unprecedented observations from Loon high altitude balloons and use specialized
high resolution computer simulations and machine learning techniques to develop
accurate, data-informed representation of gravity waves. The outcomes of this
project are expected to result in better weather and climate models, thus
improving short term forecasts of weather extremes and long term climate change
projections, which have substantial societal benefits. Furthermore, the project
will support the training of 3 Ph.D. students, 4 postdocs, and 10 undergraduate
summer researchers to work at the intersection of atmospheric dynamics, climate
modeling, and data science, thus preparing the next generation of scientists for
interdisciplinary careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will deliver two key
advances. First, it will open up a new data source to constrain gravity wave
momentum transport in the atmosphere. Loon LLC has been launching super pressure
balloons since 2013 to provide global internet coverage. Very high resolution
position, temperature, and pressure observations (taken every 60 seconds) are
available from thousands of flights. This provides an unprecedented source of
high resolution observations to constrain gravity wave sources and propagation.
The project will process the balloon measurements and, in concert with novel
high resolution simulations, establish a publicly available dataset to open up a
potentially transformational resource for observationally constrained assessment
of gravity wave sources, propagation, and breaking. The second transformation
will be using machine learning techniques to develop computationally feasible
representations of momentum deposition by gravity waves. Current physics-based
representations only account for vertical propagation of the waves (i.e., they
are one dimensional) and ignore their horizontal propagation. Using the data
based on the Loon measurements and high resolution models, one and three
dimensional data driven representations will be developed to more accurately and
efficiently represent the effects of gravity waves in weather and climate
models. These novel representations will be implemented in idealized atmospheric
models to study the role of gravity waves in the variability of the
extratropical jet streams, the Quasi Biennial Oscillation (a slow variation of
the winds in the tropical stratosphere) and the polar vortex of the winter
stratosphere, enabling better understanding their response to increased
atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.