* 2004048
* Macromolecular-bottlebrush polymeric gels with tissue-mimetic swelling and mechanical properties
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Sergei Sheiko, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living tissues are distinct in their
ability to seamlessly span a range of mechanical properties from ultra-soft
brain to super-tough cartilage at nearly constant water fraction. On the
contrary, synthetic analogs of tissues (i.e. polymeric gels) are currently not
capable to control the amount of water without affecting their mechanics. A new
class of polymeric materials based on bottlebrush-macromolecular architectures
is proposed here to enable independent and programmable control over gel
composition and mechanical properties. In contrast to traditional linear
polymers, the bottlebrush architecture introduces a myriad of side chains or
“bristles” that afford additional molecular parameters to tune softness without
changing the water fraction. Furthermore, tailoring the chemistry of side-chain
ends will empower novel applications such as programmable and injectable
materials for additive manufacturing of tissue-mimetic devices. The proposed
novel class of polymeric gels will provide ample opportunities for
interdisciplinary research through integration of cutting-edge polymer
chemistry, soft-matter physics, and emerging technologies that may lead to
breakthroughs in many applications such as biomedical devices, tissue-
engineering scaffolds, and soft robotics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address three fundamental challenges. First, the equilibrium
swelling ratio and gel’s mechanical properties will be separately correlated
with architectural parameters of brush-like networks such as the side chain
length and grafting density. Triangulation of architecture-swelling-mechanics
correlations will afford independent control over swelling, softness, and non-
linear mechanical response. For example, this will create an unprecedented
series of synthetic gels with the same solvent fraction, but widely different
moduli varying within several orders of magnitude. The second goal is to design
brush-like mesoblocks that enable solvent-free injection of tissue-mimetic
elastomers. The challenge is to control curing time from seconds to days
separate from mechanical properties of fully cured polymer networks. Lastly,
successful implementation of goals 1 and 2 will enable a new class of bioink
materials based on thermosensitive hydrogels that can inject and 3D-print
objects with well-defined solvent fractions and mechanical properties. The main
challenge here is to integrate controlled-temperature gelation of printed
materials with the design-by-architecture objectives pursued in goals 1 and
2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.