* 2004564
* Shape Changing Stimuli-Responsive Multicomponent Molecular Bottlebrushes in Solution and at Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Bin Zhao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular bottlebrush
polymers are a class of chain-like molecules composed of a very long polymer
backbone with densely grafted shorter molecules. These polymers exhibit
intriguing properties and could be used, e.g., in manufacture of advanced
materials, lubrication for friction reduction, drug delivery for medication.
Their shapes are governed by the length ratio of backbone and side chains and
the interactions of side chains with themselves and their environment. External
stimuli have been shown to trigger the shape change of brush polymers from
wormlike to globular, which mimics the folding and unfolding behavior of natural
proteins. In this project the PI will design, prepare, and study multicomponent
brush polymers that can individually change their shapes in solutions and at
interfaces upon application of external stimuli. The fundamental understanding
of the properties and behavior of such giant molecules under various conditions
will potentially impact many technologies, including targeted delivery of
substances (e.g., medications) and environmentally responsive foams and
emulsions. The research program will provide a platform for training
postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students, and thus will
have broader societal impact beyond the research itself. Outreach activities
will be directed to stimulate the interest of high school students toward STEM
fields and to broaden the science horizons of the students at the University of
Tennessee Knoxville.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at synthesizing
multicomponent molecular bottlebrush polymers that can display shape changes in
response to external stimuli and understanding how various molecular parameters
affect their shape changing behavior in dilute and moderately concentrated
solutions and at interfaces. Specifically, the research program will utilize
previously developed synthetic strategies to prepare stimuli-responsive
multicomponent brush polymers via state-of-the-art synthesis techniques,
characterize their changes in molecular dimension and conformation (shape) upon
application of external stimuli in dilute and moderately concentrated aqueous
solution, under external fields, and at interfaces, elucidate the effects of
various molecular parameters on shape-changing behavior, and reveal the unique
properties of brush polymers under different conditions. A series of
multicomponent molecular bottlebrush polymers with various chemical
compositions, molecular weights, molecular architectures, and narrow
dispersities will be made. They will be investigated by multidetector size
exclusion chromatography (SEC) for molecular weights and dimensions, dynamic and
static light scattering (DLS and SLS) for molecular sizes under different
conditions, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) for direct visualization on substrates, and small angle neutron scattering
(SANS) for in situ study of brush dimensions and conformations in solutions. The
knowledge gained from this research project will be used to guide the design and
synthesis of functional brush polymers for potential applications in delivery of
substances and stimuli-responsive foams and emulsions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.