* 2004941
* Ecological and Cultural Pyrogeography
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* William Nanavati, Nanavati, William Parashar
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 143,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Andrés Holz
at Portland State University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the extent to which changes in the
environment have influenced vegetation and the natural behavior of fire since
the last ice age (&lt;20,000 years ago). This project seeks to (1) build upon
decades of socioecological research on the role of anthropogenic fire in shaping
the landscapes; (2) refine our understanding of fire behavior through the
comparison lake and tree-ring fire records; and (3) provide datasets that can be
used to parameterize, validate, and compare with LPJ-GUESS-LMfire dynamic global
vegetation model simulations. This project will also promote diversity in the
field by supporting undergraduate research assistants from a diverse range of
socioeconomic, racial, and cultural backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
it is well established that early land use altered ecosystem dynamics, the
spatial and temporal scales at which this was done is still debated.
Disentangling anthropogenic and natural drivers of change in past vegetation and
fire regimes is a fundamental challenge. Addressing this challenge is imperative
for understanding the extent to which humans have modified temperate ecosystems,
primarily through deforestation, agriculture, and burning. This
multidisciplinary project seeks to advance the scientific knowledge of how human
land use altered ecosystem dynamics across the steep forest-grassland ecotone.
To address the research objectives of this project, new lacustrine sediment and
tree cores will be analyzed. Collecting lake cores will fill a biogeographic
knowledge gap in these ecosystems and targeting lakes near archaeological sites
in this region offer the opportunity to detect human activity in the sedimentary
record. New charcoal and pollen records and their integration with new and
existing dendroecological records will provide comparisons of fire and
vegetation histories across productivity and land-use gradients, allowing us to
understand regional ecosystem dynamics and the spatial and temporal scales at
which land use becomes evident. The comparison of paleoecological data with LPJ-
GUESS-LMfire simulations will provide an excellent way to test hypotheses about
human influence on natural fire regimes. By providing a better understanding of
landscape history, this project will facilitate the pragmatic selection of
management objectives and conservation targets by identifying which ecosystems
will benefit the most form active management, which ecosystems will likely
persist without intervention, and which ecosystems are likely to fail regardless
of management practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.