* 2004072
* Computational and Experimental Design of Associating Bottle Brush Mesostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Douglas Adamson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 608,259.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professors Douglas H. Adamson and Elena
Dormidontova at University of Connecticut to study the behavior of well-defined
polymeric structures at the mesoscale. Matter at the mesoscale, with
characteristic length between the nanoscale (proteins, DNA, viruses) and
macroscale (bacteria, chromosomes, human hair) typically exhibit fundamentally
different interactions and properties than at larger or smaller length scales.
At the mesoscale, materials are held together not only by the chemical bonds
found in small molecules, but by additional associative and dissociative forces
or interactions. Much of biology operates at the mesoscale with these additional
bonding interactions. Examples include protein folding, virus encapsulation,
mollusk shell formation, and transport between cellular membranes. In this
research, chemical reactions are used to prepare polymer brushes or worm-like
molecules in which the main polymer chain is grafted with additional polymer
chains of varying density. These side polymer chains contain different
associating groups, including DNA strands and small molecules that can bind
metals. Computer modeling and a variety of other measurement techniques are then
used to predict, guide and characterize assemblies of polymer brushes at the
mesoscale. Benefits to the broader society include the potential for accelerated
the development of inorganic/organic and bioinspired materials based on
controlled and predictable mesoscale structures. Human resource and training
benefits arise through the training of a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as through the support of the Chemistry Wizards
program. The Chemistry Wizards program works with high school students in under-
represented populations and uses a competition-based approaches to increase
interest in STEM-based careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by computer
modeling, this research is developing unique building blocks for mesoscopic
assembly. Polymer bottlebrushes functionalized by different associating groups,
including DNA strands and ligands for metal-ligand complexation with different
densities and distributions of associating groups, are systematically prepared
using a combination of established and modified synthetic approaches. Self-
assemblies of bottlebrush polymers are characterized and studied using
transmission electron microscopy and scattering approaches, as well as by Monte
Carlo and coarse-grained Molecular Dynamics simulations. The effect of
bottlebrush architecture (rigidity, length of grafts, distribution, and density
of functional groups), association strength, and nature of functional group
interaction (self-interaction and complementary assembly) on the dynamics and
outcomes of self-assembly in solution are also systematically investigated. This
work addresses many challenges pertaining to polymeric materials which assemble
at the mesoscale, including lack of theoretical framework, gaps in understanding
collective interactions and motions from which structures emerge, challenges in
modeling and measuring metastable states, and difficulty in controlling these
states experimentally. Results associated with this award could be valuable in
the development of novel polymeric structures for biology, medicine, and
materials chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.