* 2004913
* GOALI: Frictional Ignition of Metals in High-Pressure Oxygen Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Zachary Cordero, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 498,307.00

Non-Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;The oxidizer-rich staged combustion (ORSC) and
full-flow staged combustion (FFSC) rocket engines currently under development
offer dramatic improvements in fuel efficiency and thrust over the traditional
gas generator engine cycle. ORSC and FFSC power cycles use a preburner to
produce an oxidizer-rich stream of combustion gases that drives the turbine,
then burns with the remaining fuel in the main combustion chamber. However,
operating the preburner of a rocket engine under oxidizer-rich conditions
presents significant materials engineering challenges; most materials are
susceptible to ignition and combustion under a high-pressure oxygen-rich
environment. One of the ignition mechanisms of greatest concern to rocket
engines is frictional ignition due to rubbing of high-speed rotating components
in high-pressure oxygen-rich environment. Two notable recent launch failures,
Sea Launch’s NSS-8 and Orbital’s Orb-3, are believed to have arisen from
frictional ignition of metals. This work focuses on determining the physical
mechanisms that drive frictional ignition of engineering alloys in high-pressure
oxygen. Experiments on high-speed sliding wear suggest that frictional ignition
results from the onset of severe oxidational wear, corresponding to a breakdown
of a lubricating oxide tribolayer at the rubbing interface. The underlying
causes of this wear transition are poorly understood and likely vary according
to the specific material system. This proposal will address this gap in
understanding, revealing, for the first time, the effects of test conditions and
alloy chemistry on the properties, structure, and stability of oxide tribolayers
that form on several important aerospace engineering alloys. These insights will
connect micro-scale structural evolution processes with macro-scale materials
phenomena, such as frictional ignition, with important scientific implications
for the fields of tribology, mechanochemistry, and physical metallurgy. This
understanding could be used by materials scientists to design new alloys
resistant to catastrophic frictional ignition, and by rocket engine designers to
implement design and manufacturing modifications that reduce the risk of engine
failure due to unintended ignition of metal engine components. These
developments will enable robust reusable launch vehicles that will serve as the
foundation for key emerging space technologies, such as satellite mega-
constellations for high-speed space-based internet, reliable interplanetary crew
and commerce transport, and large in-space RF telescopes for low-frequency radio
astronomy, all of which promise to transform commerce and our understanding of
the universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Predicting the
conditions under which oxide tribolayers break down during high-speed sliding
wear remains a significant challenge because the underlying mechanisms that
control the growth, properties, and thermomechanical stability of tribolayers
are poorly understood. This is partly because oxide tribolayers appear to grow
via an iterative transient oxidation process, which complicates direct
comparison with oxide scales formed during conventional static oxidation. Using
a combination of wear experiments, contact mechanics theory, and metallurgical
thermochemistry, this proposed research will test the hypothesized relationship
between the onset of severe oxidational wear and frictional ignition, as well as
reveal the mechanisms of oxide breakdown during high-speed sliding. The project
will begin with high-speed wear testing experiments to characterize the
friction, wear, and ignition behaviors of several important model materials
under high-pressure oxygen environments. Next, the wear surface and mechanical
properties of recovered samples will be characterized ex situ to gain insight
into the micro-scale mechanisms that drive oxide breakdown. Finally, the
experimental results will be combined with physics-based models of frictional
heating, oxide growth, and contact mechanics in order to determine the
relationship between oxide breakdown and frictional ignition. The results of
this work will reveal an important relationship between tribolayer breakdown and
frictional ignition in mission-critical aerospace alloys, as well as the
physical mechanisms that drive oxide tribolayer growth and degradation at the
onset of severe oxidational wear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.