* 2004812
* RUI:Unraveling the Influence of Free Carriers, Phonons and Band Electrons from the Dielectric Function of van der Waals Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Frank Peiris, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 179,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to investigate a
new class of materials called 2D van der Walls solids which have interesting
properties that can be exploited for making novel electronic and optical
devices. A technique known as spectroscopic ellipsometry with a uniquely wide
light energy range is used to study the characteristics of a variety of the 2D
van der Walls solids. Knowledge gained from this study could advance the
development of various devices, such as light emitting diodes, transistors,
photovoltaic devices, and lasers. The research work is performed by
undergraduate students in a liberal-arts setting, who receive training in
materials characterization, preparing them for graduate studies and careers in
science and technology. To enhance educational goals, several experimental
activities are incorporated into current courses in the curriculum.
Additionally, to foster a wider interest in the sciences, several outreach
activities for high school students are conducted.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;By combining spectroscopic
ellipsometry and reflectivity measurements to cover a wide-spectral range (i.e.
1 meV to 6 eV), this project explores the dielectric function and the complex
conductivity of 2D van der Walls materials, particularly transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDCs). Having access to a high spectral range enables the
study of the contributions of free carriers, phonons and band electrons (and
excitons) of TMDCs. Specifically, the following issues are addressed: (i) the
excitonic effects of band transitions; (ii) evolution of transitions with the
number of layers; (iii) the mechanism that governs the carrier relaxation time;
(iv) the influence of dopants on the transport properties; (v) the significance
of electron-phonon coupling on TMDCs; and (vi) quantifying the circular
dichroism in TMDCs and explaining their differences. The research work is
performed by undergraduate students in a liberal-arts setting. Several
experimental activities are injected into current courses such as Condensed
Matter Physics, Optics and Advanced Lab. The undergraduate students receive
training in materials characterization, optics, and cryogenics, preparing them
for graduate studies or careers in STEM-based fields. Additionally, several
outreach activities for high school students are conducted in order to foster a
wider interest in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.