* 2004259
* Collaborative Research:  Deployment of Seafloor Optical Fiber Strainmeters for the Detection of Slow Slip Events
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 857,520.00

Convective forces deep below Earthâ€™s surface cause tectonic plates (continents
and seafloor) to slowly move at many centimeters (several inches) each year. In
places, the plate boundaries must slide past one another to accommodate this
motion. Sometimes this occurs smoothly, but sometimes the plate edges are stuck
together by friction and don't slide at all until enough stress builds to the
point where the plates slip past each other suddenly in an earthquake. Over the
past two decades, a different form of tectonic boundary slip has been studied in
which built up stress is relaxed episodically, as in an earthquake, but at a
much slower rate taking days, weeks, months, or even years to gradually slip.
These events are called "slow slip events" or "slow earthquakes." Because the
motions are gradual they do not generate seismic shaking (as normal earthquakes
do), making them far less dangerous. However, slow slip events occurring near
areas that are frictionally stuck may trigger large earthquakes, a phenomenon
that requires further study. This study focuses on searching for slow slip
events in the offshore, shallow part of the Cascadia subduction zone, which lies
offshore the western United States stretching from northern California to north
of the Canadian border. Here an oceanic tectonic plate is colliding with North
America, producing very large destructive earthquakes and tsunamis every few
hundred years. The lack of seismic shaking associated with slow slip events
makes these events difficult to detect, especially offshore. On land they are
evident in precise, continuous GPS records which show plate motions of several
centimeters that start and stop over a few weeks. Such motions are much more
difficult to observe on the seafloor because GPS signals do not penetrate sea
water. Consequently alternative methods must be devised to detect offshore slow
slip events. This research project will record very precisely the lengths of
optical fibers stretched across the seafloor near the Oregon coast. If a slow
slip event occurs in the region near the optical fibers, the associated optical
length change will be recorded by a battery powered laser system at the end of
each optical fiber. Studying such events offshore will help to build models of
their influence on the timing and location of great earthquakes, and may lead to
future advances in earthquake forecasting. The project supports the training of
a student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread deployments of GPS sensors in the
past decade have helped identify Slow Slip Events (SSEs), especially near
subduction zone faults in Cascadia, Costa Rica, Japan, and New Zealand.
Understanding SSEs presents an opportunity to gain new insights into the
mechanism governing locking and unlocking of subduction zone and other faults,
and may be important in assessing the hazard levels presented from potential
great earthquakes and tsunami. In particular, SSEs occurring at the downdip
limit of the strongly locked zone may pose a risk of triggering large earthquake
ruptures. It is therefore critical to search for SSEs occurring at the base of
the locked zone, which in Cascadia (as in most subduction zones) lies offshore.
In this study, two orthogonal optical fiber strainmeters will be installed on
the seafloor above the Cascadia subduction zone to detect offshore SSEs. A
recent study of the cumulative effect of SSEs in Cascadia using onshore GPS data
indicates possible offshore slow slip at the base of the locked zone which is
hypothesized to occur simultaneously with onshore SSEs. However, the detection
of this slip using onshore GPS is very weak. Confirming the presence or absence
of offshore slow slip in Cascadia is important for understanding the potential
role of SSEs in influencing the timing and location of the next great
earthquake. While GPS networks have sufficient sensitivity to map the location
of SSEs onshore, they do not cover that portion of the crust under the oceans,
nor are they able to distinguish the timing of sub-events because of the need
for averaging over daily periods. In contrast, optical fiber strainmeters can be
deployed offshore and have their best signal to noise ratio at shorter periods,
complementing onshore GPS both in location and frequency band. Because SSEs
evolve in complex patterns indicative of propagating stress fronts, it is
important to resolve, both in scale and time, the deformation signals in order
to understand more fully the evolution of the rupture plane. In conjunction with
GPS, the availability of highly sensitive and stable strainmeters offshore will
enable such characterizations. The measurements in this study will be timed with
an expected onshore SSE to capture the hypothesized offshore slip, testing this
model and others that address the extent of an offshore locked zone. In addition
to the detection of SSEs, a number of other studies will become feasible
following the deployment of this offshore strainmeter, including investigation
of strain from traveling seismic waves and tidal observations for inferring
local Earth structure. In addition, the work will advance the technology of
optical fiber sensors and likely find applications in other
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.