* 2004015
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documenting contact and shift in a demonstrative system
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lenore Grenoble, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2024
* USD 38,118.00

Urbanization, globalization, and environmental variability are working together
to transform the Arctic region's geophysical environment, economies, and
societies. Language use, particularly that by Indigenous peoples, is also
profoundly affected; urbanization, for instance, brings with it considerable
social and cultural change, as well as assimilation to a majority language.
Environmental variability and urbanization are altering both the geophysical
environment itself and the way people engage with it, as people increasingly
live in urban settings and traditional ways of life are deeply altered. Language
is following suit; this is particularly clear in the language used to describe
the environment which is linked to subsistence activities within the traditional
landscape. All languages have words for referring to aspects of the context
surrounding the speech event, which may include the spatial context (e.g.
here/there, this/that), the temporal context (e.g. now), speech participants
(e.g. I, you, we), or other aspects. There is significant linguistic variation
in which contextual aspects are encoded. Demonstratives are "pointers," or
deictic words that serve to locate or point out a specific referent within the
context. English makes a two-way distinction, contrasting "here/there" or
"this/that." Other languages distinguish more deictic categories. Three-way
distinctions (here/there/over there) are not uncommon, while others have
considerably more. Some of the larger systems use demonstratives in ways that
invoke aspects of the geophysical context for locating referents. However, in
line with the broader geophysical changes in the real world, the linguistic
systems are currently undergoing significant change and reduction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will document and analyze ongoing change in
one such demonstrative system, documenting use and variation across different
groups of speakers, in order to understand its trajectory of change and unpack
the factors influencing the system. Contact with the majority, national language
plays an important role, as does contact with globally dominant languages. As
demonstratives are anchored to the environment, this research further speaks to
the relationship between language and environment, especially within the context
of rapid environmental change and evolving human-environment interactions as
seen across the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.