* 2004093
* Forbidden Light: Origins and Implications of Optical Frequency Magnetism in Hybrid Organic/Inorganic Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Jon Schuller, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 389,685.00

Light consists of oscillating electric and magnetic fields. However, at atomic
length scales, scientists uniformly assume that materials react only to the
electric field component of light. Light-matter interactions driven by the
magnetic field component of light—magnetic dipole processes—are assumed to be
either extremely weak or strictly forbidden. Recently, the principal
investigator’s research team discovered unexpected, bright, light emission,
caused by interaction with magnetic dipoles, from a class of atomically thin
“two-dimensional” layered organic/inorganic perovskite materials These results
challenge the common notion that optical properties of materials are governed by
electric fields alone. The principal objective of this project is to determine
the origins and implications of this optical frequency magnetism in thus class
of materials. In doing so, the research team is clarifying whether optical
frequency magnetism is more common than previously thought, whether it exists in
other materials systems, and whether it manifests in other unusual ways. These
studies of the fundamental nature of light-matter interactions are complemented
by new outreach efforts designed to facilitate effective science communication
to the general public. Specifically, the principal investigator is developing
text editors that help scientists “translate” their research into language
targeted at various general audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At optical
frequencies and atomic length scales quantum-mechanical light-matter
interactions are inherently non-magnetic. That is, absorption and luminescence
processes are treated in the electric dipole (ED) approximation and assumed to
occur via quantum-mechanical matrix elements that are driven purely by the
electric field component of light. Higher order magnetic dipole (MD) processes
are assumed to be either negligibly weak, as in atoms and molecules, or strictly
forbidden, as in typical semiconductors. Recently, the principal investigator’s
research team discovered very bright, ostensibly symmetry-forbidden MD
photoluminescence in a variety of two-dimensional hybrid organic/inorganic
perovskites (2D HOIPs). This demonstration of optical frequency magnetism
challenges the common notion that optics—especially in semiconductors—is
governed by electric fields and electric dipoles. The principal objective of
this proposal is to determine the origins and implications of optical frequency
magnetism in HOIPs. The project is dedicated to answering a question of
fundamental scientific importance: Why do 2D HOIPs exhibit ostensibly
“forbidden” MD light emission and why is this emission so bright? Research
efforts follow three themes: 1) Ascertaining the prevalence of MD optical
processes in HOIPs, and showing how MD processes can be modified via chemical
synthesis. 2) Demonstrating how the magnitude, energy, and dynamics of MD
optical processes are influenced by external stimuli such as temperature,
strain, and electric fields. 3) Determining whether HOIPs exhibit MD absorption
or permeability. These research activities will clarify the role of symmetry
breaking effects in HOIPs, resolve open questions regarding commonly seen
sideband absorption and emission features that impact the efficiency and color
purity of optoelectronic devices, and point the way to new classes of bulk,
atomic-scale metamaterial phenomena heretofore thought impossible. More
generally, the existence of optical frequency magnetism in 2D HOIPs challenges
the prevailing ED-centric approach used to describe light-matter interactions.
Elucidating the origins of this effect will clarify whether optical frequency
magnetism is more prevalent than previously, whether it exists in other material
systems, and how to exploit it to achieve new types of optical
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.