* 2004005
* RUI: In situ Characterization of Competitively Balanced Supramolecular and Biomolecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Douglas Vander Griend, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 210,400.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Douglas Vander Griend at Calvin
University is working with undergraduate students, including some that are
incarcerated, to study how molecules work together and assemble themselves.
Whether in the human body or in new technology, molecules combine to make
ensembles, but these complex structures also make the materials hard to
characterize. To conquer the difficult task of figuring out how an entire
ensemble of molecules behaves, Professor Douglas Vander Griend and his group use
computers with advanced mathematics to model all the molecular interactions
simultaneously. The research project provides undergraduate students with an
opportunity to conduct hands-on chemical research. Professor Vander Griend is
also making his analysis tools available via the web at Sivvu.org to assist
other labs in studying similar problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Vander
Griend is researching how supramolecular systems with multiple competitive
arrangements can be effectively characterized in situ so that they can be
further tailored for specific mechanical, chemical and biological tasks. The key
is using advanced mathematical modeling to achieve understanding in the
characterization of complicated solution mixtures. The three chosen systems
(β-hairpin peptide folding, Ni(II) discrete coordination networks, and
transition metal acetate coordination clusters) exemplify increasingly
complicated aspects of solution-phase chemistry in which multiple arrangements
of molecules exist in equilibrium with each other. The detailed insight into the
thermodynamics of such ‘messy’ systems bolsters scientists’ ability to organize,
characterize, and optimize ensembles of molecules. Besides the scientific merit
of these pursuits, this research helps prepare undergraduates, including prison
inmates in the State of Michigan, for careers in scientific research. The
research team also enables expert modeling and archiving of spectrophotometric
titration data from labs around the world through websites, consultations, short
courses, and peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.