* 2004704
* Collaborative Research: Field Control of Spin Transport in Antiferromagnet Perovskite Oxide Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Yayoi Takamura, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 265,168.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the spin of
electrons in a special type of materials (artificially layered oxides) where the
direction of the antiferromagnetic spins can be controlled. The knowledge gained
from this project could help develop novel electronic devices for information
processing which, unlike traditional electronic devices, are not limited by heat
generated by electron flow. These new devices would have faster operation,
scalability to nanoscale regimes, and robust stability due to the insensitivity
to external applied electric or magnetic fields. The research project develops
new measurement techniques and devices, and trains young scientists and
engineers in a field that combines Physics, Materials Science and Engineering,
and Electrical Engineering. Outreach activities include supporting the
University of Denver Society for Physics Students, their outreach programs at
local museums and amusement parks, and the UC Davis Mathematics, Engineering,
Science Achievement Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of spin transport in a nearly ideal antiferromagnetic model system
consisting of antiferromagnetic/ferromagnetic interfaces in perovskite oxide
heterostructures. This system provides the unique ability to control the
antiferromagnetic order with low values of applied magnetic field through spin-
flop coupling (perpendicular alignment) with an adjacent ferromagnetic layer. In
addition, as temperature increases, the antiferromagnetic order evolves to show
parallel alignment with the ferromagnetic layer in nanowire structures. Our
focus is to measure non-local spin transport which provides an unambiguous probe
of spin flow. Additional education activities include the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the-art synthesis, nano-
lithography, and characterization tools, including synchrotron radiation-based
characterization techniques at U.S. national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.