* 2004693
* Elements: Cyber-infrastructure for Interactive Computation and Display of Materials Datasets
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Anton Van der Ven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This project will accelerate the progress of scientific research by creating a
software infrastructure named TINC (The Toolkit for Interactive Computation).
TINC will allow scientists to interactively work with very complex information
generated by high performance computing (HPC) clusters. It will provide software
tools to assist scientists by facilitating virtual experimentation through
interactive visualization, speeding up time to discovery. By tying together the
scientists' workflow of computation, scientific data analysis in scripting
languages, and visualization, TINC will enable new ways of sharing and
disseminating results by allowing researchers to share not only their results,
but also their interactive workflow as part of their publications. This research
will begin its focus on an important and essential need in the materials science
community, speeding up time to discovery of new materials through rapid
prototyping using computation. The basic science to be generated through the
application of the TINC infrastructure is the study of the electrochemical
properties of electrode materials for Sodium ion batteries that will help
overcome materials challenges that are preventing the commercialization of this
promising technology for large-scale grid storage applications. This important
proof of concept will facilitate delving deep into the science while focusing on
the generalization of the tool to other disciplines as well. The ultimate goal
of TINC is to create a new paradigm for high performance computing, facilitating
ease of use by tying together interactive visualization with computation. This
paradigm shift may facilitate a connection not only to a wider scientific
community but also to an informed general public as well through TINC's focus on
reproducibility and provenance tracing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TINC is a
computational toolkit that expedites data discovery by improving the interaction
workflow in complex data analysis. This improvement is achieved by tightly
integrating interactivity, computation and visualization with complex scientific
data. By managing the connection between data parameters and on the fly
computation, TINC simultaneously tackles the issues of reproducibility and
interactive control in the exploration of data with large parameter spaces. With
the integration of scripting languages and data notebooks, scientists can study
their data with the ease of interactive computation and display. Through a
robust caching mechanism it will enable new ways of sharing and disseminating
results by allowing researchers to share not only their results, but also their
interactive workflow as part of their publications. TINC will tightly integrate
interactivity, computation and visualization in the research loop, allowing
scientists to more quickly and more deeply understand, compare and validate
their data. Thus, TINC will facilitate the merging of complex scientific
computational models with high performance interactive visualization and will
enable real-time exploration of empirical and theoretical models and large
experimental datasets. Provided as a set of python and C++ libraries, TINC will
handle parameter space mapping to data, interactive triggering of computation on
this parameter space and caching to enable scalability, performance, full
reproducibility and data provenance tracking. TINC will be applied to a
statistical mechanics study of ionic transport mechanisms and ionic insertion
processes in layered intercalation compounds that are candidate electrode
materials for Sodium ion batteries. This is of critical importance to the area
of materials simulation that focuses on the study of transport mechanisms in
alloy systems, where visualizing specific mechanisms experimentally is
difficult. TINC will allow computational researchers to propose and verify
transport mechanisms in a way not previously possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Materials Research within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical
and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.