* 2004475
* Bioinspired, Single-molecule Based Shear Switchable Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Xuanhong Cheng, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 403,555.00

Nontechnical Summary: Shear flow is widely present in physiological environments
and contributes significantly to various normal and pathological processes,
especially in the circulatory system. Consequently, biomaterials with structure
and function tunable by shear represent powerful tools to detect and rectify
pathological processes induced by abnormal flows in the body. For the past few
decades, shear-responsive hydrogels and molecular assemblies have been widely
explored. However, single-biomolecule based shear responders remains a poorly-
tapped subject, despite such materials could better mimic natural functions in
circulation, delivering more accurate spatial and temporal responses with
function reversibility. This project will design and characterize novel Single-
MOlecule based materials with switchable structures and functions REsponsive to
Shear flows (SMORES). Owing to the modular design, the material concept can be
generalized to other constructs capable of responding to abnormal flows in the
circulatory system towards novel diagnostics and therapeutics for cardiovascular
diseases in the long term. This project will provide fundamental insights into
biomechanics of polymer devices under the influence of ligands and the flow
environment, perspectives that have not been studied in depth before. Rational
design of biomaterials containing both bio- and nonbio- functionalities to
achieve predictable flow responses will advance the fields of materials science,
biomechanics, bio-conjugation, molecular engineering and bio-transport.
Knowledge from this work will enable new diagnostics and theranostics for
hemostatic applications, advancing the national health. The PIs will actively
recruit underrepresented students to their research and disseminated discoveries
from the research broadly to the general public through various K12 outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: The design is inspired by a
coagulation molecule in circulation, the von Willebrand Factor (vWF), which
executes its function of crosslinking platelets to damaged blood vessel wall at
shear rates &gt; 5,000 per sec. The function is switched on by conformational
changes under high shear and is enabled by an extremely complicated molecular
structure: vWF is comprised of tens to hundreds of monomer units, each of which
contains more than ten domains. To demonstrate that an artificial material of
modular design could achieve a similar function to vWF, i.e. binding cells at
high shear, we propose the construction SMORES to inhibit or promote the cell
binding activity of the vWFâ€™s platelet binding domain under shear control. Shear
dependent cell binding to the proposed material will be characterized and
correlated with molecular conformations studied by single-molecular force
spectroscopy, microfluidic imaging experiments and computer modeling. Besides
demonstrating the material design concept, the proposed work will emphasize
fundamental studies of single-molecule biomechanical behaviors in different
biochemical environment, especially the presence and absence of
ligands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.