* 2004043
* Novel Implementations, Analytical Targets, and Mechanistic Studies of Negative Ion Electron Capture Dissociation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Kristina Hakansson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2023
* USD 549,935.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Kristina Hakansson and her group at the University of
Michigan are working to improve our ability to characterize the chemical
structure of molecules, including especially biomolecules such as proteins. Such
structural analysis is essential to help us understand the function (and
dysfunction) of molecules in complex samples, e.g., biofluids, cells, and
tissues. The Hakansson approach employs the attachment of electrons to gaseous
anions (negatively charged molecules), inducing diagnostic fragmentation of the
target molecule in a process termed negative ion electron capture dissociation
(niECD). Adding electrons (which bear a negative charge) to anions (which also
are negatively charged) is challenging, due to charge repulsion. Having
developed this method, Dr. Hakansson is now working to improve our understanding
and broaden the applicability and availability of niECD. The research is
providing new approaches to biomolecular structural characterization with
important implications for drug discovery and enhanced understanding of the
molecular basis of living organisms. Students involved gain exposure to highly
interdisciplinary research. Dr. Hakansson also works to bring appreciation for
these concepts and for broader STEM opportunities to middle school students in
an effort to boost interest in the scientific method at a young age.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hakansson group is exploring novel niECD instrument
configurations, including extension to matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization and nano-electrospray ionization. They are working to
implement niECD in a high pressure cell, enabling use with mass analyzers other
than Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR). In pursuit of improved
insight into the fundamental chemistry underlying niECD, they are pursuing two
approaches (drift tube ion mobility and cross-sectional areas by FT-ICR, or
CRAFTI (cross-sectional areas by FT-ICR) to testing Dr. Hakanssonâ€™s recent
findings that compact, presumably salt-bridged structures are required for
effective niECD of peptides. These efforts are supported by molecular modeling
and density functional theory calculations, with a special focus on novel
analyte classes such as carbohydrates and lipids, which were recently discovered
by the Hakansson group to undergo niECD despite not fitting the previously
proposed zwitterion mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.