* 2004691
* Spectroscopic Properties of Two-Dimensional Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Abhay Pasupathy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Superconductors are special states of solid matter.
Understanding what makes solids superconducting is a grand goal of physics
research, useful in the emerging fields of quantum communication and
computation. Recently, a number of new superconductors have been discovered in
layered van der Waals materials that are crystalline in nature. But the
mechanisms of superconductivity and the consequences of the superconducting
state to the observed properties are still unknown. In this project, scanning
tunneling microscopy will be used to understand the quantum mechanical
properties of these new classes of materials at the atomic scale. Research
performed in this project will be used to develop new modules for high school
and undergraduate education. The project will also provide science and technical
education opportunities for students at levels from high school
upwards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Superconductivity in two
dimensions remains an intellectual frontier in condensed matter physics with
fundamental open problems in understanding pairing mechanisms and fluctuations
and their consequences for the observed spectroscopic and transport properties.
Recently, it has become possible to create crystalline two-dimensional
superconductors that are only a few unit cells thick. These include mechanically
exfoliated bulk superconductors such as niobium diselenide as well as new
emergent superconductors such as twisted bilayer graphene. This project will use
scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy to gain insight into the local
density of states in these new classes of superconductors. Interference
experiments will be used to gain insight into the symmetry and structure of
superconducting gaps. Measurements in applied magnetic fields will also be used
to gain insight into vortex motion and fluctuations in these materials which can
often be in the clean limit where the mean free path is much larger than the
size of vortices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.