* 2004286
* Quantum Interference Control of Photoexcited Carriers for K-Space Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Steven Cundiff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 494,475.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Microscopy is a ubiquitous and familiar
tool in science and technology. It provides information by determining the
spatial location of objects within a sample being studied. For optical
microscopy, light must be spatially localized, i.e., focused, to enable the
determination of spatial locations. This project will explore an alternate form
of optical microscopy in solids where the momentum of an object, here electrons,
will be determined, rather than their positions. To resolve the momentum of the
electrons, the light must be focused in momentum, which is achieved by
interference between absorption of a single photon and absorption of multiple
photons. The information gained by this method will give insight into the
momentum structure, also known as the band structure, of solids, which determine
their fundamental properties such as whether they are insulators, conductors or
semiconductors. It will also characterize changes in momentum, which are
relevant for operating properties of devices made from the solids. The broader
impacts of this project include unique training for graduate and undergraduate
students in sophisticated optical methods and providing new tools for the
semiconductor industry to characterize and perfect materials and devices used
for electronics and optoelectronic products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes an experimental project to
address the lack of momentum-space sensitivity in optical methods by using
quantum interference between absorption pathways involving different numbers of
photons to achieve carrier distributions that are both asymmetric and localized
in k-space. The interference between two-photon and three-photon absorption
processes provides localization in the transverse momentum, opening the door to
selectively probing regions of k-space, or performing â€œmicroscopy" in momentum-
space. This ability would ultimately allow optical methods to be sensitive to
band structure and carrier distributions within the bands. Beyond providing
information about the band structure, the ability to selectively excite regions
of k-space will provide unique information about how non-equilibrium electronic
excitations thermalize and return to equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.