* 2004183
* Infrared Chiral Plasmons for Vibrational Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Shumaker-Parry, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Jennifer Shumaker-Parry and her group at the University
of Utah are working to improve capabilities for measuring the "handedness"
(chirality) of molecules. Chirality arises when a molecule and its mirror image
are not superimposable. Chirality is critically important in nature and medicine
- for example, it is common for one molecular form of a drug to be effective
while its mirror image is ineffective or even toxic. The Shumaker-Parry group is
striving to enhance the utility of a chirality-sensitive method known as
Vibrational Circular Dichroism (VCD) by utilizing the ability of certain metal
nanostructures to selectively enhance the absorption of polarized infrared light
by chiral molecules. The research incorporates elements of materials science,
physics, surface chemistry, and engineering, thereby providing excellent
interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
who work together on nanofabrication, materials characterization, optical
studies, simulations, and calculations. Professor Shumaker-Parry and her
students organize and participate in science education and outreach programs on
campus and in the community to encourage students to participate in science.
These hands-on nanoscience activities provide excellent opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students to mentor participants and learn to
communicate their research to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Shumaker-Parry and her group are studying plasmonic nanostructures with tunable
infrared (IR) plasmons and orientation-dependent chiroptical activity for
plasmon-enhanced VCD spectroscopy. VCD combines IR spectroscopy and circular
dichroism (CD) to provide information about chemical groups and local
environment enabling chiral-based structural analysis of small molecules,
biological molecules, and higher order assemblies. Nanostructures with both
tunable IR plasmons and chiroptical behavior form the foundation of systematic
studies of the impact of local electric and magnetic fields in VCD spectroscopy
of chiral molecules. By manipulating chiroptical behavior of plasmonic
nanostructures using control of structure and orientation, symmetric and
asymmetric localized electric and magnetic fields are produced. The influence of
these sculpted localized fields on chiral molecules will be probed through the
IR and VCD spectra as the chiroptical behavior is turned on and off, as well as
more finely manipulated. The studies aim to provide an understanding of how
nanostructures with IR plasmonic and chiroptical activity impact molecular
vibrational spectra of chiral molecules in VCD spectroscopy. The findings from
these investigations will establish a foundation for plasmon-enhanced VCD for
analysis of chiral molecules. Enhanced detection of chiral molecules would lower
detection limits for trace impurities and could lead to highly sensitive real-
time monitoring of products in asymmetric catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.