* 2004050
* Hydrophobic and Electrostatic Driving Forces for Ion Adsorption to Polymers and Extended Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Paul Cremer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Paul S. Cremer and his students at the Pennsylvania
State University to explore the ways that salts influence oily polymer molecules
dissolved in water. Oil and water do not readily mix. In salad dressing, for
example, an oily layer is typically found floating on top of a water-based
layer. Moreover, dissolved salts reside primarily within the water phase rather
than in the oil phase. Specifically, this study helps to determine when
negatively or positively charged ions interact with polymer molecules or
separate from them. The attraction of the polymer for salts in water dictates
whether the polymers can remain dissolved in solution or deposit as a solid from
the solution. The solubility of polymers in salt water is important in a
surprisingly wide variety of areas ranging from the biological and food sciences
to atmospheric chemistry, the self-assembly of novel materials, and even the
cleaning of laundry. This research not sheds light on problems of direct
relevance to society, but also trains students in interdisciplinary fields
involving chemistry, biology, materials science, and engineering. Professor
Cremer and his group are working with high school chemistry teachers to create
inexpensive and easily accessible experiments for 10th and 11th graders. The
instructors will develop teaching modules on principles of polymer solubility
and the central role of salt ions in everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Cremer group is exploring how weakly hydrated anions, strongly hydrated cations,
as well as hydronium and hydroxide influence the behavior of thermoresponsive
polymers in aqueous solutions. Their experimental approach involves correlating
ion binding and hydrophobic collapse behavior with spectroscopic signatures of
the hydration shell. This information can be obtained by using techniques like
Raman multivariate curve resolution spectroscopy and vibrational sum frequency
spectroscopy. These thermodynamic and spectroscopic experiments are performed in
collaboration with theoreticians performing molecular dynamic simulations.
Measurements are made in bulk solution and with surfactant monolayers at the
air/water interface. For example, results are being explored as a function of
the size of the macromolecules as well as their net charges and the presence of
specific negatively and positively charged functional groups. Special attention
is focused on whether ions in solution can interact with polymer molecules via
contact ion pairing or through solvent shared ion pairing. Moreover, the context
in which charged moieties are presented is explored. These studies provide
information as to how the number density of charged moieties as well as the
configuration of surrounding hydrophobic sites influence ion-polymer
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.