* 2004840
* Elements: FastTract: Web-Based Exploratory Visualization of Gigapixel Astronomical Images
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Peter Williams, American Astronomical Society
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 05/31/2023
* USD 431,261.00

Like scientists in virtually every field, astronomers are struggling under
a&lt;br/&gt;"data deluge". While the ever-larger images obtained by the
newest&lt;br/&gt;observatories lead to cutting-edge science, they also overwhelm
traditional&lt;br/&gt;tools designed to work with files hundreds or thousands of
times smaller&lt;br/&gt;than the state-of-the-art. In particular, astronomers
are rapidly losing the&lt;br/&gt;ability to simply look at the images of the sky
that are coming out of their&lt;br/&gt;telescopes. The FastTract Project will
solve this problem by marrying existing&lt;br/&gt;Web-based visualization
technologies in the AAS WorldWide Telescope software&lt;br/&gt;system with new
features and tools needed to efficiently work with the
large&lt;br/&gt;astronomical images of the 2020's, enabling US astronomers to
fully exploit&lt;br/&gt;their world-class facilities, in particular the ones
that open new Windows on&lt;br/&gt;the Universe. The project team will
synthesize the insight gained in this&lt;br/&gt;undertaking to establish the
Little Big Data University (LBDU), a learning&lt;br/&gt;resource for scientists
across disciplines who are struggling to stay afloat&lt;br/&gt;in the "data
deluge". LBDU will follow the Khan Academy model and extensively&lt;br/&gt;use
interactive environments to help researchers and others learn
strategies&lt;br/&gt;for Harnessing the Data Revolution. These efforts will
especially benefit&lt;br/&gt;people who do not have access to top-tier
computational resources, such as&lt;br/&gt;those at small institutions and
interested non-specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FastTract Project will
create a sustainable cyberinfrastructure (CI)&lt;br/&gt;system and associated
community of practice that enable exploratory scientific&lt;br/&gt;visualization
of large (gigapixel+) astronomical images over the Web. The CI&lt;br/&gt;will
build on the NSF-funded AAS WorldWide Telescope (WWT) software
system.&lt;br/&gt;The research team will extend WWT's image tiling architecture
to work with&lt;br/&gt;FITS data files, develop the tooling needed for easy
creation of such tiles,&lt;br/&gt;and produce workflows and tutorials allowing
the broad astronomical community&lt;br/&gt;to take ownership of the
infrastructure. The team will work with three&lt;br/&gt;NSF-funded partners on
specific science applications. Annual workshops will&lt;br/&gt;nucleate a core
group of project user-contributors and ensure that development&lt;br/&gt;effort
meets the needs of the broader community. The project will adopt
best&lt;br/&gt;practices in the open-source, open-development paradigm, laying
the groundwork&lt;br/&gt;for FastTract infrastructure to be leveraged by non-
astronomical communities&lt;br/&gt;facing similar data challenges. In parallel,
the team will distill its&lt;br/&gt;expertise to create the Little Big Data
University (LBDU), an online&lt;br/&gt;professional development resource aimed
at domain scientists who do not intend&lt;br/&gt;to become CI specialists. These
scientists will learn core strategies for&lt;br/&gt;coping with ever-larger data
sets through the empirically successful Khan&lt;br/&gt;Academy model. Telemetry
analysis and focus groups will guide curriculum&lt;br/&gt;design and assess
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.