* 2004150
* Bio(in)organic Chemistry of Reactive Sulfur and Selenium Species
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Michael Pluth, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 01/31/2024
* USD 432,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Michael Pluth from the University of Oregon to
investigate biologically-relevant reactive sulfur and selenium compounds. These
compounds play important roles in biological systems, but in many cases the
underlying chemistry and reactivity of these compounds that supports their
biological function remains unclear. Dr. Pluth investigates this complex
chemistry using relatively simple sulfur-containing model compounds synthesized
for this purpose in his laboratory. In addition, the proposed experiments probe
differences and similarities between the reactivity of the new sulfur compounds
and related, selenium compounds. The research is implemented by graduate and
undergraduate students who gain knowledge and skills of bioorganic and
bioinorganic chemistry useful in STEM careers in the 21st century. An
educational broader impact focuses on the design of hands-on laboratory-based
experiments for middle school students and on raising the awareness of the
students of the importance of negative experimental results in guiding the
design of future areas of scientific investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project investigates the fundamental chemistry associated with the
storage, signaling, and action of reactive sulfur and selenium species relevant
to biological system. Specifically, the work probes the chemical mechanisms that
differentiate persulfide signaling and hydrogen sulfide release and expands
studies on the bioavailability of uninvestigated sulfane sulfur sources.
Building on connections to related reactive selenium species, small molecules
that allow the modulation of biological hydrogen selenide pools are being
developed. Information gained from these investigations is expected to shed
light on the connections and interactions among reactive sulfur and selenium
species across a range of oxidation states in biological systems. In the longer
term, the tools developed in these studies have the potential to help elucidate
some of the key roles that the small molecule reduced chalcogenides, H2S
(hydrogen sulfide) and H2Se (hydrogen selenide)and their oxidized counterparts
play in biological communication and signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.