* 2004681
* RUI: Studying the photodynamics of FRET paired fluorescent molecules near gold nanogratings
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Steele, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 257,090.00

Currently patterns on metal surfaces can be fabricated with features in the
nanometer (one billionth of a meter) size range. These patterns can interact
strongly with particular colors of light. Fluorescent molecules are designed to
give off certain colors of light, and are used to mark specific molecules and
proteins in biological applications. A nanopatterned metal surface can be made
such that its optical properties match a particular fluorescent molecule and
enhance the light signal from the molecule. Fluorescent molecules can also
transfer light from one molecule to another, and this transfer is extremely
sensitive to the distance between molecules. Biologists have used this property
to measure distances at the sub-nanometer scale. The team will use the unique
optical properties of arrays of gold wires hundreds of nanometers wide to
enhance this transfer of energy. The result of this work will aid in the study
of this energy transfer in photosynthesis and in applications such as improving
light harvesting in organic solar cells. The team will be completely comprised
of a diverse set of undergraduate students at Trinity University. The students
will take a leading role in every aspect of the experiments, will present their
finding at national scientific meetings, and will be co-authors on any
publication resulting from this work. Equipment and experimental techniques from
this project will be integrated into upper division lab courses, broadening the
impact to additional students at Trinity University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project characterizes the photophysics of Forster resonance energy transfer
(FRET) paired donor and acceptor fluorescent molecules near a gold nanograting.
The optical properties of structured metal surfaces can be engineered to
influence the fluorescence of nearby quantum emitters. Applying this to FRET has
many potential advantages, including the ability to enhance the energy transfer
rate and increasing the Forster radius of FRET pairs. Metal enhanced
fluorescence results from two effects, an enhanced excitation rate of the
fluorophores and a decrease in their excited state lifetime of the fluorophore
arising from altering the local density of optical states (LDOS). The geometry
of gratings uniquely allows these two mechanisms to be measured separately,
providing greater insight to the photophysics of the system. Surface plasmon
modes on gratings follow a dispersion relationship, allowing for a wide
wavelength range of relatively narrow surface plasmon resonances covering both
fluorophoresâ€™ absorption and emission spectra using a single substrate. Time-
correlated single photon counting will be used to directly measure both the FRET
energy transfer rate and efficiency as a function of surface plasmon wavelength.
DNA will be utilized to attach the donor and acceptor molecules to the
nanogratings, allowing for precise spacing between donor and acceptor molecules
with respect to each other as well as the nanograting surface. The results of
these experiments will allow one to optimize the enhancement in FRET rate and
efficiency, as well as directly measure any increase in the Forster
radius.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.