* 2004830
* Self-Assembly of Levitating Water Droplets over Polymer Solutions for Fabrication of Microporous Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mohan Srinivasarao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The Condensed Matter Physics Program in the Division of Materials Research
supports Professor Mohan Srinivasarao at Georgia Institute of Technology to
create well-ordered porous polymeric structures via a simple and elegant way
without using slow or costly fabrication processes. When a polymer in a volatile
solvent is evaporated, it results in cooling of the solution. Water from the
atmosphere then condenses on the cold surface of the polymer solution. The self-
assembly and subsequent crystallization of water droplets produce an ordered
array of two- and three-dimensionally (2D and 3D) packed holes in the polymer
film. Water droplets condensing on a cold solid surface is seen in a variety of
situations in everyday life. Common examples of this phenomenon include dew
formation on leaves early in the morning, fogging of eyeglasses when one enters
a cold room, water condensing on the lids of coffee cups from Starbucks, and
breathing on glass as one polishes it. This research examines the phenomenon of
"breath figures" - the condensation on a polymer surface - and paves a new way
to construct macroscopic 3-dimensional porous structures from a variety of
polymers in a very short time. The fundamental knowledge gained from this study
may impact ultrasmall volume reactors, diffraction gratings, and to cell growth
scaffolds. In addition, this project provides training of undergraduate and
graduate students with emphasis on its integration with this research. The
project also develops outreach programs connected to Lawrence Hall of Science to
communicate the value of this research to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this support from Condensed Matter Physics Program in the Division of Materials,
Professor Srinivasaraoâ€™s research team elucidates the mechanism behind the
phenomenon of moisture condensing on a cold surface called breath figures.
Although it is known that macroporous polymers could be used as a template to
make ceramic and metallic structures with 2-dimensional pores, the mechanism by
which the structures form is far from understood. This research studies the
physics and physical chemistry of the phenomena involved in the self-assembly of
breath figures. The team investigates key processes such as nucleation and
growth, ordering dynamics, noncoalescence, surface tension driven instabilities,
packing of spheres, and heat/mass transport, and wetting. These measurements are
carried out by using high-speed video microscopy. Understanding the formation
kinetics/mechanism of breath figures and the optical/physical properties of the
resulting 3-dimensional structures may lead to a simple and effective way to
rapidly create ordered, macroporous structures from a variety of
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.