* 2004046
* D3SC: Nonlinear Optical Analysis of Proteins in Glasses
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Garth Simpson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Garth Simpson and his group at Purdue University are
devising sophisticated new optical methods and machine learning-based data
analysis tools capable of probing the changes of structure and flexibility that
occur when proteins transition from solutions to glassy matrices. Some proteins
retain function in amorphous glasses, even in the absence of liquid water. This
effect enables some living creatures to survive even below the freezing point of
water. Glassy matrices can also support long-term storage and delivery of
therapeutic proteins - another context in which it is important to understand
the properties of proteins in these matrices. The methods being developed by the
Simpson group are designed to improve our fundamental understanding of the
nature of protein/matrix interactions upon removal of water. Dr. Simpson is
communicating the principles behind his research to broad audiences through
short instructional videos and through industrial interactions in an NSF
Industry/University Collaborative Research Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Simpson group is working on three innovative approaches to probing the protein
and sugar structural and dynamic changes that accompany the lyophilization-
induced transition of sugars from co-solutes in aqueous environments to protein-
stabilizing matrices. First, they are developing new Fourier transform methods
for substantially improving the information content in fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching (FRAP) in order to enable rapid assessment of
mobility/relaxation within low volumes (~100 nL) of both aqueous solutions and
lyophilized materials. Second, they are devising means of atomic-level mapping
of structural evolution within proteins upon water removal using a one-of-a-kind
instrument designed and built in collaboration with Argonne National Laboratory.
The approach combines nonlinear optical imaging, synchrotron X-ray diffraction,
and unique data-handling algorithms based on non-negative matrix factorization.
Third, a novel physics-encoded artificial neural network (PENN) is being
designed, trained, and tested as a means of gaining improved understanding of
the physical origins of observed structure and mobility changes. The long-term
aim is to develop experimental/computation methods that can improve fundamental
understanding and provide capabilities for predicting the dynamic
transformations in proteins within glassy matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.