* 2004556
* Collaborative Research: Improving contact fatigue and wear properties using graded nanostructured surfaces in metallic materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Ming Dao, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 246,675.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Graded nanostructured metallic materials, with
grain-size gradients ranging from the nanometer-level in the surface regions to
the micrometer-level in the interior regions, are a novel class of materials
that have exhibited promise for exceptional mechanical properties. However, at
present, there is very limited understanding of the surface wear resistance and
contact fatigue behavior of these nano-graded metals and alloys. Unlike in the
case of materials with a uniform grain-size, where the surface region provides
only one type of surface wear protection, in the nano-graded materials, the
surface region has the potential to provide two types of protections by
increasing the resistance to both damage initiation and subsequent damage
progression into the interior of the material. Through modeling and experiments,
this collaborative project between Stony Brook and MIT, seeks to obtain a
scientific understanding of damage initiation and damage evolution processes in
metallic materials with graded nanostructured surfaces. By advancing the current
understanding of the mechanisms associated with surface wear protection and
contact fatigue resistance of graded nanostructured materials, this project
facilitates the development of a road-map for the reliable introduction of novel
materials in the multi-billion dollar tribology industry that includes aircraft,
automotive, electronic packaging, nuclear energy, and biomedical applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on
obtaining a fundamental understanding of the contact fatigue crack resistance in
graded nanostructured metallic materials. In particular, the influence of
dislocation activities that are dictated by grain-size gradients and yield
strength gradients, on crack tip blunting and crack tip shielding, is assessed.
An adhesion-based analytical modeling framework is developed to predict the
conditions for contact fatigue crack initiation in graded nanomaterials. A
dislocation pile-up based multi-scale plasticity model is implemented in finite
elements to predict contact fatigue damage evolution pathways in graded
nanostructured metals and alloys. Contact fatigue and wear experiments are
designed to provide a quantitative assessment of contact fatigue and wear
behavior of graded nanomaterials and validation for the analytical and numerical
models developed, while microstructural observations identify deformation
mechanisms that contribute to contact fatigue resistance and wear damage
protection. A new design paradigm for engineering functionally-graded
nanomaterials that provides enhancements in contact fatigue damage resistance,
beyond the classical limit that has been traditionally obtained in materials
with (mostly uniform) surface modified layers, is
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.