* 2004386
* Novel Superconducting Physics Through Microwave Imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Steven Anlage, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 649,563.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is a game-changing
technology that has enabled widespread use of magnetic resonance imaging for
medical diagnosis, and is the leading technology platform in the emerging
quantum information revolution. The research project addresses some of the grand
challenges of superconductivity for societal needs: The search for a room
temperature superconductor that will enable high-impact technologies that will
generate tremendous wealth for the nation. Such materials will revolutionize the
distribution of electricity as well as information technology, bringing
unparalleled benefit to society. The search for these new superconducting
materials is enabled by the PI’s invention and development of a new microscope
specifically designed to image the properties of superconducting materials. It
is part of a discovery process carried out in collaboration with creative
materials growers at the University of Maryland and Rutgers University. The
project will also rigorously train two graduate students to attack complex
problems and solve them in a creative and quantitative manner. The students will
go on to contribute to the further development of superconductors into high-
impact and widely beneficial technologies. The PI continues to address under-
represented groups through both research inclusion and outreach such as Physics
is Phun and the Physics Summer Girls Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; The research team is investigating cutting-edge
superconducting phenomena with a novel microscope of their own invention. The PI
has developed a new microscopic tool that can image superconducting gap nodal
directions in real space, and measure zero-energy excitations that exist due to
nodal gap structure. The PI’s microscope images the nonlinear Meissner response
of superconductors along with nonlinear response from any other zero-energy
excitations that live on the surface of the superconducting material (e.g.
Andreev bound states, Majorana zero modes, etc.). The research project goals are
to elucidate the pairing state symmetry of new superconducting materials with
exotic properties such as proximity-coupled s-wave / topological insulator
systems, and superconductors with putative j = 3/2 spin pairing. The PI’s
microscope is particularly well suited to investigate the predicted Bogoliubov
Fermi surface in these materials. The team is also investigating two systems
that are proposed to have a change in pairing state symmetry as a function of
either doping or pressure. The microscope can also sensitively measure the
complex surface impedance as a function of temperature to provide cross-checking
information on the imaging results. The team is developing a new high-pressure
version of the microscope to measure contact-free the Meissner state screening
and macroscopic quantum properties of superconductors under extreme conditions
where such measurements have never been accomplished before. With the assistance
of creative materials collaborators at Maryland and Rutgers, the team is using
this new microscope as a powerful tool for discovery and investigation of the
basic properties of exotic superconductors in the temperature-doping-pressure
phase diagram.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.