* 2004749
* Elucidation of Hot-Electron Transport and Exploitation of Hot-Carrier Plasmonics via Nonlinear Optical Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Wenshan Cai, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 398,000.00

The behavior of energetic electrons, termed “hot” electrons, is essential for
applications in chemical synthesis, energy harvesting, and information
technology. Further advances of this area of research demand deepened knowledge
of the behavior of such charged electrons after excitation with light. This
excitation process is a complicated phenomenon consisting of a number of
sequential processes, most of which happen within one billionth of a second.
This research team controls the behavior of these hot electrons with other
optical effects to understand the generation, transport, and decay of electrons.
Moreover, the ultrafast behavior of optically induced hot electrons is harnessed
for the all-optical control of light. The knowledge gained through this project
lays the groundwork at the interface of semiconductors and optics, and leads to
new insights into the design and implementation of devices for the detection and
processing of light. This research, included with high school and collegiate
education, promotes multidisciplinary thinking of the up-and-coming scientists
and engineers. The project broadly disseminates interdisciplinary knowledge
derived from this research effort, encourages early engagement of the youth via
integration of research and education, and enhances the learning opportunities
for high school students from minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics
of plasmonically induced hot carriers is pivotal to a wide range of
photophysical and photochemical processes. The current understanding is
partially constrained by the capacities of prevailing characterization methods.
Moreover, the fundamentals and applications of hot-carrier plasmonics are
predominantly focused on the linear optical regime, while rather limited work
has investigated the involvement of hot carriers in nonlinear light-matter
interactions. This project aims to elucidate the dynamics of the generation,
transfer, and thermalization of hot carriers via nonlinear optical means, and
furthermore, to exploit hot-carrier induced nonlinear optical processes for
signal detection and processing in photonic and quantum systems. The overall
content of this research is to establish a new technique for the investigation
and utilization of the ultrafast dynamics of hot carriers based on the second-
and third-order nonlinear optical effects. Such novel nonlinear processes are
explored in hybrid plasmonic platforms, where nanostructured metals interface
electron-accepting materials. Of particular interest are the implementations of
two hot-carrier induced phenomena, namely, the transient optical Kerr
nonlinearity and the transient second-harmonic generation, for the investigation
of hot-electron dynamics and the realization of ultrafast all-optical control of
light. The successful execution of the research leads to new understanding of
light-matter interactions at reduced dimensions, and facilitates improved
understanding of hot-carrier physics, optical signal processing, and quantum
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.