* 2004117
* Development of Controlled Polymerization for Hierarchically Organized Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Evgueni Nesterov, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Evgueni Nesterov of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Northern Illinois University is
developing new synthetic routes for the construction of conjugated polymers.
Conjugated polymers have special chemical bonds that enable them to conduct
electricity. In this research, conjugated polymers are prepared using catalysts
based on palladium. Palladium is used to speed up the polymerization process,
making it easier to convert starting materials to desired product. The research
activities are focused on developing new molecular building blocks for the
construction of conjugated polymers and well as understanding of how this
palladium-catalyzed reaction works. The results of this project have the
potential to broaden the scope of conjugated polymer structures that can be
prepared in a controlled manner, which is of significant importance for the
development of more efficient sensing devices. The research is having a broader
impact through the implementation of a chemical drawing program for K-12 public
schools. Particular emphasis is placed on underperforming schools where students
have few opportunities to learn about modern science and not exposed to hands-on
science experiences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on rational
development of palladium-catalyzed Suzuki-Miyaura catalyst-transfer
polymerization (SCTP) as a general method of controlled chain-growth
polymerization as well as the expansion of its application for the preparation
of a broad range of conjugated polymers. There are three main objectives
associated with the project. The first objective focuses on structural and
mechanistic studies of palladium-catalyzed externally initiated SCTP with the
purpose of developing a generally applicable polymerization protocol. In the
second objective, the developed methodology is used to prepare and study
sequence-controlled hierarchically organized conjugated polymers architectures.
The last aim concentrates on investigating the possibility to extend SCTP
towards larger diversity of monomers and also development of efficient routes
towards surface-initiated polymerization for the preparation of thin films with
advanced control of structure and morphology. Expansion of the step-growth
polymerization technique to conjugated polymers opens doors for the synthesis of
a large range of well-defined semiconducting polymers with controlled molecular
weights and dispersities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.