* 2004111
* Single Molecule Fluorescent Indicators for Gas-Phase Sensing of Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Frank Foss, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Heavy metals are continuously introduced into the atmosphere by natural and
human activity, a process that endangers the health and well-being of the public
and the environment. Current methods for measuring the presence of harmful
metals in materials in the atmosphere require time-consuming processes to
concentrate metal targets, as well as complicated sample preparation methods for
the intricate analyses. A major limitation of these existing methods is that
atmospheric materials have to be placed in water or other solvents to be
analyzed. Significant advances in rapid, heavy metal detection could occur by
direct light-based measurement of metals present in gases at the point of their
generation (prior to entering the atmosphere). However, our understanding of how
to detect heavy metals in gases using fluorescent light-based sensors is
hindered by the inability to study molecular-level interactions between a metal
of interest and fluorescent receptors that report metal presence. Single-
molecule fluorescence imaging technologies may enhance the design of gas-phase
sensors for heavy metal ions. These enabling technologies have the potential to
offer early-stage detection of metal contamination to help prevent significant
harm to human health and the environment. Recent advances in the single-entity
fluorescence imaging of ions from gases have been made at the University of
Texas at Arlington. This project brings together a unique combination of
techniques to create sensitive gas-phase sensors that measure toxic heavy
metals, with a focus on lead, mercury, and cadmium as some of the most harmful
heavy metals. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school researchers in Dr. Frank
Foss Jr.â€™s laboratory design and make sophisticated fluorescence imaging
materials that are placed on optical surfaces. These materials can then be used
to assess presence of metals in the atmosphere. The research and training
environment allows for learning about fundamentals of molecule-metal chemistry,
photophysics, and cutting-edge approaches to making molecules, as well as
scientific literacy and teamwork skills that propel the careers of the
scientists in training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging Program is funding Dr. Frank Foss Jr. at the University
of Texas at Arlington to synthesize and study hybrid materials that directly
investigate the fundamentals of heavy metal ion capture, surface dynamics, and
fluorescence at gas-solid interfaces. Fundamental kinetic and thermodynamic
properties are complicated by the seemingly irreversible nature of analyte
binding in solvent-less environments and limited by methods that investigate
bulk properties of ions on surfaces, rather than molecular properties. Turn-on,
single-molecule fluorescence imaging (SMFI) methods have revolutionized our
understanding of biomolecular and catalytic events at the molecular level in
solution. Preparation of new turn-on fluorescence sensors containing rigid ion-
selective receptors with solid-state functioning fluorophores provide SMFI
materials that can be incorporated into self-assembled monolayers at gas-solid
interfaces. To enhance ion binding selectivity, SMFI-SAMs are modified with
solid electrolyte-inspired ion transport materials. Ion sensing and mobility
measurements in SMFI-SE-SAMs are studied by microscopy and supported by
computational experiments to enhance gas-phase sensing technologies and provide
new tools for investigating surface design and function. These studies provide
the molecular scale insight necessary for attaining ultra-low levels of
detection by rapid gas sensitive fluorescent measurements. This
interdisciplinary collaborative project brings together new materials with
recently developed microscopy techniques to evaluate the measurement and
selectivity of these devices to detect toxic heavy metal ions directly from the
gas phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.