* 2004323
* Collaborative Research: Elements: EdgeVPN: Seamless Secure VirtualNetworking for Edge and Fog Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Cayelan Carey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 05/31/2024
* USD 80,387.00

Edge computing encompasses a variety of technologies that are poised to enable
new applications across the Internet that support data capture, storage,
processing and communication near the edge of the Internet. Edge computing
environments pose new challenges, as devices are heterogeneous, widely
distributed geographically, and physically closer to end users, such as mobile
and Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices. This project develops EdgeVPN, a software
element that addresses a fundamental challenge of networking for edge computing
applications: establishing Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) to logically
interconnect edge devices, while preserving privacy and integrity of data as it
flows through Internet links. More specifically, the EdgeVPN software developed
in this project addresses technical challenges in creating virtual networks that
self-organize into scalable, resilient systems that can significantly lower the
barrier to entry to deploying a private communication fabric in support of
existing and future edge applications. There are a wide range of applications
that are poised to benefit from EdgeVPN; in particular, this project is
motivated by use cases in ecological monitoring and forecasting for freshwater
lakes and reservoirs, situational awareness and command-and-control in defense
applications, and smart and connected cities. Because EdgeVPN is open-source and
freely available to the public, the software will promote progress of science
and benefit society at large by contributing to the set of tools available to
researchers, developers and practitioners to catalyze innovation and future
applications in edge computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Edge computing applications
need to be deployed across multiple network providers, and harness low-latency,
high-throughput processing of streams of data from large numbers of distributed
IoT devices. Achieving this goal will demand not only advances in the underlying
physical network, but also require a trustworthy communication fabric that is
easy to use, and operates atop the existing Internet without requiring changes
to the infrastructure. The EdgeVPN open-source software developed in this
project is an overlay virtual network that allows seamless private networking
among groups of edge computing resources, as well as cloud resources. EdgeVPN is
novel in how it integrates: 1) a flexible group management and messaging service
to create and manage peer-to-peer VPN tunnels grouping devices distributed
across the Internet, 2) a scalable structured overlay network topology
supporting primitives for unicast, multicast and broadcast, 3) software-defined
networking (SDN) as the control plane to support message routing through the
peer-to-peer data path, and 4) network virtualization and integration with
virtualized compute/storage endpoints with Docker containers to allow existing
Internet applications to work unmodified. EdgeVPN self-organizes an overlay
topology of tunnels that enables encrypted, authenticated communication among
edge devices connected across disparate providers in the Internet, possibly
subject to mobility and constraints imposed by firewalls and Network Address
Translation, NATs. It builds upon standard SDN interfaces to implement packet
manipulation primitives for virtualization supporting the ubiquitous Ethernet
and IP-layer protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.