* 2004831
* SBP: Can Teachers' "Psychological Affordances" Broaden Participation in Math and Science?
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* David Yeager, Hecht, Cameron A
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Science of Broadening Participation program. The goal of the SPRF program is to
prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers
in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. David Yeager at The University
of Texas at Austin, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating how teachers’ practices can support (or undermine) high-
school students’ growth mindsets, the role of these practices in shaping
students’ long-term persistence in the STEM pipeline, and the implications of
these practices for broadening participation in STEM for underrepresented
students. Many 9th grade students fail to progress to the 10th grade math
courses that would keep them on track to graduate with a strong portfolio of
math and science courses. Students with a growth mindset – the belief that
academic ability is not fixed and can improve – are more likely to seek academic
challenges and may therefore complete more advanced math and science courses
throughout high school. Growth-mindset beliefs may be especially beneficial for
students of color and students from working-class backgrounds (termed
underrepresented here), who face barriers to success in these fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two factors may promote a growth mindset in 9th grade math
courses: (a) exposure to a teacher's growth-affording practices, which reinforce
and reward growth-oriented behavior, and (b) receipt of a growth-mindset
intervention, which employs attitude-change techniques to facilitate adoption of
growth-mindset beliefs. In addition, these factors may interact: growth-mindset
interventions may be more powerful when complemented by teacher practices that
reinforce the message. By encouraging students to seek academic challenges,
growth-affording practices and growth-mindset interventions may propel students
to take more advanced math and science courses through 12th grade. The proposed
research has the following objectives: (a) to test whether growth-affording
practices affect 9th grade students' challenge-seeking predisposition and
subsequent course taking, (b) to test whether these practices moderate growth-
mindset intervention effects on these outcomes, and (c) to investigate how these
practices alter intervention effects. To address these objectives, the PI will
first conduct secondary analyses of the National Study of Learning Mindsets, a
nationally-representative randomized-controlled trial of a growth-mindset
intervention. These analyses will assess the effects of teachers' growth-
affording practices, provision of a growth-mindset intervention, and their
interaction on math and science course taking through 12th grade, and examine
whether such effects are driven by changes to students' challenge-seeking
predisposition. Second, the PI will manipulate growth-affording practices and
provision of a growth-mindset intervention in a laboratory study to test the
causal effects of these practices on students' challenge seeking. In each of
these studies, the PI will test whether promoting a growth mindset is more
beneficial for underrepresented students. Together, these studies will address
pressing questions about experiences that promote growth mindsets, and how these
experiences can promote preparation to enter the STEM fields in college. In
addition, these studies will inform the development of teacher professional
development activities and help determine the contextual conditions necessary
for growth-mindset interventions to be effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.