* 2004617
* Collaborative Research:  Multiscale Engineering of Active Stress in Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Zvonimir Dogic, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 273,022.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Biological systems exhibit remarkable
behaviors, including the ability to heal, reproduce, and be self-motile.
Conventional synthetic materials do not display such properties because they are
composed of inanimate molecules. In contrast, biological systems consist of
active, energy transducing molecules which continuously push and pull on each
other, producing active stresses. These active stresses make biological systems
examples of active matter, and are ultimately are responsible for many of their
unusual behaviors. Creating artificial active matter opens up a new route
towards constructing materials with lifelike functionalities. However, a
significant obstacle to realizing this possibility is an absence of
understanding of how active stresses are produced: given specific elemental
building blocks, there are not currently tools to either measure or
theoretically predict the magnitude, type, or even the sign of the active
stresses. The project will elucidate the foundational principles of active
stress generation using a synergistic combination of experiments, simulations,
and theory. The work will result in the creation of new experimental tools for
measuring active stresses, new synthesis procedures for creating active
materials, and new multi-scale modeling techniques for studying active matter.
An integrated outreach program will bring the excitement of active matter to
K-12 education, undergraduates, and graduates by combining interactive
demonstrations, advanced interdisciplinary training, and intensive summer
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses
on studying assemblages of microtubules and kinesin-14 molecular motors. The
work addresses three fundamental challenges in understanding active stresses
generated by such active materials. First is the development of tools to measure
active stresses at different length scales using optical tweezers, fluid flow
measurements, microfluidics, and 3D printing, in combination with theory and
simulations. Second, a novel system will be created in which active stress
generation will be modulated by directly affixing kinesin-14 to microtubules in
predetermined patterns. Theory and simulations will be used to guide which
patterns to create, and conversely, measuring the resulting active stress
generation in these designed materials will provide a stringent test of theory
and simulations. Third, a multi-scale modeling framework will be developed and
tested. These will be subsequently related to each other through a combination
of analytical calculations and simulations. The resulting models will be made
with continual feedback from experiments. Taken together, this work will
establish new paradigms to study, understand, and engineer active stresses in
active materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DMR grant supports research to
understand the assemblages of microtubules and kinesin-14 molecular motors with
funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) and Biomaterials (BMAT) Programs
in the Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.