* 2004766
* Elements: Agricultural Cyber-infrastructure support for Field and Grid Modeling, and Runtime Decision-Making
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Robert Malone, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,998.00

This project develops science-driven modeling and decision-making algorithms for
precision agriculture, with associated cloud-based implementations. This project
would increase the potential for more efficient agricultural systems through the
development of more accurate and larger scale models, data collection, and
ultimately a software infrastructure that farmers could use for real-time
monitoring of their crops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is derived from
scientific questions in sustainable agriculture, sensor networks, decision
sciences, data science, and machine learning. The primary innovations are
applications of grid-based soil parameters using incomplete data, machine
learning-based time series analysis, and optimization problems to estimate the
optimal mix of inputs for nutrients and irrigation. These applications are
likely to have wide usage among the precision agriculture community. The
cyberinfrastructure, MyGeoHub, is a cloud-based service that users can access
through web browsers and leverages an existing
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.