* 2004235
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Basic ALgebra LIbraries for Sustainable Technology with Interdisciplinary Collaboration (BALLISTIC)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Michael Mahoney, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2024
* USD 718,740.00

Scientific software libraries have long provided a large and growing resource
for high-quality, reusable software components upon which applications from
science and engineering can be rapidly constructed â€” with improved robustness,
portability, and sustainability. For this, a team of researchers from four
collaborating organizations proposed to develop BALLISTIC (Basic ALgebra
Libraries for Sustainable Technology with Interdisciplinary Collaboration). The
BALLISTIC project, through the leading-edge research it channels into its
software deliverables, will lead to the introduction of tools that will simplify
the transition to the next generation of extreme-scale computer architectures.
The main impact of the project will be to develop, push, and deploy software
into the scientific community to make it competitive on a world-wide scale and
to contribute to standardization efforts in the area. BALLISTIC has the
potential to become the community standard for dense linear algebra and be
adopted and/or supported by a large community of users, computing centers, and
High-Performance Computing (HPC) vendors. Learning to use numerical libraries is
a basic part of the education of a computational scientist or engineer in many
fields and at many academic institutions. BALLISTIC will have a correspondingly
large impact on the research and education community, government laboratories,
and private industry and support national efforts to build a workforce capable
of employing state of the art tools in pursuit of science and engineering
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of BALLISTIC is to create a layered
package of software components that is capable of running at every level of the
platform deployment pyramid and achieves three complementary objectives: (1)
deliver seamless access to the most up-to-date algorithms, numerics, and
performance via familiar Sca/LAPACK interfaces, wherever possible; (2) make
advanced algorithms, numerics, and performance capabilities available through
new interface extensions, wherever necessary; and (3) provide a well-engineered
conduit through which new discoveries at the frontiers of research in these
areas can be channeled as quickly as possible to all the applications from
science and engineering communities that depend on high-performance linear
algebra libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.