* 2004110
* Nontraditional Noncovalent Interactions in Protein Structure, Function, and Design
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Neal Zondlo, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2024
* USD 360,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry
Division is supporting the research of Dr. Neal J. Zondlo at the University of
Delaware in Newark, DE to study the effects of non-traditional non-covalent
interactions on the structures of proteins in their normal forms and also when
their amino acids have been oxidized when cells are stressed. A protein is a
polymer of amino acid building blocks that are held together by strong chemical
(covalent) bonds. The folding of this linear chain into a three-dimensional and
functional shape or structure, however, is determined by a set of weaker non-
covalent interactions. The common or traditional non-covalent interactions are
hydrogen bonds, interactions between charged groups, and the hydrophobic effect.
This project studies the interactions of carbon-hydrogen chemical groups with
oxygens (C–H/O interactions) and with benzene-like amino acids (aromatic amino
acids phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan) (C–H/pi interactions), as well as
sulfur (from methionine and cysteine amino acids) with aromatic amino acids
(S/pi interactions). Dr. Zondlo and coworkers aim to determine the chemical
basis for what makes such interactions weak or strong at the atomic and
subatomic levels both experimentally and by computation. Insights into these
chemical principles for non-traditional non-covalent interactions are expeted to
help explain the folding of proteins that are important in normal cellular
activity, in cell division, and protein misfolding that can be important in
dysfunctional biological systems or disease states such as Alzheimer's disease.
This project provides multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate
students, including those from underserved communities. In addition, new
discovery-oriented laboratory experiences are being developed to engage students
in research within the undergraduate laboratory class.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the roles of chalcogen/pi, C–H/pi,
and C–H/O interactions in protein structure. The interactions of amino acids
containing sulfur with aromatic amino acids, including thiol-aromatic and
methionine-aromatic interactions, have been observed in numerous contexts. Due
to the relatively similar electronegativity of sulfur and selenium compared to
carbon, the electrostatic basis for these interactions is expected to be
relatively weak, particularly in water. The project uses a combination of small
molecule synthesis, peptide synthesis, and protein expression to probe the
nature of sulfur-aromatic interactions using x-ray crystallographic analysis of
small molecules, biophysical methods (NMR, CD, IR) in peptides and proteins,
functional analysis of proteins, and bioinformatics analysis. This work provides
fundamental insights into the geometry and energetics of chalcogen-aromatic
interactions and aims to identify particularly complementary pairwise
combinations of chalcogen amino acids and aromatic amino acids that can be
applied to molecular and supramolecular design. This work also seeks to identify
protein motifs in which sulfur-aromatic interactions might be modulated by
sulfur oxidation. The project will further explore protein motifs where C–H/O
interactions are hypothesized to be central to protein structure, including
roles of protein post-translational modifications in inducing structural changes
via C–H/O interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.