* 2004701
* Investigation of topological electronic states in atomic layered materials and heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Yongtao Cui, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 340,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Conventional conductors and insulators are
distinguished by their abilities to conduct electricity. Topological insulators
are a new class of materials which combine an insulating interior with
conducting surfaces. Their unique electronic properties can enable new
generation of quantum technology such as quantum computers and energy efficient
electronics. A recently discovered material, WTe2, exhibits such topological
behavior in a single layer form. In this 2D topological insulator system,
electrical current can only flow along the edges of the sample. This project
investigates the electrical properties both in the interior bulk and at edges of
monolayer WTe2, aiming to understand the connection between the topological bulk
states and the conducting edges and to develop new methods to manipulate these
properties by stacking monolayer WTe2 on other 2D materials. The research team
also builds an experimental workflow to effectively screen candidate topological
materials predicted by theory, which could potentially lead to discovery of new
2D topological systems. The project is integrated with education activities to
attract undergraduate students to research and train them in advanced
electronics hardware and development of new
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to investigate topological physics in 2D systems based on atomic layered
materials, with a focus on a recently discovered 2D topological insulator,
monolayer WTe2. The research employs a range of electrical characterization
techniques to probe the electronic properties of the topological states,
including local conductivity by microwave impedance microscopy, chemical
potential by electrostatic force microscopy, and thermodynamic density of states
by quantum capacitance measurement. The goal is to understand the nature of the
bulk electronic states including the effect of interaction on the topological
properties. The project also explores heterostructures of monolayer WTe2 with
other 2D materials in order to manipulate the topological properties in
monolayer WTe2. The research team further develops an effective experimental
method to screen candidate materials that are predicted to be 2D topological
insulators. The approach involves integration of fabrication and
characterization techniques suitable for the study of air-sensitive materials
and develops a workflow that minimizes sample fabrication to enhance throughput.
Graduate and undergraduate students are involved in the development of the
experimental methods which provides a comprehensive training in device
fabrication, instrumentation design, and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.