* 2004570
* Fundamental Studies of Bose-Einstein Condensates of Polaritons
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,05/31/2024
* David Snoke, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 580,308.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project studies fundamental effects of
quantum mechanics of optical states in semiconductor structures at low
temperature. In particular, this project focuses on the process of Bose-Einstein
condensation (BEC), in which many particles enter a single quantum state. The
BEC studied here is comprised of “polaritons,” which can be viewed as photons
with special properties; for example, they have mass and repel each other, like
atoms. BEC has been studied extensively in gases of atoms at low temperature;
this project on BEC of polaritons complements the study of BEC of atoms by
providing new ways of looking at the system. In particular, the system under
study in this project emits coherent light like a laser, which can be studied
using advanced optical methods. The principle investigator (PI) of the project
will also work closely with the Carnegie Science Center in Pittsburgh to present
basic concepts of quantum mechanics to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on
previous successful work on Bose-Einstein condensation of polaritons by pursuing
three main goals: 1) Experiments at the University of Pittsburgh will aim at
establishing the phase diagram of BEC under equilibrium conditions, including
accurate determination of the condensate fraction as a function of density and
temperature; 2) experiments at the University of Pittsburgh will study the onset
of BEC from a “quench” (a highly nonequilibrium state) all the way to full
equilibrium, in quasi-one-dimensional wires; and 3) experiments at the
University of Pittsburgh will study macroscopic coherent states of a condensate
in a circular ring, including spin texture and quantized angular momentum
states. The above experiments involve ultrafast time-resolved optical
spectroscopy, imaging, and interferometry methods available in the Snoke
laboratories in Pittsburgh. For each of these thrusts, samples designed at the
University of Pittsburgh are grown by molecular beam epitaxy at Princeton
University and at the University of Waterloo, then delivered to Pittsburgh for
final processing in the clean room at the University of Pittsburgh. This
processing includes etching the structures to make one-dimensional wires for
controlling the flow of the polariton condensate. The results of these
experiments are studied in collaboration with a team of theorists from other
universities including the University of Chicago, the University of Strathclyde,
the University of Wolverhampton, and the University of Pittsburgh to address
fundamental questions, such as the effect of interactions on depletion of the
condensate, the theory of damping of a condensate out of equilibrium, and
topologically nontrivial states of a condensate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant supports research to understand the
phase diagram of BEC under equilibrium and non-equilibrium conditions with
funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in DMR and the Atomic,
Molecular and Optical Physics - Experiment (AMO-E) program in the Division of
Physics (PHY) both of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.