* 2004630
* Relating glass forming ability and mechanical behavior to the structure of metallic liquids and glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Katharine Flores, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 379,392.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Metallic glasses are a unique class of metals
with structures very different from the more common crystalline materials.
Whereas atoms in most metals are arranged in a regular, ordered pattern,
metallic glasses have a disordered atomic structure, similar to the liquid
state. This difference at the atomic-level often results in dramatically
different properties at the large scale, including higher strength, better
corrosion resistance, and a surprising ability to be easily and inexpensively
molded into complex shapes. Not all metals are able to form glasses, however.
Recent studies suggest that the ability to form a glass may be related to the
atomic structure of the high-temperature liquid. Quantitatively describing the
disordered structure in order to predict the glass-forming ability of a metal
alloy is challenging, since there is no long-range pattern to the atomic
positions. Previous attempts to identify common polyhedral shapes in the atomic
structure are instructive, but offer limited insight into the degree of
similarity among those shapes and therefore the overall degree of structural
order, particularly for alloys consisting of multiple elements of different
atomic sizes. This project instead uses artificial-intelligence-based algorithms
to automatically identify structurally ‘similar’ atomic clusters in computer-
simulated liquids. Liquid compositions with a low degree of such structural
similarity are postulated to be good glass formers. The results of the
simulations will be experimentally verified over a wide range of compositions
using compact material libraries, rapidly synthesized with an advanced
3D-printing-based method. This work will accelerate the discovery of new, high-
performance metallic materials for a variety of applications, as well as
contribute to the development of a science and engineering workforce trained in
computational and efficient manufacturing methods. Finally, it will impact K-12
science and engineering education through workshops targeting middle- and high-
school teachers from diverse school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;Metallic glasses hold tremendous promise as potential
structural materials, due to their unique combination of excellent mechanical
properties and unusual ability to be thermoplastically formed into complex
shapes. While potentially transformative, several fundamental questions remain
about the relationship between glass structure and properties. In particular,
the relationship between the structure of the liquid and the ease with which it
can be quenched to form a glass remains poorly understood. This project is
motivated by recent studies suggesting that the relative glass-forming ability
of compositions within an alloy system may be predicted by a simple parameter
characterizing the population distribution of nearest-neighbor atomic clusters
in the liquid, well above the glass transition temperature. The work integrates
molecular dynamics simulations, pattern-recognition and machine-learning
clustering algorithms, and state-of-the-art high-throughput synthesis and
characterization methods to investigate correlations between the geometry and
population of atomic clusters in simulated liquids and glasses and
experimentally observed properties, over a wide range of alloy compositions and
families. A laser-deposition-based synthesis technique is used to rapidly
construct alloy libraries for evaluation. Mechanical properties of the glass-
forming regions in these libraries are mapped as a function of composition via
nanoindentation. Compositional trends in glass-forming ability and mechanical
properties will be compared with trends in the population distribution of atomic
clusters in simulated liquids and glasses. For each alloy family, point-pattern
matching and machine-learning clustering algorithms will be used to identify a
set of unique and robust atomic motifs that comprise the structure of the
simulated liquids and glasses. By integrating the simulated structures with
experimental property measurements, this work will dramatically strengthen the
understanding of structure-property relationships in metallic glasses, and
enable the rational design of new alloys with desirable combinations of
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.