* 2004420
* Probing Fundamental Magneto-Electronic Properties of Two-Dimensional Metal Halides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mark Hersam, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Researchers have recently learned how to produce
atomically thin materials that are referred to as two-dimensional (2D) materials
since they are extended in two dimensions (i.e., length and width) but are
confined in the third dimension (i.e., depth) at the atomic scale. Due to a
range of superlative properties and new physics in the atomically thin limit, 2D
materials have attracted significant interest for fundamental studies and
prototype device development. Thus far, chemically inert 2D materials have been
the most widely studied since they can be processed in ambient conditions with
minimal further precautions. However, the family of 2D materials has hundreds of
additional members, which have been underexplored due to their high chemical
reactivities that introduce challenges in preparing and handling samples for
electronic testing. To address this knowledge gap, this project develops
encapsulation and related sample preparation protocols to enable
characterization of the fundamental properties of chemically reactive 2D
materials. Of particular interest are the 2D metal halides since they are
theoretically predicted to possess unique combinations of electronic and
magnetic properties that are relevant to next-generation computing and quantum
technologies. These research results are widely disseminated to diverse
audiences through a series of education and outreach activities including
Illuminate, which assists and enables low-income, first-generation, and/or
underrepresented minority students to attend and complete college, and Science
with Seniors, which organizes visits to retirement homes for interactive science
presentations and demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Among the most chemically reactive two-dimensional (2D)
materials are the layered van der Waals transition metal halides. Due to their
high chemical reactivity, experimental studies of bulk metal halides are rare
and have traditionally required an inert environment and/or vacuum equipment.
However, theoretical models have predicted many layered metal halides to be
mechanically exfoliatable due to low cleavage energies and large in-plane bond
strength, suggesting that they could be explored in the 2D limit if suitable
passivation and processing conditions were identified. This project develops
atomic layer deposition encapsulation layers that allow 2D metal halides to be
handled, processed, and tested in ambient conditions. Preceding atomic layer
deposition, the 2D metal halides are passivated with organic buffer layers that
minimize charge trapping and scattering, thus allowing intrinsic properties to
be probed. The interplay among the electronic, magnetic, and optical properties
of 2D metal halides is characterized as a function of temperature using lateral
field-effect transistors, vertical heterostructures, and Hall bar electrode
arrays. By elucidating fundamental charge transport phenomena such as the
quantized anomalous Hall effect, this work provides guidance to emerging efforts
to incorporate 2D metal halides into advanced magneto-electronic applications
including spintronic devices, quantum technologies, and non-volatile
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.