* 2004081
* Membrane Protein Folding
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Judy Kim, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Proteins that reside within cellular membranes are at the heart of many
important life processes, including photosynthesis, respiration, and immune
responses. For a protein to function properly, it must fold into a specific
three-dimensional (3-D) shape or structure. The Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Judy E. Kim from the University
of California at San Diego to investigate one of the most important and
challenging aspects of membrane proteins, their folding into correct 3-D
structures. Incorrectly folded proteins can cause diseases, such as Alzheimerâ€™s
and cystic fibrosis. This research study focuses on understanding the folding of
a set of membrane proteins (OmpA and OmpT) to better understand how these
proteins assemble in bacteria. While establishing the 3-D structures of membrane
proteins remains a grand challenge of structural biology, establishing the
folding pathways for these and other proteins is especially challenging. One of
the most important goals of this research is to better understand how
interactions between the membrane protein and its local environment impact
folding. State-of-the-art biophysical techniques will be brought to bear on this
problem. Undergraduate and graduate students involved with the project are
trained to become skilled researchers at the chemistry/biology interface, while
building other important career skills such as communication and leadership. An
integral part of this project involves outreach to help broaden participation in
the sciences. A summer training program, Preparing Undergraduate Researchers for
Protein Lab Experiments (PURPLE), will provide basic research skills to early-
stage college students from underserved communities in a committed effort to
enhance diversity in STEM. This training program and strong translational
connections of the research to the biology of living systems make the project
well-suited to inspire undergraduates at an early stage to explore scientific
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project focuses on the
folding of two beta-barrel integral membrane proteins, OmpA and OmpT. The
motivation is to gain a more complete understanding of the dehydration process
and the role of a native chaperone protein during the membrane insertion process
and the folding of these membrane proteins. The primary tools include steady-
state and time-resolved electronic and vibrational spectroscopy that report on
details of the protein structure and changes in the local environment during
folding. Various targeted protein mutants involving the judicious placement of
tryptophan residues will be generated. These tryptophan residues are exploited
as spectroscopic reporting chromophores to elucidate specific interactions
between these residues and their environment. Results from this project are
expected to advance knowledge and understanding in the fields of membrane
protein dynamics and folding. Additionally, the biophysical approaches taken
here and the experimental findings of these studies may serve to nucleate
complementary theoretical and experimental studies of protein dynamics in other
complex biological assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.