* 2004818
* Investigating the evolution of bone technologies through quantitative method development
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Naomi Martisius, Martisius, Naomi
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2022
* USD 148,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and is jointly funded
by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The goal
of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level
scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and
government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of
established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent
research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments
of the scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in
its research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to
be an important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Danielle
Macdonald at the University of Tulsa, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist developing innovative methods for bone tool
studies by combining raw material properties analyses with 3D quantitative
microscopy in order to investigate the evolutionary development of osseous
technologies, objects created from hard animal tissues such as bone, antler, or
ivory. Bone tool use by some of our earliest ancestors has been documented as
early as 2 million years ago, and over millennia, these technologies diversified
in how they were made and for what purpose. This study lays the groundwork for
studying bone artifacts and assesses how their manufacture and use may have
differed. Bones used as tools on different materials often leave signature
traces reflective of the interaction between both materials, which allows
researchers to read those traces and translate them into interpretations about
tool function. These interpretations inform our understanding of how certain
objects functioned in the past, but also have broader implications for human
evolutionary behavior and the development of human decision-making and
cognition. The study will produce reliable techniques to evaluate some of the
earliest instances of bone tool production by our ancient relatives and provide
insights into how and why human ancestors began to use bone for technological
purposes, and how osseous technologies changed over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to assess the
utility of different parts of animal skeletons to determine which bones might be
desirable for different tool types. Thus, the project assesses human decision-
making and how this has developed and changed over broad timescales. The first
steps for understanding these behaviors is to obtain an understanding of the
fundamental differences in several skeletal elements and determine how they
accumulate wear patterns under varying conditions. Additionally, this project
aims to establish quantitative methods for the study of surface traces on
osseous materials, which will minimize issues of human error in the
interpretation of these objects. This proposal is organized into four main
project research aims: 1) to understand and isolate bone mechanical properties
involved in the formation of wear traces on varying skeletal elements from
different animals through the use of a modular material tester; 2) to develop
controlled experiments using bones with different mechanical properties and
specific worked materials under varying conditions; 3) to apply quantitative
methods including confocal microscopy and 3D surface texture analysis to wear
traces on the experimental pieces and statistically evaluate the association of
wear and material properties; 4) to blind-test the statistical models against
additional experimentally created bone tool assemblages in order to recognize
diagnostic wear traces. Overall, this project will incorporate knowledge from
various academic viewpoints through collaboration with researchers focused on a
variety of time periods and regions. This broad investigation into bone tool
technologies will result in information and study protocols that can be applied
to artifacts in varying archaeological contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.