* 2004243
* Chemical Toolbox for Deciphering the Molecular Origins of Selectivity in Human Extracellular Sulfatases
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Kamil Godula, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding the research of Dr. Kamil Godula at the University of
California â€“ San Diego, to study the effects of two human enzymes known as Sulf1
and Sulf2. These enzymes act on the exterior of cell surfaces by recognizing and
modifying the patterns of negatively charged groups on sugar polymers that are
part of the outside coating of cells. In doing so they control the activity of
proteins involved in critical cell signaling and development events. Despite
being a key element in regulating important cellular functions, the structures
of these enzymes and the sugars they act on are still poorly understood.
Additionally, their precise actions in a cellular context need better
understanding. This research project develops a set of new tools and techniques
at the interface of chemistry and biology to fill the gaps in the basic
understanding of the biological functions of these enzymes. These activities
allow graduate students to obtain training in the interdisciplinary area of
chemical biology focusing on carbohydrate chemistry and biology. The students
also gain a deeper understanding of the varied roles of carbohydrates in
biology. The educational and technical resources enabled by this award allow for
the dissemination of the knowledge, tools, and techniques stemming from this
research project to the broader research community and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops novel methods to produce human
sulfatase enzymes enabling detailed investigations of structure and mechanism.
New chemical glycomics tools are envisioned to capture and structurally
characterize the polysaccharide substrates for these enzymes. Further,
biochemical and cell-based assays are under development to investigate their
function during embryonic stem cell differentiation. The sulfatase enzymes are
thought to have specificity for unique negatively charged regions of their
sulfated polysaccharide substrates complementing the organization of positively
charged residues in their substrate-binding domains. However, little information
exists regarding the structure of the enzymes and the composition of their
preferred substrates. Arrays comprising structurally defined sulfated
polysaccharides from synthetic and biological sources are in use to identify
preferred substrates for the sulfatase enzyme isoforms and to delineate how the
enzymatic removal of sulfates from the polysaccharides impacts their
interactions with growth factors. The chemical toolbox includes substrate-based
fluorogenic probes for imaging sulfatase activity in biological environments and
reactive molecules for chemical fingerprinting of substrates for structural
characterization by mass spectrometry analysis. In combination, these tools are
deployed to map how sulfatase enzymes control growth factor signaling during
neural and mesenchymal differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells. The tools
are general and suitable for the investigation of other biological systems where
extracellular sulfatases exert important regulatory
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.