* 2004983
* Neural and behavioral coordination in infant-caregiver communication across the socioeconomic spectrum
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Jessica Kosie, Kosie, Jessica Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2021
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Casey Lew-
Williams at Princeton University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the neural mechanisms by which variation in
the quality of infants early learning environment, across the full spectrum of
socioeconomic status (SES), impacts infants’ language learning. Much of infants’
learning occurs through social interactions with others, and the quality of
these early social interactions is consequential for linguistic and cognitive
development. In particular, there is substantial variation in input quality
across the SES spectrum, often putting infants from lower-SES families at risk
for learning challenges. However, current investigations of how input impacts
learning have had a dominant focus on language, undercutting current
understanding of the full complexity of infants’ everyday communicative
environments. Further, minimal research has studied the neural mechanisms
through which input quality influences learning. This project will address both
of these limitations, exploring relations between variation in input quality
across the full SES spectrum, neural activity during caregiver-infant
interactions, and language outcomes six months later.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project takes a novel approach to studying how infants learn in social
interactions with caregivers. Objective 1 focuses on examining variation in
“infant-directed communication” (IDC) across the SES spectrum. IDC includes a
broad suite of interconnected signals that contribute to infants’ everyday
learning environment: language, action, gesture, emotion, and touch. Objective 2
uses dual-brain functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) to investigate
relations between quality of IDC and the extent to which neural activity in
caregivers’ and infants’ brains are correlated during communicative
interactions. Finally, Objective 3 asks how IDC and neural coupling
independently and jointly predict infants’ vocabulary growth. Together, these
objectives will provide new insight into the mechanisms by which infants across
the SES spectrum learn in interactions with their caregivers, with the ultimate
goal of generating new ideas for interventions that aim to enhance
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.