* 2004937
* NSF-BSF: Development of hydrogel materials for use in cellular force sensing
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Megan Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 427,143.00

Cells generate significant forces that are critical to growth, wound healing and
many tissue functions, but measuring these forces within living tissues remains
a significant challenge. One promising approach is to embed, within the tissue,
microscopic sensors that can be stretched, compressed and deformed by cell-
generated forces. By recording these sensor shape changes with microscopy, the
cell-generated forces can be measured over time. One barrier to developing this
technology is the lack of robust, non-toxic, polymeric materials for use as
sensors. This project aims to address this challenge by developing a fundamental
understanding of how polymer composition and processing control the structural
and mechanical properties of hydrogels. The results of this work will enable the
design and manufacturing of hydrogel-based materials for specific sensing
applications, and will establish predictive relationships between sensor shape
and applied force. The knowledge and materials developed through this award will
promote their use in tissue engineering and reconstruction, bioengineering
devices, and medical diagnostics. This project will provide important
opportunities for education and outreach. Diverse cohorts of graduate and
undergraduate students will be recruited and trained in biomaterial science and
engineering. Elementary school students will be given opportunities to
experiment with polymers and learn about the relationships between shape,
mechanics and force. Course materials and informational videos will be generated
and distributed to provide teachers and the public with resources to understand
and appreciate the importance of biomaterials science in biology, engineering
and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project combines theory and experiment to
develop and optimize non-toxic hydrogel microspheres for use as sensors of cell-
generated forces in multicellular aggregates and tissues. The study will
establish the material design criteria that enable programming of the mechanical
properties of polymeric hydrogels, including single and multi-phase materials
that exhibit linear and nonlinear mechanical responses, respectively. The
results of this work will establish how polymer length, network architecture,
crosslinking density, and hydrophobic content influence the materialâ€™s shear
elasticity and compressibility. Experimental manufacturing methods will be
optimized and theoretical models will be developed to understand and program the
material mechanics for cell sensing applications. Sensor performance will be
validated in biological assays. These results will provide the foundational
knowledge needed to develop new classes of biocompatible hydrogel materials for
cell force sensing, cell encapsulation and soft tissue regeneration and
replacement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.