* 2004288
* Novel Thermal Transport Phenomena in Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Lu Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 488,837.00

Non-technical Abstract: In solids, electrons carry not only electrical charges
but also heat and energy. This dual nature of electrons turns out to be a
powerful tool to understand quantum materials. Moving the electrons with heat
creates electrical voltages or reveals thermal conductions in the solids. These
mobile electrons may further change the moving directions under a magnetic
field, leading to transverse electrical voltages and transverse thermal
conductions. These novel thermal transport properties are essential steps to
detect and probe the ground state of strongly correlated quantum materials. The
research brings the potential to open the door to study the interplay between
strong-correlation effects and topology in the search for new quantum phases,
novel topological phases, and new multi-functionalities for future electronics.
The project also provides opportunities to train undergraduate and graduate
students in the science and technology of this field anticipated to grow in the
coming years. By involving undergraduates in research, integrating female and
minority students in the projects, and communicating research to the broader
public, the team brings the general public the advancements in strongly
correlated materials and to develop excitement, awareness, and interest in the
field of quantum science and condensed matter physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The research project aims to
investigate strongly correlated materials using novel thermal transport
properties. Bridging the research fields of strongly correlated materials and
topological quantum materials, the research team will use thermoelectric effect
and thermal Hall effect to reveal the physical origin of recently observed novel
phenomena of strongly correlated materials: (1) quantum oscillations in
electrical resistivity of Kondo insulators; (2) large thermal Hall effects in
Mott insulating state of the undoped parent compound of high-temperature
superconductors, and (3) topological superconducting state in Fe-based
superconductors. These directions are new exciting developments in long-standing
puzzles in condensed matter physics. They share the same debate about the role
of the charge-neutral quasiparticles in the strongly interacted states: what
carries these interesting phenomena: magnon, phonon, and Bogoliubov
quasiparticles. The research tasks will answer these questions: (1) What is the
nature of the quantum oscillations in insulators? (2) What leads to the metal-
like thermal transport in Kondo insulators? (3) Why are Hall signals of the heat
flow in undoped cuprates? (4) How to couple to quantum anomalous vortices in Fe-
based topological superconductors? The answers to these questions shed light on
the ground state of the strongly interacted quantum systems. The research also
leads to effective ways to probe charge-neutral quasiparticles in strongly
correlated quantum materials and reveal the crucial characteristics in these
material systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.