* 2004220
* Confinement effects within metal organic nanotubes:  Relationships between hydrophobicity and water structure, diffusion, and selectivity
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Tori Forbes, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 409,931.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Water confined in nanosized
channels can behave in unexpected ways and controlling this behavior could lead
to the development of new materials for water purification applications. The
identity of the chemical components that line the interior wall of these
nanochannels may be the crucial design principle that can be used to create new
materials with controllable water properties. The overall hypothesis for this
project is that the identity and placement of the chemical components that make
up the channel wall are key to controlling water confined within these spaces.
Metal organic nanotubes (MONTs) are used to test this hypothesis because they
contain one-dimensional channels, have tunable channel walls, and exhibit
stability in water. Within this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, MONTs are
designed with chemical components that will either attract or repel the water
molecules in specific locations along the interior wall. Then the behavior of
the confined water within these new materials is explored by identifying how the
confined water molecules are organized within the channel, measuring the rate of
water movement through the channels, and testing the ability of the MONTs to
selectively take up water over other molecules. Gaining this fundamental
knowledge of confined water is important for creating advanced materials for
water purification and treatment. Additional educational initiatives for this
project include training in resiliency and overcoming failure to improve
retention of students in science. This includes curriculum development at both
the undergraduate and graduate level that will be freely disseminated to others
in the field. These efforts will also include assessment and evaluation of best
practices to further our understanding of the role of resiliency training in
improving STEM retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Predicting and controlling the behavior of
nanoconfined water is important for the development of advanced applications,
but structurally engineering these desired effects are dependent on the
complexity of the pore walls. Metal organic nanotubes (MONTs) are optimal for
probing the relationships between structural features and nanoconfinement
effects due to their 1-D pore structure, tunable structural features, and
relative stability in water. The overall hypothesis for this project is that
increasing the hydrophobicity of the pore wall will lead to more structural
ordering of the water and faster diffusion of water through the nanotube.
Furthermore, combining hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions within the walls will
lead to chemical selectivity of the nanopore to water. Within this project,
MONTs are used to test the central hypotheses through 1) identifying clusters
topologies within nanochannels and relating water structure with hydrophobicity;
2) delineating the relationship between variability hydrophobicity and water
diffusion rates; and 3) determining how spatial variability of hydrophobic
regions impacts water selectivity. The proposed research is expected to
contribute to our fundamental understanding of the behavior of nanoconfined
water in complex materials. With this systematic understanding, these ideas are
translatable to the behavior and modification of other materials and may have
far-reaching effects on our fundamental understanding of nanoconfined water,
which is of interest to researchers in the fields of material science,
chemistry, geology, engineering, and biology. Education initiatives will include
specific training in resiliency and overcoming failure to improve retention of
underrepresented groups in science. This includes curriculum development at both
the undergraduate and graduate level that will be freely disseminated to the
field to reach a broader audience. These efforts will also include assessment
and evaluation of best practices to further our understanding of the role of
resiliency training in improving STEM retention. This project is supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.