* 2004993
* Elements: Advanced Lossless and Lossy Compression Algorithms for netCDF Datasets in Earth and Engineering Sciences (CANDEE)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Charles Zender, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,916.00

Data compression is used to store and transmit digital data such as music,
television, and satellite measurements more efficiently by reducing storage
space and download times. The compression software broker that this project
provides will facilitate the adoption of modern compression techniques in many
branches of science. Compressors come in two flavors: lossless, those that
perfectly preserve the original information; and lossy, those that irretrievably
discard parts of the "signal" to further improve compression. Modern lossless
and lossy compression improvements in efficiency, speed, and fidelity, are
striking and will benefit critical research areas by permitting researchers to
simulate, store, and analyze phenomena such as stellar evolution, chemical
reactions, and hurricane formation at finer detail than before, with no extra
storage costs. Since digital storage consumes power, better compression also
reduces power consumption and associated greenhouse gas emissions. This project
will develop the software infrastructure necessary for scientific researchers to
seamlessly shift their applications to produce and use data stored with state-
of-the-art lossless techniques, and by new lossy techniques that are more
accurate than any others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two most widely-used self-
describing dataset storage formats, HDF5 and netCDF4, support by default only
one patent unencumbered lossless compression format, the venerable DEFLATE
algorithm standardized in the 1990s. Our project will develop a dynamic and
extensible software library of modern COmpressors and DECompressors (codecs) for
scientific data called the Community Codec Repository (CCR). We will populate
the CCR with cutting-edge open-source compression technology, including the LZ4,
Facebook's Zstandard, and Google's Snappy codecs, and will implement default
netCDF support for the CCR. Sequential lossy-then-lossless compression improves
both the size and speed of compression/decompression yet is currently tedious to
perform. We will implement a user-friendly method to "chain" codecs into
sequential operations in memory (no intermediate files required) in our widely
used netCDF Operators software package. We will also produce a new precision-
preserving lossy codec, Granular Bit Grooming, that has unsurpassed compression
ratio and statistical accuracy. Technical success will be evaluated by the size
and speed improvements of compressing a prototypical geoscience/engineering "big
data" project, the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project version 6
(CMIP6).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.