* 2004160
* Collaborative Research: CAS-MNP: Understand and Predict the Adsorption of Organic Contaminants by Aging Microplastics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jay Oswald, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 162,894.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports Professors Francois Perreault and Jay Oswald at Arizona State
University and Professor Onur Apul at the University of Maine for research on
microplastics. These small plastic particles form during the breakdown of waste
plastic. Because of their small size, microplastics accumulate more organic
contaminants on their surface than larger plastic pieces. Microplastics age in
the environment due to the action of sunlight or microorganisms, which changes
their surface characteristics. To predict the environmental effects of
microplastics, it is important to understand how aging of microplastics by
sunlight or microorganisms affect contaminant adsorption. This project focuses
on the aging of low-density polyethylene, one of the most abundant plastics. The
exploratory scope of this project leads to insights for future in-depth studies
of the nature of microplastics aging and their effect in complex natural
systems. Graduate and undergraduate students at the two institutions have the
opportunity to learn about interdisciplinary research, including experimental
and theoretical work. The team also engages in age-appropriate outreach
activities on the topic of plastic pollution for K-12 students in their
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project combines experimental and
theoretical approaches to identify the molecular-level mechanisms involved in
organic contaminant adsorption on pristine and aged low-density polyethylene
microplastics. Laboratory-based aging procedures, simulating the effect of
sunlight or surface biofilms, are used to produce well-characterized low-density
polyethylene microparticles representative of environmental microplastics. Using
these model microplastics, adsorption isotherms are measured for a range of
model organic contaminants to determine how biofilms or the change in surface
chemistry affect the adsorption of different classes of contaminant. Molecular
dynamics simulations are used to identify, based on the aged microplastics
characterization, the molecular-level changes in surface chemistry that occur
during environmental aging. This multidisciplinary approach provides a
mechanistic insight into how environmental aging by sunlight or biofilms affect
the role of microplastics as vectors of organic contaminants in the environment.
The experimental framework developed in this project can be applied to a wide
range of microplastic materials or mechanism of environmental aging to provide a
comprehensive understanding of how organic contaminants will interact with
microplastics in the environment over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.