* 2004544
* Elements: Cyberinfrastructure Service for IoT-Based Construction Research and Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Janise McNair, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2023
* USD 455,114.00

Wireless infrastructure is steadily evolving into wireless access for all humans
and most devices, from 5G to Internet-of-Things. This widespread access creates
the expectation of custom and adaptive services from the personal network to the
backbone network. In addition, challenges of scale and interoperability exist
across networks, applications and services, both requiring an effective wireless
network management infrastructure. At the same time, there has been a rising
imperative to capitalize on the current technological advancements to address to
the most pressing issues surrounding construction and the built environment to
increase health and safety; productivity; and sustainability. This Elements
project combines the areas of computer science, electrical engineering, and
construction and building to develop a robust cyberinfrastructure (CI) service
for construction research, as well as applications that utilize state-of-the-art
emerging technologies and software to address the current challenges faced by
the construction industry. The major contribution of the project is the
development of the IoT-ACRES (IoT-Applied Construction Research and Education
Services) system, a central, interoperable framework hub that can incorporate a
variety of heterogeneous sensors, technology, software, managed by a software-
defined network infrastructure and optimized by machine learning and artificial
intelligence techniques. The prototype system will help to augment the works
and/or safety manager's ability to detect hazards and subsequently improve
safety performance in construction, which is one of the greatest challenges
faced by the construction industry. In addition, the framework can be used to
increase autonomy in applications that require simultaneous tracking of multiple
entities (people, vehicles, equipment, etc.), detecting multiple objects of
interests, analyzing real-time biometric data, and making autonomous decisions.
Results will be disseminated to industry and research communities through
publications and presentations at workshops, training courses and online
professional certification programs. The project will also be used as a
research, education, and training tool to (1) mentor and teach K-12 students
about STEM, and (2) to develop and enhance courses to educate the current and
next generations of students, users, and workers, on the latest technology and
the latest approaches to cyber security techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a robust cyberinfrastructure (CI) system and service for
construction research and applications to address the current challenges faced
in the construction industry. The outcomes and services that this proposal aims
to provide are 1) a distributed SDN-managed and AI-assisted IoT-based system
that can be adapted and extended based on needs of the research and application;
2) identification of the data and data security requirements needed to address
the challenges in the construction industry and potential technologies that can
provide those data; 3) evaluation of reliable real-time multi-sensor fusion
techniques for ruggedness, usability, and limitations of IoT-based components
deployed in the dynamic construction environments; 4) robust prototype system
for real-time safety monitoring based on the IoT system framework; and 5)
recommendations of potential configurations of the system with the appropriate
technology and sensors to meet the needs of the application. The empirical data
resulting will be delivered through yearly NSF reports on the progress and
findings, journal publications of the intellectual merit and scientific
findings, and conference proceedings discussing the broader impacts and future
research objectives. The framework of the hardware and software, including an
instructional manual will also be published. The software will be made available
through request via a project website, open source posts, and conference and
workshop dissemination. The project will explore the use of various delivery
mechanisms, such as NSF's eXtreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment
(XSEDE). The IoT-ACRES will utilize IBM IoT Continuous Engineering and Cloud
Computing Servers Cloud (e.g. Amazon AWS) for the data analysis and performance
metrics. This novel convergence research project will ultimately advance the
development of sustainable CI communities and stewardships of sustainable CI
services that can enhance productivity and accelerate innovation in science and
engineering. This work will advance practices of safety controls by developing a
tool for safety monitoring on construction sites, presented to safety managers
with interfaces that visualize, and report real-time safety hazards.
Significantly, it will address fundamental research challenges in computer
vision and construction management: improving context-based object recognition
and tracking; and formalizing rules for integrating visual, textual, biometric
data to proactively recognize safety hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.