* 2004497
* Single Ion Conducting Polymers of Boron Rich Nanoclusters: Synthesis and Fundamental Electrochemical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Juchen Guo, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 520,000.00

Non-Technical Summary: Innovative electrochemical energy storage technologies
beyond lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are essential for a new era of information
and communication technologies. Emerging applications such as smart grid,
telecommunications, and the Internet of Things demand new rechargeable batteries
characterized with low costs, high safety, and excellent cycle stability.
Rechargeable magnesium (Mg) ion batteries can potentially fulfill these
requirements and are scientifically intriguing due to their distinctly different
electrochemical mechanisms from those known in LIBs. The key bottleneck for Mg-
ion batteries is the lack of Mg2+ ion electrolytes that offer excellent Mg2+
conductivity, chemical and electrochemical stability. In this project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, researchers develop a completely new class of solid polymer
electrolytes (SPEs) that have high Mg2+ ion conductivity and excellent
stability. The researchers achieve this by covalently tethering anionic species
to the polymer backbones, which attract and transport Mg2+ cations within the
polymer network. The specific anions in this project are boron rich nanoclusters
(BRNs), which are cage-like bulky molecular structures composed of carbon and
boron atoms and carrying a negative charge. The uniqueness and advantage of
these BRN anions is their relatively weak bonding with Mg2+ cations so that Mg2+
can be dissociated and moved within the electric field in solid state. The BRN
SPEs also exhibit excellent stability due to the strong carbon-boron and boron-
boron bonds. Additionally, this project directly involves the participation of
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students from underrepresented groups.
Funds have been allocated for high school student stipends to continue an
outreach program the PI and Co-PI developed. These activities will provide
society with more greatly needed STEM educated people to enter the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Boron Rich Nanoclusters
(BRNs) are weakly coordinating polyatomic anions composed of boron and carbon.
Their salts exhibit extraordinary solid-state ionic conductivity at low
temperature and unmatched (electro)chemical stability. With this project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, the research team translates the favorable properties of
magnesium (Mg) BRN salts into Mg2+ single ion conducting ionomers as solid
polymer electrolytes (SPEs) for rechargeable Mg-ion batteries. The central
hypothesis is that a new class of single ion Mg2+ conducting polymers can be
created by covalently linking BRNs anions to polymer backbones. The obtained
Mg2+ ionomers maintain the high ionic conductivity and (electro)chemical
stability observed for their crystalline powders. It is also hypothesized that
the Mg2+ ion transport in the proposed BRN SPEs follows a new mechanism superior
to the conventional ion hopping due to the weakly coordinating nature of the BRN
anions. Surface functionalization of BRNs is also investigated to fine tune
their electrochemical properties, which is not possible or very limited with
traditional polyatomic anions. Two methods including (1) base initiated epoxide
ring opening polymerization and (2) ring opening olefin metathesis
polymerization are proposed to synthesize the Mg BRN SPEs. The physical,
chemical, and electrochemical properties of the synthesized SPEs are
systematically investigated. The investigations on the electrochemical
properties focus on ion conductivity, interfacial stability with Mg metal
anodes, and electrochemical reactions with the
cathodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.