* 2004897
* Uncovering the atomic origins of thin film ferroelectricity
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* BC Regan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 468,198.00

Non-technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;Memory is a key specification in consumer
electronics like laptop computers and cell phones. For instance, a hard disk
drive stores information as a series of “1”s and “0”s that are physically
realized as tiny magnets. Instead of the magnetic materials in hard disk drives,
new “ferroelectric” materials might form the basis of next-generation digital
storage. In this project the research team uses advanced electron microscopy to
probe the relationships between physical structure (where the atoms are) and
electronic structure (how they respond to electric fields) in these new
materials at the atomic level. Graduate and undergraduate students sponsored by
this award will perform microelectronic device fabrication and testing, and
become proficient at electron microscopy. These skillsets are directly
applicable in the semiconductor industry. Students are being trained not only at
the home institution of UCLA, but also at the minority-serving institutions of
Norfolk State University and Fort Lewis College via a collaboration with the
Partnership for Education and the Advancement of Quantum and nanoSystems
(PEAQS), which is part of the NSF-funded Partnership for Research and Education
in Materials (PREM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Hafnia
(HfO2), when prepared in a very specific, non-equilibrium crystalline state, can
exhibit ferroelectricity. Materials such as hafnia specifically are already
commonplace in microprocessors, and underlie the emerging technologies of
ferroelectric field effect transistors (FeFETs) and ferroelectric random access
memory (FRAM). The team fabricates nanoscale, electron-transparent ferroelectric
hafnia devices, and cycles the hafnia thermally and electrically in situ. These
stimuli bring the hafnia, which is amorphous as deposited, through its various
crystalline phases. Imaging the hafnia in each phase with electron beam-induced
current (EBIC) imaging and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), the team
produces near-atomic resolution structural, electronic, and temperature maps.
Correlating these maps with transport data acquired simultaneously provides a
complete picture of these live, switchable devices. In particular, differential
measurements of electronic properties, both before and after thermal and
electrical cycling, enable the team to directly address such open problems as
the origin and stability of the ferroelectric phase. Developing techniques for
measuring the electrical and thermal properties of such materials contributes to
the rational design of compact, low-power, and robust memory
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.