* 2004217
* High-Field Solid-State Dynamic Nuclear Polarization with Paramagnetic Systems Beyond Simple Spin 1/2
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Song-I Han, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 970,546.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Song-I Han at the University of California-Santa Barbara
is working to improve our understanding of solid-state Dynamic Nuclear
Polarization (DNP), an important means of boosting the sensitivity of Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR), thereby expanding its reach to a wider scope of
chemical systems. NMR is a widely used tool for characterizing the composition
and dynamics of chemical systems. It is, for example, the technical basis of
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), an important medical diagnostic tool. Dr. Han
and her group are devising new probes and new experimental protocols to
substantially improve the resolution and sensitivity of NMR analysis of samples
containing species and of properties currently not amenable to NMR analysis. The
research offers interdisciplinary training opportunities to graduate students by
providing hands-on experience in technology and hardware development. The
educational impact is enhanced through a structured undergraduate research
program, Hands-On-Spin (hSPIN), engaging undergraduate students in instrument
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Han's research focusses on development of
innovative methods for spin manipulations and novel instrumental capabilities,
targeting improved understanding and a wider scope of applicability for high-
field solid-state Dynamic Nuclear Polarization (DNP). Specifically, her group is
using a novel sensitizer scheme to reveal DNP from high-spin systems that would
otherwise be invisible to DNP. In the course of these studies, they are
clarifying the mechanism behind the Overhauser effect (OE) in insulating solids,
unraveling the competition between electron spin exchange (J) and dipolar
couplings (D) in DNP under Magic Angle Spinning (MAS), and improving
understanding of the potential and range of hyperfine DNP spectroscopy to
measure transition metal – nuclear spin distances. The studies are uncovering
new DNP mechanisms and novel experimental approaches to extend DNP to spin
systems beyond S=1/2. These aims are enabled by developing innovative
instrumental capabilities for concurrent electron (e) and nuclear (n) spin
resonance excitation and detection; arbitrary waveform generated (AWG) pulse
shaping to achieve coherent and/or spin dynamics-assisted e-n polarization
transfer; and two-frequency pump-probe 2D Electron DOuble Resonance (ELDOR),
under static and MAS conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.