* 2004571
* CSSI: Frameworks: X-Ion Collisions with a Statistically and Computationally Advanced Program Envelope (X-SCAPE)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Loren Schwiebert, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2024
* USD 4,048,831.00

High-energy colliders around the world currently study the production of, and
interaction between, a variety of subatomic particles and environments produced
in the collision of protons with protons, with nuclei, or even between two
nuclei, as at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European Center for Nuclear
Research (CERN), or at the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven
National Laboratory (BNL). The future Electron Ion Collider (EIC), slated for
construction at BNL, will study collisions of electrons with protons and nuclei.
Interactions at all these experiments are dominated by the strong nuclear force,
whose behavior is still not well understood. Direct comparison between theory
and experiment requires sophisticated computer simulations, where each stage of
a collision is modeled via a combination of established principles or candidate
theories. A complete simulation, consisting of a number of sub-simulations,
depends on several input parameters. The extracted values for these parameters
represent fundamental properties of strongly interacting matter. A simultaneous
determination of these parameters, in extensive comparisons with volumes of data
from diverse experiments, requires an elaborate statistical and computational
framework. The X-SCAPE collaboration, a multi-disciplinary team of physicists,
computer scientists and statisticians, is engaged in the construction of such an
open-source framework. The expertise required to operate, modify and extend this
framework is disseminated to practicing scientists via a combination of
dedicated short-term schools (in-person and virtual), topical workshops, web
tutorials, conference presentations and detailed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The X-SCAPE project encompasses the entire
high-energy nuclear physics enterprise by providing a general purpose,
modifiable, and modular framework, that incorporates all known interaction
processes prevalent at these experiments. The developed software is designed to
be portable onto hybrid architectures, where GPU acceleration can be applied to
the most demanding computational tasks. Provided as a steadily improving package
culminating in annual releases, X-SCAPE includes of i) the default distribution
of baseline tools allowing for simplified simulations on commodity CPUs, ii) a
refactored product for distributed architectures with GPUs, and iii) Bayesian
statistical routines to both emulate and systematically explore the model space
of parameters against diverse experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the
Physics at the Information Frontier (PIF) Program within the Division of Physics
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities within the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.