* 2004466
* Understanding antiferromagnetic spin-orbit heterostructures with a single-spin microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Gregory Fuchs, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 440,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand and control a
class of magnetic materials, antiferromagnets, that are abundant in nature but
produce no macroscopic magnetic fields. In these materials, the atomic-scale
sources of magnetism alternate directions and thus fully cancel when observed
from a distance. Until recently, these materials have played little role in
magnetic science and technology, with the principle application being the
modification of other magnetic materials. However, the potential for
antiferromagnetic materials as active elements that store and process
information has emerged. Their advantages, including ultra-fast dynamics and
insensitivity to applied magnetic fields, make them attractive for high-
performance information storage. The research team’s approach acknowledges the
critical role of material interfaces for advanced magnetic memory technologies.
Additionally, this project addresses a key challenge in this field – that
antiferromagnetic materials are difficult to study because they produce no
magnetic fields except at atomic-scale distances from the sample. The team is
tackling this challenge using an atom-scale quantum sensor scanned in nanoscale
proximity to antiferromagnetic materials and their interfaces, thus enabling the
measurement of otherwise undetectable magnetic fields at the smallest length
scales. Training for graduate and undergraduate students contributes to a
workforce with convergent knowledge in materials physics and quantum information
technology. Additionally, this project provides hands-on science educational
opportunities aimed at elementary school students that encourage positive
relationships with role models and contributes to a scientifically literate
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
interfaces between antiferromagnetic materials and materials with strong spin-
orbit coupling with the main question: can spin-orbit coupling modify AF spin
order? For example, the research team is examining the potential formation of an
interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (or antisymmetric exchange) that
induces chiral spin order and modifications to antiferromagnetic anisotropy at
an interface. This project also seeks to understand how uncompensated magnetic
moments, which are critical to the interfacial magnetism in
antiferromagnet/ferromagnet heterostructures, contribute in the case of
antiferromagnet/spin-orbit coupling interfaces. The magnetic materials that the
research team work with include antiferromagnets such as nickel oxide, chromia,
iridium manganese, iron rhodium and others, as well as ferrimagnets near
compensation such as rare earth alloys and garnets, which enable temperature and
compositional tuning of the net magnetization. The materials with strong spin-
orbit coupling include heavy metals (Pt, Ta, W, Ir) and topological insulators
(bismuth selenide and related materials). To understand spin order in these
heterostructures, the research team must overcome the experimental difficulties
associated with study of antiferromagnetic materials – the lack of an average
magnetization that can be detected using conventional techniques. This project
takes advantage of the exquisite sensitivity and spatial resolution that is
possible using a scanning-probe nitrogen-vacancy center magnetic microscope. The
team is using this quantum-enhanced sensor to detect the tiny magnetic fields at
surfaces and interfaces, and they are developing new approaches designed for
antiferromagnetic material imaging including coherence imaging, relaxometry, and
image reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.