* 2004326
* Nanoscale Mechanisms in Alloy Oxidation: Binary and Ternary Ni-Based Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Petra Reinke, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2024
* USD 515,290.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;Corrosion is in the most general terms the breakdown of
a material due to chemical reactions at the surface, and is often seen in daily
life as rust on steel and iron. Corrosion is everywhere, in cars and water pipes
to name a few, and most metals will break down over time which can lead in the
most extreme case to catastrophic failure. The annual cost incurred in the U.S.
by corrosion is more than 3% of the gross national product. Protecting materials
from corrosion is critical to the design of new materials. How fast a material
corrodes and degrades depends strongly on the environmental conditions, such as
temperature, and humidity, salinity, noxious fumes, and radiation. Often,
coatings are placed on materials that protects it from rusting rapidly. For
example, Ni-based superalloy are used in turbine blades for energy production
and propelling airplanes, yet they degrade rapidly in the extreme high
temperature environment. Small additions of elements are often added, such as W,
Mo, Cr, to these alloys to dramatically reduce corrosion. This work combines
forefront experimental and computational tools to gain understanding at the
atomic scale on how rust develops from the initial oxygen striking the surface
of a material to the development of a protective oxide in Ni-based superalloys,
and the beneficial role of adding certain elements to control and reduce
corrosion. Such knowledge will benefit the design of future alloys, especially
those used in extreme environments. This work will contribute to graduate and
undergraduate research experiences. Furthermore, a video-based portfolio of on-
demand lectures will be developed through a collaboration between University of
Virginia and James Madison
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;Dry and aqueous
corrosion/oxidation are leading causes of materials loss, and catastrophic
failure. Corrosion resistance is therefore included as a design criterium in
alloy engineering. The proposed work will advance understanding of oxidation
mechanisms in Ni-based superalloys with Cr, Mo, and W as alloying elements.
Mechanistic understanding of the initial reaction sequence where the alloy
surface transforms into an oxide layer, is achieved by probing the geometric,
electronic, and chemical structure in alloy and oxide at the nanometer scale.
This work advances fundamental understanding of oxidation, and will infuse the
development of computational methods to design protective coatings and better
alloys. This proposal aims to develop a detailed mechanistic understanding of
the initial steps in alloy oxidation of binary and ternary Ni-based alloys. The
formation of oxide layers on Ni-Cr, and Ni-Cr-Mo or Ni-Cr-W alloys is studied
with methods traditionally used in surface science and catalysis and afford the
requisite geometric, electronic, and chemical information at the nanoscale. This
includes scanning tunneling microscopy, and electron spectroscopies at
synchrotron facilities with in-situ and operando observations starting with the
clean alloy all the way to the closed oxide layer for a wide range of alloy
composition and processing conditions (T, p(O2)). The majority of experiments
are positioned in a regime where NiO and chromia formation compete. Monte Carlo
methods, and density functional theory are used to model the element
distribution in the pristine alloy and combined with experimental studies of
segregation, and diffusivity to understand the near-surface Cr inventory in
various alloys. Surface phase transformations, reconstructions, and element-
specific nucleation pathways contribute to the development of oxide
heterogeneity and are dramatically modified by minor alloying elements (W, Mo).
The propagation of heterogeneity into the Cabrera-Mott regime is tested with
operando experiments (ambient pressure x-ray photoelectron and absorption
spectroscopies). The materials knowledge developed in this proposal will provide
an understanding of mechanisms at the atomic scale, which are critical to infuse
computational approaches, including machine learning approaches, and to achieve
future predictive capabilities. A video-based portfolio of on-demand Surface
Science lectures will be developed integrating textbook knowledge and pertinent
literature. These videos build the knowledge base in surface science, corrosion,
catalysis, thin film growth and analytical techniques for undergraduate and
graduate students at UVa and James Madison University (Prof. Baber), a primarily
undergraduate institution. The PI is committed to outreach and diversity, and
will recruit UG students for the proposed research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.