* 2004076
* Development of Innovative Approaches to Entangled Photon Imaging and Microscopy for Chemical and Biological Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Theodore Gore Goodson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 503,551.00

With this award, The Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry, with co-funding from the Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics –
Experiment Program in the Division of Physics, is funding Dr. Theodore Goodson
III of the University of Michigan to investigate the limits of sensitivity of a
new imaging technique known as entangled two-photon absorption microscopy.
Interesting and new ways to take advantage of the complex nature of light, such
as making use of its fundamental basic unit – the quantum- to image molecules in
biological systems has rapidly progressed over the last decade. Microscopy-based
imaging of materials and biologicals, and chemical sensing have benefitted from
advances exploiting non-linear interactions of light with matter. By taking
advantage of the quantum and non-linear interactions of light that occur in a
novel microscope, Dr. Theodore Goodson III at the University of Michigan
utilizes a new approach that circumvents shortcomings with current microscopy-
imaging methods. The new measurement approach, labeled entangled two-photon
absorption microscopy, offers imaging of a wide array of chemical and biological
systems with high sensitivity and little risk of damaging the sample. This new
capability is expected to find wide application in molecular sensing, from small
moleculars to complex materials to biological systems. Integrated educational
activities provide professional training to undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral scientists in chemistry, optics, and materials science. The program
provides opportunities for students interested in quantum information science
and provides for broad participation in frontline experimental methods
development in imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project sets out to
investigate the limits of sensitivity of the entangled two-photon absorption
microscopy method. In the past, the optical arrangement to probe the entangled
two-photon absorption microscope effect has been a limiting factor in the
process of illustrating the full utility of the microscope. Dr. Goodson is
addressing this challenge by testing a two-beam configuration at very low input
flux of the entangled two-photon absorption microscope. Dr. Goodson is also
addressing the ability of the entangled two-photon absorption microscope to
image biochemically endogenous materials without the use of an external dye or
chemical probe. The project provides the foundation for a new microscopy
approach that the chemical and imaging community may utilize for chemical
imaging. The research objectives are integrated with educational objectives and
involve the engagement of diverse undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
scientists in experimental physical chemistry
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.