* 2004613
* Epigenetic inheritance in the Crenarchaeota
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Mark Wilson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 618,472.00

This project addresses evolution by studying how microbes called archaea inherit
biological traits through an epigenetic mechanism. Epigenetics refers to
chemical modifications of DNA or of proteins bound to that DNA that cause
inherited changes without modifying the order of nucleotides (sequence) of a
gene. This form of heredity has significant impacts on the physiology and
evolution of animals and plants but it is not known when this form of
inheritance arose in evolution. This project explores the possibility that
epigenetic inheritance arose first in in the archaea, which are a much more
ancient lineage than eukaryotes including plants and animals. The PI will
examine laboratory-adapted lineages of an archaeal species that inherit extreme
resistance to acidic environments. These cells have extensive changes in gene
expression that enable this acid resistance, yet they do not have any DNA
sequence variations that explain this inherited trait. This project will also
enable development a new investigative laboratory course module for a general
microbiology course (400 students/year). The laboratory module will be adapted
for use in high schools and with underserved minority students (in the U.S
Department of Education Upward Bound program) and in a regional Women in Science
program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SARC archaeal lines were evolved in the
laboratory to select for extreme acid resistance. In some of the SARC lines,
chromatin protein hypomethylation and not mutation account for inherited global
changes in gene expression that are responsible for extreme acid resistance. In
the proposed work, the locus-specific distribution of epigenetic marks on
chromatin proteins will be determined using called site-specific chromatin
immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry. These experiments will determine whether
hypomethylated archaeal chromatin proteins preferentially localize to genes
within the SARC transcriptome. While the composition and epigenetic variation of
chromatin protein networks have been established, the connectivity among
component proteins has not. These networks are critical because they may
constitute the signal transduction pathway controlling epigenetic traits. The PI
will use three different techniques to elucidate how the proteins are connected
in one or more networks. Finally, the PI will investigate the observation that
SARC lines have a reduced mutation rate per cell division. The PI will test two
competing models to clarify the mechanism underlying this trait. This work has
the potential to reveal that epigenetic inheritance is an ancient mechanism for
adaptation to sudden environmental changes typified by steep physiochemical
gradients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.