* 2004601
* Frameworks: Bayesian Analysis of Nuclear Dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Richard Furnstahl, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2025
* USD 3,798,390.00

Nuclear physicists seek an accurate description of the properties of atomic
nuclei, collisions between nuclei, and extreme environments such as the first
few seconds of our universe or the interior of a neutron star. These situations
involve many particles interacting through complex forces. They’re each
described by a number of different models that typically explain accurately
results of existing experiments. The models don’t do as well predicting what
will happen in future experiments or in environments that are inaccessible here
on Earth. The Bayesian Analysis of Nuclear Dynamics (BAND) Framework will use
advanced statistical methods to produce forecasts for as-yet-unexplored
situations that combine nuclear-physics models in an optimal way. These will be
more reliable than the predictions of any individual model. BAND’s forefront
computer codes will be widely available and will facilitate the design of
nuclear-physics experiments that can deliver the largest gain in understanding.
The adoption of BAND’s tools in other sciences dealing with “model uncertainty”
could spur broad scientific innovation. Undergraduate and graduate students
working on BAND will gain a broad range of technical skills in data science,
machine learning, nuclear physics, and high-performance
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear physicists seek a quantitative
description of strongly-interacting matter. Sophisticated models of how neutrons
and protons interact in the nucleus, extreme environments, and collisions
between nuclei have been key to the great progress made towards this goal. These
models typically describe extant data well, but often yield divergent
predictions for future experiments. The Bayesian Analysis of Nuclear Dynamics
(BAND) framework will be a broadly available set of computational tools built
through intensive collaboration between statisticians, computer scientists and
nuclear physicists. It will combine the results of several models, incorporating
prior knowledge and experimental data for each, to produce a full assessment of
the uncertainty in nuclear-physics predictions. This will enable quantitative
evaluation of the impact of future experiments, accelerating the theory-
experiment feedback loop and spurring innovation. It will also help quantify
uncertainties for terrestrially inaccessible environments, such as the core of
neutron stars or the first microsecond after the Big Bang. Similar challenges
are faced by researchers modeling complex dynamics in other sciences, so BAND’s
tools will have broad appeal. Undergraduate and graduate students working on
BAND will gain expertise in statistical methods and nuclear physics, as well as
experience with large-scale computing and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Physics at the Information
Frontier in the Division of Physics and the CDS&amp;E program in the Division of
Mathematical Sciences within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.