* 2004527
* Measuring the Surface Energy of Metals through Structure-Property Analysis of Electrodeposition Instabilities
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Ranga Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2023
* USD 581,500.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Surface energy is one of the most fundamental
and important thermophysical properties of metal surfaces as it has a strong
influence on the mechanical, electrical, catalytic, and morphological
characteristics of the solid. These properties are important to understanding
corrosion, catalytic behavior, adsorption on solid substrates, and crystal
formation. Measurements of the surface energy have been recognized as an
important parameter that has eluded researchers for several decades. This
project seeks to develop the structure-property relationships that enable the
direct measurement of the surface energy of solid metals near ambient
temperature. The approach is based on well-defined patterns that form on the
cathode during the electrodeposition of metals in microfluidic channels.
Electrodeposition allows highly accurate potential gradients and spacings that
can be conducted at room temperature to obtain reliable patterns. These well-
defined patterns are associated with the competition between different forces
acting on the surface, allowing determination of the surface energy of the metal
surface. The method can be translated to any metal surface that is capable of
electrodeposition reactions in which the thermophysical parameters are known.
The program also includes K-12 outreach with local schools, which include in-
class demonstrations, summer research programs, and engineering
fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Experimental estimates
of the surface energy of metals are very difficult to obtain and have
uncertainties of unknown magnitude. The objective of this project is to measure
directly the surface energy of solid metals using copper surfaces as a case
study. The central hypothesis is that electrodeposition instabilities result in
well-defined instability patterns of predictable wavelengths that correlate with
the surface energy of the copper surface. The project capitalizes on the ability
to measure the formation of a single wave instability pattern during
electrodeposition thereby leading to the direct measurement of surface energy.
Instability patterns at the surface arise from inherent perturbations of
structure, potential or concentration during electrodeposition and are a result
of a feedback mechanism that encourages patterns at the cathode. An intelligent
choice of electrode dimensions enables a single wave pattern to be formed and
detected at the onset of the instability. These onset conditions and the
companion patterns are directly related to the surface energy of the solid metal
and predicted by the coupled transport and reaction kinetic equations. The
expected outcome of this project is a direct method to measure the surface
energy of a solid metal surface near ambient
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.