* 2004274
* SBP: Major Disadvantages: Career Ambitions and Inequality by College Field of Study in Early Careers
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Elizabeth Armstrong, Pech, Corey
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award is provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF program
is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific
careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards
involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists
and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to
promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific
community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its research
programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Elizabeth A.
Armstrong at the University of Michigan, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating workplace gender inequality
among recent college graduates. We know a good deal about mid-career gender
inequality in the labor force, such as discrimination limiting women’s
advancement opportunities and how burdens of work/family conflicts are borne
unequally by women. Exposure to this inequality may cause women to change their
professional plans early in their careers, however we know little about how
early career experiences might contribute to this outcome. This research will
identify when people’s workplace expectations begin to shift and if these are
related to inequality experienced or observed at work, family expectations, or
other considerations. Findings will lend insight into how women can be better
positioned in the labor market, broadening their participation in high status
jobs, and closing gender gaps that exists across the occupational
hierarchy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate men and women’s
early career experiences from college internships to their fourth year in the
workforce in order to learn when and how individuals begin to change their
career plans and how these decisions are informed by workers observing or
experiencing relational inequality at work. Relational inequality is a concept
capturing how cognitive biases, along with explicit and implicit discrimination,
explain how women are treated differently than their male co-workers throughout
their careers. Research will be accomplished by collecting a third wave of
longitudinal interviews with college graduates from four majors, two that are
male-dominated (Engineering/Business), and two that are female-dominated
(Communications/English). Previously, 91 college seniors were interviewed about
their internships and 85 of them were retained for a second interview one year
later after graduation. Research will meet three objectives: (1) uncover the
pathways through which individuals change their career plans early in their
careers, (2) explain how these pathways are shaped by experiences, or
observations, of relational gender inequality, (3) investigate how these two
processes vary by gender and college field of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.