* 2004135
* Iron(II)/Iron(III) and Cobalt(II) Complexes as Redox-tunable Probes for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Janet Morrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 443,200.00

Inflammation is a characteristic feature of many diseases including
arteriosclerosis, multiple sclerosis, and cancer. The development of probes to
track inflammation could provide information towards the diagnosis and treatment
of these diseases. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides high resolution and
deep tissue images, which in conjunction with MRI probes, may enable mapping of
inflammation in disease states. In this project, Dr. Morrow is developing new
MRI probes that demonstrate a change in signal in the presence of certain
molecules that are produced by the immune defense system of the body during
inflammation. These MRI probes contain cobalt or iron switches that are part of
small molecules or lipid nanoparticles. This project involves the preparation of
several new cobalt or iron containing molecules and their study in solution and
in animal models of inflammation. Dr. Morrow of the University at Buffalo, the
State University of New York is actively engaged in outreach activities that
build upon her research to promote engagement of students in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities,
which include summer research internships for middle school and high school
teachers in Dr. Morrow’s laboratory, are directed at improving education of K-12
students and encouraging their interest in STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms-B program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Morrow of the University at
Buffalo, the State University of New York is developing transition metal
complexes as MRI contrast agents that respond to cellular redox imbalances
attributed to inflammation. Inflammation that is associated with the defensive
immune response is a characteristic of many diseases and injuries including
arteriosclerosis, multiple sclerosis, and cancer. For example, atherosclerotic
lesions contain high levels of perioxidase activity. Dr. Morrow is synthesizing
new Co(II) and Fe(II)/Fe(III) complexes as MRI contrast agents that are
responsive to inflammation. Small molecule coordination complexes of Fe(II) are
activated under these oxidizing conditions through the formation of high spin
Fe(III) complexes that are relaxivity contrast agents. Liposome systems loaded
with Co(II) or Fe(II) show a shift in the position of the signal upon change in
redox environment. MRI studies are carried out both in solution and in mice. Dr.
Morrow is actively engaged in STEM outreach programs focused on summer research
experiences and collaborative projects for middle and high school teachers and
for undergraduates to improve education in the STEM fields, in support of
broader impacts of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.