* 2004559
* Superparamagnets for Probabilistic and Reservoir Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Sara Majetich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This research program aims to optimize superparamagnetic tunnel junctions for
low power probabilistic and reservoir-based computation. The results will have
impact on low energy sensors and hand-held electronic devices, as well as in
high performance data encryption and probabilistic decryption. Superparamagnetic
tunnel junctions are devices that spontaneously fluctuate between two resistance
states, and have a time-averaged resistance that can be tuned using a smaller
voltage than that needed for conventional switching, enabling lower power
consumption, for example in a smart phone. Probabilistic computing performs
logic operations based on combinations of the time-averaged signals. The
randomness of the resistance fluctuations and ability to design
superparamagnetic tunnel junctions for high speed are important features for
cyber security applications. Reservoir computing is a type of hardware-based
accelerator for neural networks, and here interacting superparamagnets will be
used to form different kinds of reservoir. A unique feature is that only the
input and output will require electrical connections, which could dramatically
reduce power consumption. The aim of this component of the research program is
to quantify the speed and short-term memory for different geometries of
superparamagnet arrays, in order to evaluate them for use in artificial
intelligence applications. The impact of magnetic reservoir computing would come
from a better understanding of the algorithms that enable high energy efficiency
and complex processing. A graduate student will develop extensive
nanofabrication, high frequency electronics, and machine learning skills. There
will be multiple options for undergraduate research projects, and a teaching
module for a nanofabrication laboratory will be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two interconnected thrusts to this research
program, both centered on electrical control of superparamagnets. In the first,
non-interacting superparamagnetic tunnel junctions are optimized for high
average fluctuation rate and low bias voltage tunability of the time-averaged
resistance. Multiple tunnel junctions are interconnected with variable feedback
in order to demonstrate probabilistic logic gate behavior. The effect of the
feedback amplitude and averaging time on the statistical preference for
different logic states will be determined, and the power consumption measured,
in order to benchmark superparamagnet-based logic devices. The second thrust
involves investigation of assemblies of magnetostatically interacting
nanomagnets for reservoir computing. They are controlled by the magnetic fringe
field of a superparamagnetic tunnel junction input, and their response in picked
up by the fringe field generated at a superparamagnetic tunnel junction output.
Magnetostatically coupled patterns have previously been used for logic devices,
but applications have been limited by the need for an external magnetic field.
Here electronic control and detection will be used, enabling high speed
operation and making integration with semiconductor electronics easier.
Investigation of magnetostatically driven output coupling could eliminate an
important bottleneck in the design of high performance magnetic logic devices
imposed by the weak signal from the inverse spin Hall effect. By combining
superparamagnetic tunnel junctions, electronic feedback, and magnetostatically
coupled patterns, the proposed research program will develop an accelerator for
machine learning and a toolkit for exploration of reservoir
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.