* 2004085
* SciGirls in the National Parks: Building Positive STEM Identities in Underserved Girls in Citizen Science Programs Using Gender Equitable and Culturally Responsive Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Richard Bonney, Twin Cities Public Television
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 01/31/2024
* USD 2,999,495.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This Innovations in Development project
addresses the need to broaden girls’ participation in STEM studies and career
pathways. While women make up 47% of the U.S. workforce, they hold only 28.3% of
STEM jobs and only 1 in 10 employed engineers and scientists are minority women.
Girls of low socioeconomic status start losing interest and confidence in STEM
during middle school, and this decline often continues as girls get older.
Multiple sociocultural barriers contribute to girl’s loss of confidence
including gender and ethnic stereotypes; lack of culturally responsive
programming; limited exposure to women role models; and few or no hands-on STEM
experiences. This project builds upon the success of SciGirls, the PBS
television show and national outreach program, which provides professional
development on research-based gender equitable and culturally responsive
teaching strategies designed to engage girls in STEM. It is a collaboration
between Twin Cities Public Television, the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, and the
National Park Service. The project’s goal is to create media-rich citizen
science experiences for girls, particularly girls of color and/or from rural
areas, which broaden their STEM participation, build positive STEM identities
and increase girls’ understanding of scientific concepts, while leveraging
citizen science engagement at national parks. Project deliverables include 1)
creating five new PBS SciGirls episodes that feature real girls working with
women mentors in 16 National Parks, 2) producing five new role model videos of
women National Park Service STEM professionals, nationally disseminated on
multiple PBS platforms, 3) providing professional development for educators and
role models. This project will increase access to STEM education for girls of
color and/or from rural areas, inspiring and preparing them for future STEM
workforce participation. It will build the capacity of educators and National
Park Service women role models to create educational and professional programs
that are welcoming to girls of varying racial, ethnic, socioeconomic, and
geographic backgrounds. SciGirls’ massive reach to diverse audiences via PBS
broadcast and multiple PBS digital platforms will amplify public scientific
literacy, particularly for 21st- century audiences that connect, learn and live
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research study conducted by the Cornell Lab of
Ornithology will address these questions: 1) To what extent does the use of
culturally responsive and gender equitable multimedia in citizen science
programming affect girls’ learning outcomes, and contribute to the development
of positive STEM identity? 2) how will their experiencing citizen science in the
parks influence girls’ connection to nature? At the beginning of the project all
participating girls (n=160) will complete a survey on their interest in science,
efficacy for doing science, and knowledge of citizen science and project-
specific subject matter. Researchers will use the suite of DEVISE instruments
most of which have been validated for youth to measure these constructs. To
measure connection to nature, researchers will use the Connection to Nature
Index, a scale developed for children. Interviews with the girls will be used to
obtain qualitative data to supplement the survey data. Pre-post data will be
analyzed to determine the influence of the culturally responsive media and
experiences on girls’ STEM identities. Researchers will share findings with the
project evaluator to triangulate data between educators’ implementation of the
strategies and girls’ learning outcome providing a more holistic picture of the
overall program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.