* 2004176
* Collaborative Research: Impact of a colloidal suspension droplet: Suspension flows at extreme shear rates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michelle Driscoll, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 254,637.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;An impacting liquid drop is not only an eye-
catching phenomenon, it is also an ideal testbed for studying material
properties. This is due to the high speed at which an impacting drop spreads out
(up to 10 m/s); this spreading process has been carefully studied in ordinary
fluids, but little work has been done to understand how this impact behavior is
modified in a complex fluid. Complex fluids such as ketchup, paint, and oobleck
(cornstarch-in-water) have the property that their viscosity (resistance to
flow) depends on the applied stress. Thus, these fluids flow quite differently
depending on the stress they experience. This research project explores how this
stress-dependent viscosity alters drop-impact behavior. Complex fluids are
ubiquitous, and a deeper understanding of their behavior in impact processes is
essential to industries such as food and drug processing, additive
manufacturing, and printing/coating. In addition to the research synergy between
PI Driscoll and Co-PI Cheng, the collaboration allows a unique opportunity for
expanding students’ training: a personnel exchange has been implemented, so that
the students involved in the project spend two weeks each year at their non-home
institution. This personnel exchange provides trainees opportunities to connect
with a larger network of scientists, as well as the experience of another
discipline and institution. Additionally, the research team leverages the
stunning and eye-catching phenomena of drop impact to design demos to educate
the broader public about the fascinating properties of complex fluids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Liquid drop impact is a
classic problem in fluid mechanics and soft materials and has been studied
extensively for many decades. In comparison, studies focusing on the impact of
non-Newtonian fluid droplets, particularly suspension droplets, have been few
and far between, even though such processes are essential in industries such as
food and drug processing, additive manufacturing, and printing/coating. This
project addresses this knowledge gap by conducting an extensive study of
impacting colloidal suspension droplets, providing a full understanding of the
dynamics of suspension-drop impact and drawing a direct comparison between
Newtonian and non-Newtonian drop impact processes. This systematic study varies
control parameters such as suspension volume fraction, particle shape, impact
energy, and target size. Using both advanced imaging techniques, as well as new
tools to measure impact forces and stress distributions, the team aims to fully
characterize both the kinematics and dynamics of impacting suspension droplets.
Suspension-drop impact provides an ideal model system to probe suspension
dynamics under complex and extreme conditions: a spreading droplet generates
shear rates at least an order of magnitude higher than those that are accessible
via standard rheometry. In addition, the isolated air-fluid interface in drop
impact imposes a unique open boundary rarely seen in other circumstances. Thus,
this project provides crucial missing information on suspension dynamics under
extreme conditions, complementary to the current understanding of suspension
flows obtained in conventional bulk rheological tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant supports research to study impacting
colloidal suspension droplets between Newtonian and non-Newtonian drop impact
processes with funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in DMR of
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.