* 2004298
* Collaborative research: Mid-IR Photonic Funnels: Coupling, emitting, and re-shaping mid-IR photons in the nano-world
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Viktor Podolskiy, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2024
* USD 261,407.00

Progress in the fields of materials science, nanotechnology, healthcare, and
communications all require precise control and understanding of light
interaction with nanoscale objects. Unfortunately, the phenomenon known as the
diffraction limit prevents focusing of light to areas smaller than approximately
half the wavelength of the light. For thermal (mid-infrared) radiation, the
diffraction limit-scale is roughly five microns, much larger than
10-100’s-nanometer size of semiconductor electronic components, viruses, and
other objects of interest. In this collaborative research the investigators
develop novel structures, photonic funnels, that eliminate the diffraction limit
and efficiently guide the optical signals between free space and nano-scale
areas. Theoretically, the investigators develop equations and computer codes to
model propagation of light through the funnels, as well as the emission of light
by nanoscale objects positioned within, and in proximity to, the funnels.
Experimentally, the researchers develop procedures to fabricate the funnels,
integrate light emitters, and analyze light propagation through, and from, these
structures. The exploration and development of these novel composite materials
have the potential to open new avenues in high-resolution probing of biological,
electronic, and optical structures, and in engineering optical interactions with
these structures. In addition, the investigators plan for outreach and
educational activities aimed at both high-school and college-level students, as
well as personnel exchange and training across the
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project aims to address one
of the fundamental limits of light-matter interaction, the diffraction limit.
The research team utilizes recently developed composite optical materials with
highly doped plasmonic inclusions, hyperbolic metamaterials, and develops tools
for the design, fabrication, and analysis of conical structures with hyperbolic
cores, photonic funnels, in the important mid-infrared frequency range. The
strong dielectric anisotropy of hyperbolic materials postpones the onset of the
diffraction limit inside the funnels and thus enables propagation of light
between micro- and nano-scales. The research team analyzes, theoretically and
experimentally, light-matter interaction inside, and in close proximity to, the
photonic funnels. Specifically, the team develops theoretical tools capable of
accurate modelling of light generation from within, and in the near field of,
the funnels, as well as of light propagation through the funnels. In parallel,
the team develops fabrication and characterization procedures to accurately
control the geometry of the funnels and to understand their optical response.
The collaborative feedback within the team enables comprehensive development of
a novel material platform offering unique opportunities for light
manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.