* 2004877
* Harnessing machine learning and cloud computing to test biological models of the role of white matter in human learning
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Franco Pestilli, Vinci-Booher            Sophia
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Science of Learning and Augmented Intelligence Program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Franco
Pestilli at Indiana University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the role of white matter communication
pathways in the human brain in learning and generalization. Prior work has
related individual differences in human white matter to current abilities as a
measurement of past learning; the proposed work will, instead, use individual
differences in human white matter to predict future learning. The hypothesis
addressed in the proposed work is that sensorimotor training changes white
matter communication pathways in ways that allow for generalization to untrained
behaviors. The investigators will test this hypothesis by using machine-learning
methods and implementing an explicit model testing approach. This research will
provide the field with important information concerning learning-related changes
in the brain that will be applicable to educational and neuro-rehabilitation
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates cutting-edge
measurements of white matter communication pathways in the brain with novel
behavioral assessments. The proposed work builds from a well-documented and
repeatable finding: sensorimotor learning leads to learning that generalizes
(e.g., handwriting increases letter recognition). The project has three goals.
The first goal is to demonstrate that training on a sensorimotor task (i.e.,
drawing novel symbols) leads to task-specific changes in the tissue properties
of white matter communication pathways. We will employ a between-participants
training manipulation and assess differences in learning-related white matter
microstructure among training groups. The second goal is to demonstrate that the
white matter changes associated with sensorimotor learning support
generalization to an untrained behavior. We will use machine-learning to build a
model of the relationship between learning-related changes in white matter
tissue microstructure and sensorimotor learning. We will then quantify how well
that model predicts visual recognition learning (i.e., learning to recognize the
novel symbols). The expectation is that individual variability in global white
matter tissue properties will predict sensorimotor learning and generalization.
The final goal of the work is to leverage the cloud computing
platform–brainlife.io–to deliver open-science and reproducible methods as well
as publicly available analyses and services. Data, analyses, and results will be
shared on brainlife.io with the potential to impact multiple communities of
scientists interested in learning: behavioral scientists, computer scientists,
and neuroscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.