* 2004682
* CAS: Lignocellulosic building blocks towards high-performance and sustainable polysulfones and polyurethanes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Thomas Epps, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 511,883.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyurethanes are ubiquitous in a
range of consumer products from athletic goods to automotive parts, showcasing
their versatility to address a variety of application needs. Typically
manufactured utilizing petroleum feedstocks, the continued use of polymers, such
as a polyurethanes, is impacted by questions around recyclability and
environmental impacts. The transformation of biomass into value-added polymers
is a promising route to develop materials with comparable performance and lower
cost, and that can be designed for an optimal product lifecycle. Utilizing wood
biomass, the team will design, synthesize, and characterize high-performance
polymers, investigate more sustainable approaches to the generation of polymers,
and study the influence of wood diversity on material properties and
environmental impact. These bioderived polymers have potential applications as
membranes, elastomers, and foams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainability in the
context of new materials design will be leveraged as a framework for broadening
participation in science and engineering fields at all levels -– K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, and aspiring faculty -- via strategic partnerships,
mentoring activities, and educational activities. High school internships and
research opportunities will prepare underrepresented students for science and
engineering college pathways. Mentoring activities for female graduate students
and post-docs will be implemented, focusing on shared experiences and sustained
dialogue. Diversifying the professoriate with a focus on soft materials will be
targeted via an annual workshop, expanded to include concepts of collaborative,
multidisciplinary research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alternative synthetic approaches are critical for
the utilization of biomass building blocks in the development of robust
polymeric materials with exceptional mechanical function and thermal properties.
Lignocellulosic biomass, particularly the lignin fraction, is an attractive
source of diverse, abundant, and inexpensive precursors for macromolecular
design. Bisguaiacols, such as the newly-developed bisguaiacol A (BGA) –- an
entirely bio-based, methoxy-substituted analogue to bisphenol A (BPA) -- are
robust and potentially safer components for the design of polymeric systems with
enhanced properties. Utilizing lignin-based biomass as a primary synthetic
precursor, the PIs will investigate the following strategies in the design of
sustainable routes for bio-based polymeric materials – polysulfones (PSFs) and
polyurethanes (PUs) with enhanced material properties: (i) synthesis of new
bisguaiacol analogues for BPA-replacements for polymerization; (ii) development
of schemes for ‘green’ PU synthesis; (iii) exploration of the influence of
biomass source on thermomechanical behavior; (iv) construction of structure-
property-processing relationships; (v) toxicity assessment of these bisguaiacol-
based polymers; (vi) examination of reprocessability in bisguaiacol-derived PU
networks; and (vii) exploration of additive manufacturing conditions and post-
functionalize strategies for scale-up. Expertise in materials science, polymer
chemistry, and chemical engineering will drive this fundamental research program
that spans the inclusion of diverse lignin sources, synthesis of sustainable
building blocks, macromolecular design and characterization, and manufacturing
of ‘green’ polymers for a diverse set of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.