* 2004589
* Nonlinear Analysis of Three-Dimensional Water-Wave Patterns via Exponential Asymptotics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Triantaphyllos Akylas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 342,000.00

Three-dimensional water-wave patterns due to moving surface and submerged
sources, such as ships and submarines, or due to currents flowing over seamounts
and underwater ridges, are familiar from everyday experience. Apart from their
aesthetic appeal, these wave phenomena also are fundamental to applications in
various scientific fields, including geophysical fluid dynamics, ship
hydrodynamics, oceanography, and meteorology. This research project will develop
a novel mathematical methodology for analyzing three-dimensional water-wave
patterns. In contrast to all previous analytical treatments, the new approach
will not be restricted to waves of small steepness and aims to explain
theoretically several striking features revealed by recent numerical simulations
of water waves induced by currents over uneven ocean bottom topography. The
project will also involve graduate students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The generation of steady three-dimensional (3D)
water-wave patterns by moving surface and submerged sources is a fundamental
topic of fluid dynamics with applications to geophysical fluid modeling,
oceanography, and ship hydrodynamics. The usual way of tackling these problems
analytically is based on the linearized water-wave equations, assuming
infinitesimally small disturbances. Departing from such linear analysis, this
project will devise an analytical (asymptotic) technique that will enable
nonlinear treatment of steady 3D free-surface gravity wave patterns due to
various types of wave sources. Motivation comes from the recent discovery (by
the PI's group) of a nonlinear mechanism that controls the amplitude of 2D
forced gravity waves for a broad range of flow conditions, limiting severely the
validity of linear analysis. This mechanism depends on all orders of the
disturbance amplitude (nonlinearity parameter) and can be captured by
perturbation expansions that go beyond all orders in the nonlinearity parameter.
This project will develop such a beyond-all-orders (exponential asymptotics)
technique suitable for 3D wave patterns. This new methodology will be used to
advance understanding of nonlinear effects in 3D forced gravity water waves in
two distinct flow regimes: (i) waves on water of finite depth due to a stream
over fully localized topography or due to a localized pressure patch moving on
the free surface; and (ii) deep-water waves due to flow past a point source or
doublet submerged at finite depth from the free surface or due to a pressure
patch moving on the free surface. These problems model (i) oceanic flows over
seamounts and underwater ridges as well as ship wakes in shallow water; and (ii)
ship wave patterns on deep water. The asymptotic analysis will aim to explain
theoretically several striking nonlinear features revealed by recent numerical
simulations of these mathematical models and to shed light on novel nonlinear
aspects that as yet have not been captured
numerically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.