* 2004971
* Collaborative research: Developing cancer-specific targeting near-IR photosensitizers for in vitro theranostic photodynamic therapy and photothermal therapy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Sherri McFarland, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 259,651.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phototherapy involves the use of
light to treat disease. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) and
photothermal&lt;br/&gt;therapy (PTT) are specialized forms of phototherapy that
employ a light-responsive molecule to create&lt;br/&gt;reactive oxygen species
(ROS) or heat, respectively, to treat cancer. In contrast to
traditional&lt;br/&gt;chemotherapy, PDT/PTT is highly selective because light
can be delivered specifically at the tumor and&lt;br/&gt;thus confines the
toxicity to the tumor. The widespread use of PDT for cancer treatment has been
limited,&lt;br/&gt;in part, by the drawbacks associated with the
photosensitizing molecules approved for this therapy. They&lt;br/&gt;tend to
require shorter wavelengths of light that do not penetrate tissue as well as
near-infrared light, cannot&lt;br/&gt;treat oxygen-deprived tumors, cause
prolonged cutaneous sensitivity to sunlight, and are poorly soluble
in&lt;br/&gt;aqueous solutions. PDT could become more widely available as an
adjuvant cancer therapy if better&lt;br/&gt;photosensitizers can be developed.
This project will address some of these challenges with
novel&lt;br/&gt;photosensitizers based on the transition metal iridium (Ir).
These new molecules will be activatable with&lt;br/&gt;near-infrared light and
able to generate ROS even when tumors oxygenation is low. The proposed
Ir&lt;br/&gt;molecules are unique in that they are equipped with special
functional groups designed to shift the activation&lt;br/&gt;wavelength of the
molecules into the near-infrared while maintaining good ROS generation
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;Meanwhile, these near-infrared absorbing Ir molecules will
also produce heat that will further maintain&lt;br/&gt;phototoxic effects in the
absence of oxygen through PTT. The combination of PDT with PTT
could&lt;br/&gt;significantly enhance the cancer treatment efficiency,
especially toward oxygen-deficient tumors. In&lt;br/&gt;addition, folic acid
will be attached to the Ir molecules for added discrimination for certain types
of tumors,&lt;br/&gt;such as triple negative breast
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research and educational and outreach
activities will boost biomaterials research at North&lt;br/&gt;Dakota State
University (NDSU) and the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA), and will have
broader&lt;br/&gt;impacts on the biomedical field in general. The scientific
community will benefit from a deeper&lt;br/&gt;understanding of heavy
transition-metal complexes and their application as near-infrared
photosensitizers&lt;br/&gt;in the field of phototherapy. The interdisciplinary
nature of this project will provide the involved graduate&lt;br/&gt;and
undergraduate students with training opportunities in synthesis, spectroscopy,
and photobiology, which&lt;br/&gt;will prepare these students for the future
biomaterials workforce. The proposed outreach
activities&lt;br/&gt;involve/expose tribal college students, high school
students, and underrepresented African&lt;br/&gt;American/Hispanic students
in/to modern biomaterial research and technology transfer, which will
increase&lt;br/&gt;the diversity of the future workforce in biomaterials field.
The two female PIs can serve as role models for&lt;br/&gt;female students and
encourage more female students to pursue scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop dual-action novel Ir(III) complex photosensitizers (PSs)
for combined&lt;br/&gt;photodynamic therapy (PDT) and photothermal therapy (PTT)
of cancers. The proposed PSs are bis-terpyridine&lt;br/&gt;Ir(III) complexes
equipped with a chalcogenophene-substituted diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)
unit&lt;br/&gt;and folic acid. These PSs will be NIR (700-850 nm) activatable,
exhibit cancer-specific targeting, and&lt;br/&gt;generate efficient ROS and/or
hyperthermia for treating hypoxic solid tumors such as triple negative
breast&lt;br/&gt;cancer (TNBC). The PIs posit that attaching a chalcogenophene-
substituted DPP motif to one of the&lt;br/&gt;terpyridine ligands will shift the
absorption of the PSs to the NIR regions while maintaining the long-
lived&lt;br/&gt;DPP localized 3pi,pi* state as the lowest-energy triplet excited
state. It is anticipated that the long-lived triplet&lt;br/&gt;state will
provide sufficient time for bimolecular interactions with oxygen for efficient
ROS generation even&lt;br/&gt;under hypoxia. In addition, the strong NIR
absorbing PSs are expected to generate hyperthermia effects&lt;br/&gt;for PTT as
an alternate relaxation pathway due to the much lower-energy triplet states
associated with NIR&lt;br/&gt;PSs. The combination of PDT with PTT could
significantly enhance the cancer treatment efficiency,&lt;br/&gt;especially
toward hypoxic tumors. Folic acid will be introduced to the other terpyridine
ligand for specific&lt;br/&gt;targeting of cancers with overexpressed folic acid
receptors. The photophysics of these new and improved&lt;br/&gt;Ir(III) PSs will
be systematically investigated according to their absorption and emission
profiles and triplet&lt;br/&gt;excited state lifetimes. The effectiveness of the
proposed PSs as in vitro PDT/PTT agents and the&lt;br/&gt;photosensitization
mechanism(s) and subcellular targets will be explored using the TNBC MDA-
MB-231&lt;br/&gt;cell line. The proposal addresses the major challenges to
current PS development, i.e. high dark toxicity,&lt;br/&gt;inability to be
activated by tissue penetrating NIR light, low ROS generation efficiency in
hypoxic solid&lt;br/&gt;tumors, low cancer selectivity, and water insolubility.
The success of this study could benefit the biomedical&lt;br/&gt;field of
phototherapy by providing a deeper understanding of heavy transition-metal
complexes and their&lt;br/&gt;application as NIR PSs, which would eventually
enable PDT/PTT to be applied to deep-seated, high-volume&lt;br/&gt;tumors,
leading to more effective cancer therapies for some hard-to-treat solid tumors,
such as TNBC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.