* 2004197
* Modeling of Charge Transfer Processes in Heterostructured Nanocomposites
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dmitri Kilin, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,998.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division at the National Science Foundation supports Professors Kilina, Kilin,
and Kryjevski of North Dakota State University to develop computational methods
that model light-induced processes taking place in quantum dots (tiny pieces of
crystalline solids that are one billionth of a meter in size). Developing
sustainable and efficient energy sources is one of the greatest challenges
facing mankind. One attractive solution is solar-based fuel cells that utilize
the sun's energy to produce hydrogen from water. This hydrogen can then be used
as a fuel, producing only water when it is burned (combined with oxygen).
However, high cost, and low efficiency and durability are the main factors that
hinder the large-scale use of this solar cells. One way to meet these challenges
is to utilize quantum dots. Attaching a molecule to the quantum dot surface
alters its ability to capture light. This modification can significantly enhance
the efficiency of solar energy conversion to chemical energy. This research may
result in more efficient solar cell components. Computational predictions guide
the rational design of novel, cost-effective materials for energy applications.
This project also provides educational and research experiences for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students in computational chemistry and materials
chemistry modeling. Remote training/research activities are offered to increase
participation of female and Native American students. The project helps prepare
a diverse STEM workforce with the skills and knowledge critical for the real-
world design of novel materials for energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team creates and implements
novel quantum chemistry methods capable of accurately modeling the photoexcited
dynamics in extended nanostructures with complex surfaces and interfaces.
Specifically, this methodology is suitable for the Janus-type quantum dots
composed of two different semiconductors, such as PbS(e)/CdS(e), and covalently
functionalized by organic dyes, to determine the conditions that govern the
dynamics of charge transfer in the presence of other competing processes, such
as carrier multiplication, energy transfer, phonon-mediated carrier relaxation
and carrier recombination. These computations are useful for interpreting data
from time-resolved optical spectroscopy and guiding new experimental probes.
Knowledge of the dependence of charge and exciton transfer efficiency on the
surface and interface effects is critical for controlling the photoexcited
processes via chemical engineering of quantum dot/dye composites, thus improving
their functionality for energy conversion
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.