* 2004126
* Multivalent Binding of Spatially Patterned Nucleic Acid Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Khalid Salaita, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

DNA, the carrier of genetic information in biology, is increasingly being
utilized for non-biological applications. The two strands that link together
(hybridize) to form the twisted-shaped genetic material are now designed to link
in different ways to form non-biological nanostructures. The precise assembly of
nucleic acids through hybridization has revolutionized the field of DNA
nanochemistry because it allows one to use simple base-pairing rules to design
complex three-dimensional structures. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Khalid Salaita of Emory University is developing increased binding
strength and specificity of long strands of DNA to form nanostructures by
leveraging the ability to form multiple bonds that reinforce each other. The
project focuses on spatially patterned short strands of complementary DNA that
function cooperatively to bind a target nucleic acid. Boosting the strength and
specificity of targeted DNA binding to specific targets is critical for the
application of DNA technology in sensing and diagnostic and therapeutic
applications. In the course of conducting this research, graduate and
undergraduate students are trained in DNA nanotechnology. K-12 students gain
summer research experience and research results are incorporated into science
demonstrations and video clips for the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of this project is to investigate a class of multivalency where
orthogonal ligand-receptor pairs are arrayed in a spatially defined manner. This
type of “spatially organized heteromultivalency” is not currently employed in
DNA nanostructure formation and may offer new strategies for macromolecular and
supramolecular design. Professor Salaita seeks to develop synthetic methods and
detailed characterization of new types of spatially patterned nucleic acid
nanoparticles with enhanced binding capabilities. The hypothesis motivating the
effort is that spatial organization of oligonucleotides displayed on the
particle surface may lead to a substantial enhancement in the affinity and
specificity of binding to a complementary nucleic acid target. An objective of
the work is to develop the methodology to spatially pattern nucleic acids on the
surface of gold nanoparticles. The binding affinity and specificity of patterned
particles will be tested as a function of total segment number, segment density,
and molecular flexibility of segments. Another objective is to create patterned
liposomal particles. The impact of patterning geometry and anchoring chemistry
will be investigated by measuring the full thermodynamic binding constants for
these constructs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.