* 2004417
* Collaborative Research: Enzyme-Powered, Programmable Active Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Ross, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 489,923.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Imagine a world in which roads can sense their
damage and repair themselves like human skin, or in which natural disasters such
as forest fires and landslides are prevented by materials that change shape and
stiffness automatically, or in which clothing materials change their porosity to
become personal protective equipment (PPE) when the clothing itself senses
airborne pathogens. These futuristic ideas are currently science fiction, but if
we have any hope of creating these amazing technologies, we need to begin today.
This collaborative project seeks to explore the fundamental underpinnings of the
materials needed for such applications. Specifically, in order to design any of
these futuristic devices, we need to have materials that are self-powered and
assembled hierarchically from energy-using building blocks. Luckily, many
biological systems, such as cells, plants, and humans, are already capable of
sensing their environment and responding by moving, changing shape, or releasing
chemicals. The basic building blocks of these biological “systems” are enzymes,
nanoscale machines made of protein that come in a variety of shapes and sizes.
In order to dissect and begin to create an understanding of how enzymes can
animate matter, our team will use enzymes to power new synthetic materials at
the nanoscale to microscale. In the future, these nanoscale materials can be
assembled themselves to create new larger scale active materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of
this project is to understand the physics of synthetic active materials powered
by enzymes. The research team combines expertise in DNA nanotechnology, enzyme
kinetics, single-particle tracking, and sensitive force measurements to address
the following objectives: (1) The team uses DNA origami to design, create, and
characterize a suite of active particles, driven by enzyme catalysis, with
programmable size, shape, flexibility, and location of propulsive enzymes. This
objective addresses a need to create new nano- to mesoscale active particles and
uses these particles to understand the mechanisms governing enhanced motility.
(2) The team characterizes the properties of an active bath of enzyme-driven
particles via the fluctuation spectrum, dissipation of energy, and the ability
of an active bath to propel passive particles to extract work from noise. A
combined study of the single-particle motility and the active fluctuations that
emerge from collections of active particles will reveal a wealth of new
information, including the mechanisms of enhanced transport of active particles,
as well as a non-equilibrium statistical mechanical description of active
fluctuations. The importance of this approach lies in the potential to specify
the microscopic details of active particles, like their size, shape, and
flexibility, and then to discover how these attributes alter the single-particle
and collective behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DMR grant supports research
to understand the physics of synthetic active materials powered by enzymes with
funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) and Biomaterials (BMAT) Programs
in the Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.