* 2004437
* Harnessing room-temperature quantum-dot-like states in 2D materials for nanoscale non-classical light sources
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Peter Schuck, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 586,757.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Light-based quantum technologies rely on the
creation and manipulation of individual photons, the discrete fundamental
packets of energy that constitute light. Engineers and scientists who are
seeking to use light for quantum technologies require “single-photon emitter”
devices that produce just a single photon with a flip of a switch. Such devices,
however, need single-photon emitting materials that are hard to come by because
they also need to be compatible with modern semiconductor engineering and
fabrication techniques. Recently, a new class of single-photon emitters was
discovered in ultrathin two-dimensional materials and was greeted with much
excitement because, among other advantages, two-dimensional materials can be
more easily integrated into devices than most other single-photon emitting
materials. However, the underlying material properties and physical phenomena
that lead to the single-photon emission in two-dimensional materials remain
unknown: it is known that single-photon emitters exist, but it is not known why.
This project aims to answer this critical question by combining highly
sophisticated optical microscopy techniques to study single-photon emitters in
two-dimensional materials on ultrasmall length scales. The experimental studies
are complemented by the development of theoretical models to better predict
their behavior and identify ways to improve their performance for quantum
technologies. These research activities include strong components of quantum-
centered education and workforce training, including highly interdisciplinary
Ph.D. research, integrated undergraduate research opportunities, curriculum
development, and public and K-12 outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Light-based quantum
technologies necessitate quantum emitters to produce single photons or entangled
photon pairs on demand. The discovery of single-photon emitters (SPEs) in
monolayer WSe2 (1L-WSe2) ushered in a revolutionary class of solid-state quantum
emitters with new opportunities for deterministic positioning, facile emitter
control, and integrability into photonic architectures. However, the physical
mechanisms giving rise to these promising states are still unknown, hindering
their development. Using state-of-the-art theoretical modeling with advanced
experimental characterization, a new mechanism of strain-induced exciton
localization in 1L-WSe2 was previously identified. It upends the understanding
of strain localization of excitons in two-dimensional semiconductors and may be
the mechanism that underlies many SPEs in 1L-WSe2. With an overarching goal of
developing an understanding of SPE phenomena in 1L-WSe2 that will guide their
development into controllable quantum photonic devices, this project is focused
on (1) investigating whether the newly discovered states are room-temperature
SPEs; (2) establishing the roles of these states in known low-temperature SPEs;
and (3) exploring new routes for engineering the creation and active control of
SPEs in 1L-WSe2 and other two-dimensional materials. The research strategy
combines nano-optical characterization with low-temperature quantum optical
measurements and theory, and it is integrated with educational efforts
emphasizing mentoring and hands-on learning about photonic materials, quantum
optical characterization techniques, and the fundamentals of quantum information
science for students in high school through graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.