* 2004751
* Frameworks: Developing CyberInfrastructure for Waterborne Antibiotic Resistance Risk Surveillance (CI4-WARS)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Liqing Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,299,036.00

CI4-WARS is a cyberinfrastructure (CI) being developed as a key step towards
establishing an efficient and integrated network of wastewater treatment plants
(WWTPs) incorporating CI for antibiotic resistance (AR) surveillance. AR is the
ability of some bacteria to survive antibiotic treatment, a capability encoded
by antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs). AR rates are increasing globally, with
the US Centers for Disease Control estimating 35,000 related deaths in the US
per year in 2019, compared to 23,000 deaths per year in 2013. It is a grand
challenge that calls for an interdisciplinary approach to combat its spread.
Efficient and effective surveillance is needed to pinpoint where ARGs are
spreading among bacteria and to inform ways to stop their spread. Combining next
generation DNA sequencing with CI for monitoring patterns in ARG detection WWTPs
is a promising and novel way to achieve this. WWTPs aggregate antibiotics
excreted by all people in a community undergoing antibiotic therapy, as well as
any AR bacteria or ARGs that are present on their skin or eliminated by them.
Identifying anomalies in ARG patterns in wastewater could help identify
potential outbreaks before they occur, better inform clinical use of
antibiotics, and improve treatment practices to prevent release of ARGs to
rivers and streams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are
to: (1) Develop and demonstrate the CI4-WARS system using DNA sequencing data
and associated metadata collected from a local WWTP; (2) Develop new
computational tools to identify ARG occurrence patterns in the DNA sequencing
data that indicate the risk of AR spreading and develop and apply new algorithms
for identifying anomalies in these indicators that are indicative of emergence
of new AR bacteria or outbreaks; and (3) Integrate the developed computational
tools into CI4-WARS, establishing it as a one-stop service for surveying,
evaluating, communicating, and reporting/alerting indicators of AR risk. Broader
impact activities include student and professional training, annual workshops,
free online videos, tutorials, and making CI4-WARS freely available on the web
to maximize the benefit of CI4-WARS and facilitate adoption by the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.