* 2004148
* Adolescent neurodevelopment of memory-guided decision making
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Catherine Insel, Insel, Catherine
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Daphna
Shohamy at Columbia University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating how adolescent brain development shapes
memory and decision-making. This project will examine how adolescents access
memories to make adaptive decisions, and how the development of key brain
regions that guide learning and memory supports this ability. This research has
direct implications for education policy and practice. Specifically, if
adolescents exhibit age-related differences in memory-guided decision making due
to ongoing brain development, this could have direct consequences for how
individuals learn in and out of the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adolescence
is a period of the lifespan when ongoing brain development supports continuous
gains in cognitive abilities, and adolescents must learn how to navigate the
world with increasing independence. Prior work has shown that memory and
decision-making systems continue to mature during adolescence, however,
developmental studies have traditionally tested these cognitive processes in
isolation. As a result, remarkably little is known about how the development of
memory and the corresponding neural processes influence the emergence of
adaptive decision-making during adolescence. Specifically, it remains unclear
whether the maturation of memory and learning systems in the brain give rise to
effective memory-guided decision-making. This research project aims to address
this gap by leveraging recent advances from computational neuroscience that have
identified how adults use memory to navigate decision-making. By combining this
approach with tools from developmental cognitive neuroscience, this research
investigates how these memory-guided decision processes emerge with age during
adolescence. Across two experiments, this project integrates behavioral indices
of learning and memory, computational modeling, and functional neuroimaging
(fMRI) to investigate the neurodevelopmental mechanisms of memory-guided
decision-making. The first experiment tests the hypothesis that functional
development of the hippocampus during adolescence shapes the ability to learn
from a single experience. The second experiment tests the hypothesis that
developing functional connectivity between the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex
supports the ability to integrate and generalize across multiple memories to
guide adaptive decision-making. The current research aims to identify when and
how memory guides adolescent decision-making. By examining the computational
foundations and neurodevelopmental trajectories of memory-guided decision-
making, the proposed research has the potential to reveal how learning and
decision-making processes refine with age during
adolescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.