* 2004575
* Elements: Cyberinfrastructure for streamlining coupled, simplified climate modeling within the Community Earth System Model
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Gokhan Danabasoglu, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,969.00

Global climate models have increased dramatically in their complexity over the
last few decades, and now represent a massive array of coupled atmospheric,
oceanic, cryospheric, biospheric and chemical processes. However, this
complexity incurs substantial computational expense, and creates a challenge for
researchers to perform targeted experiments and investigate specific dynamical
processes. Idealizing the climate system through the creation of simplified
models is a way of performing these types of highly focused studies while
avoiding complexity and expense. However, the climate modeling community
presently lacks the software infrastructure to easily configure these models
using minimal physics packages, simplified domain geometries, or more
streamlined model versions, within a single framework that bridges the gap
between these simplified models and the fully coupled system. This project aims
to fill this gap by developing a software toolchain to enable fast and seamless
setup of coupled simplified models within NCAR’s Community Earth System Model
(CESM). This Simpler Models toolchain will be officially supported as part of
the CESM modeling framework, and will serve the needs of the research and
academic communities across all climate science
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal for the Simpler Models
toolchain is to streamline the user workflow and enable research-ready coupled
modeling at minimal expense in terms of human or computing time. The first
component of the toolchain, the Simpler Models Query Tool, will advise users on
the compatibility and configuration of different earth system model components
based on their XML metadata. This tool will essentially let the user hone their
modeling strategy without having to consult each component’s documentation or
resorting to a trial and error approach. The toolchain will then allow for the
configuration of model resolution and idealized domain geometries in such a way
as to ensure compatibility across components. The workflow enabled by the
toolchain will be structured so that compatibility of the coupled system is
guaranteed first, followed by customizations at progressively higher levels of
granularity within individual model components. The toolchain will be
accompanied by user documentation that will be hosted on the CESM Simpler Models
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.