* 2004757
* Calorimetric Benchmark Energies of Adsorbed Intermediates, Solvent Effects and Solvent / Catalyst Bonding
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Charles Campbell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2023
* USD 453,165.00

Better catalysts and electrocatalysts are essential for energy-efficient and
environmentally benign manufacturing of fuels and chemicals, and for advanced
processes to reduce carbon emissions and mitigate environmental pollutants.
Optimizing catalysts for specific applications, however, requires detailed
knowledge of reaction steps and the mechanisms by which the catalyst accelerates
those steps. The project will generate data on the bonding strength of small
molecules to catalytic metal surfaces, both in the presence and absence of
solvents. The bonding strength can then be used to refine theoretical models of
catalyst performance and accelerate the discovery and design of improved
catalysts and catalytic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
project will employ state-of-the-art calorimetric methods developed in the
investigator’s laboratory to measure adsorption enthalpies of small molecules on
single crystal surfaces, and estimate solvent effects that are relevant to
various applications in heterogeneous catalysis and electrocatalysis. The
project involves three main energy-measurement objectives: 1) adsorption of
small molecular species on copper (Cu) single crystal surfaces, as a complement
to the extensive work that has been done on earlier transition metal surfaces;
2) adhesion of condensed solvents on single crystal surfaces; and 3) adsorption
of small molecular species in the presence of a co-adsorbed solvent. This work
extends the investigator’s previous gas adsorption studies on platinum (Pt) and
nickel (Ni) single-crystals to Cu single crystals, while furthering the Cu study
to include solvent effects important in liquid-phase electrocatalytic reactions.
The study will advance a database of experimental adsorption energies that can
be used to calibrate ab initio models and their basis sets, thereby
strengthening links between experimental and theoretical catalysis. The project
is structured such that the investigator will provide in-depth training to both
graduate and undergraduate students with respect to his unique calorimetric
instrumentation and analysis tools. He will also collaborate with a young
associate professor as part of a succession plan to ensure long-term
contributions to the critical database of adsorption enthalpies already
established in his laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by
the Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems and the Chemical Catalysis Program in the
Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.