* 2004652
* Understanding transport of nanoparticles in crowded, confined media through experiments and simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jacinta Conrad, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 365,517.00

Synthetic nanoparticles can be used as carriers to help deliver drugs to
specific locations within the body. Other nanoparticles appear as byproducts
from industrial manufacturing that are released into water sources that move
through environmental soils. Controlling the transport and distribution of
nanoparticles inside the body and in the environment is critical to developing
effective therapeutic treatments and strategies for mitigating impacts of
pollutants. This project will support research into the transport of
nanoparticles in complex environments, such as those encountered these
biological and environmental settings, where nanoparticle motions are influenced
by the presence of nearby confining surfaces and large macromolecules such as
polymers. The research will focus on the flow-driven transport of nanoparticles
through solutions of polymers confined in porous media. Experiments will be used
to image particles as they move through the confined polymeric fluids.
Complementary computer simulations will help characterize mechanisms of
nanoparticle transport and interactions between nanoparticles and nearby
surfaces that are mediated by polymers in the surrounding fluid. Results of the
research will lead to improved predictions of confined nanoparticle transport in
complex fluids, which will benefit applications ranging from drug delivery to
wastewater treatment. The research team will participate in activities that
engage K-12 students and the general public in science and engineering,
including hands-on activities at the Childrenâ€™s Museum of Houston, the Houston
Energy Festival, and the GRADE summer camp for women and students from
underrepresented groups. The researchers will disseminate results of the project
to local industrial scientists and engineers at the Texas Soft Matter Meeting.
Scientific results will be available through publicly accessible open-source
software projects and through online videos. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will employ particle-imaging experiments and computational models to investigate
the flow-driven transport of nanoparticles through complex fluids confined in
porous media. This overarching objective will be achieved by integrating
particle synthesis and imaging and microfabrication techniques with advanced
simulation methods to (1) elucidate the mechanisms by which polymers influence
the transport of nanoparticles through well-controlled porous media and (2)
understand how these mechanisms are affected by particle shape and size.
Particle imaging and tracking techniques will be used to characterize the
transport of nanoparticles through porous media, including quasi-two-dimensional
arrays of nanoposts and three-dimensional packed beds. Complementary dissipative
particle dynamics simulations will be used to characterize the structure and
dynamics of polymers confined in the porous media and the polymer-mediated
depletion interactions between the nanoparticles and nearby surfaces. Diffusion
and dispersion coefficients of nanoparticles through the model porous media will
be measured in experiments and simulations as a function of polymer
concentration and molecular weight and particle size and shape. By judiciously
combining simulation and experiment, this project will elucidate the physical
processes controlling the equilibrium and non-equilibrium (flow-driven)
transport of nanoparticles through confined complex fluids. Results will lead to
modifications of existing theories to account for polymer-mediated processes
that affect nanoparticle transport and dispersion in strong
confinement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.