* 2004732
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Molecular Magnetoelectric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Stephen Hill, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 325,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project involving
partners in the US, the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, focuses on
achieving molecular-level control of a new class of materials that possess both
electric and magnetic properties that are readily switchable at ambient
temperatures. The project is supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program and the Condensed Matter Physics program, both in the Division
of Materials Research. Of particular importance is the possibility to tune the
coupling between the different material properties by choosing particular
molecular building blocks, so that it becomes possible to switch, for example,
the magnetic state with an external stimulus that would ordinarily switch only
the electric property, and vice versa. This multi-functional behavior can
potentially pave the way towards ultra-fast memory storage applications with
very low energy consumption, thereby solving one of the most significant
roadblocks to the continued miniaturization of electronic devices (Mooreâ€™s law).
Research activities focus on chemical synthesis, precise characterization of the
resulting materials, and routes towards fabrication of nanoscale device
structures. Impacts are therefore expected at several levels, chiefly in terms
of transformative fundamental science, but also increased understanding of
molecular design principles leading to new technologies for the 21st century.
The highly interdisciplinary and transnational consortium provides excellent
training and mobility opportunities to early stage PhD and postdoctoral
researchers, and a target of 40-60% female participation among the funded teams
will promote gender equality. The tripartite US-Ireland consortium also ensures
meaningful cross-border collaboration between teams on the island of Ireland,
North and South, thereby working towards the twin goals of building prosperity
and an all-island economy and continuing the work of peace and reconciliation
between the two jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program and the Condensed Matter Physics program,
both in the Division of Materials Research, sets out routes to harness the
switchable electronic spin states that occur in certain paramagnetic transition
metal complexes for development of a new class of magnetoelectric materials. The
target compounds are spin crossover metal-organics which can change their
internal arrangement of electrons in d-orbitals from paired to unpaired with
heat, photoexcitation, pressure/strain or electric and magnetic fields. The
project examines the interplay between changes in electric, magnetic and
structural properties that accompany the spin state switching under a range of
perturbations. Routes to robust nanofabrication of the crystalline metal-
organics are also explored. Four interdisciplinary sub-projects are
investigated: (1) Optimization of synthetic routes to ensure (i) crystallization
in a polar ferroelectric space group and (ii) retention of thermal spin state
switching; (2) Characterization of (i) the spin state and (ii) the ferroelectric
domain structure; (3) Potential for magnetic, electric, optical and strain
switching of spin state and electric polarization; and (4) Nanofabrication of
the metal-organics from crystals into arrays on thin films. The focus on
molecule-based metal-organics with soft lattices offers an alternative and
advantageous pathway towards materials with magnetic and electric polarization
responses that are readily switchable at room temperature, with future potential
for ultra-fast, low energy memory applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.