* 2004074
* The search for  new paradigms for a spin liquid state in organic based materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Natalia Drichko, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 501,791.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Some magnets have become a part of our
everyday life, but research in new magnetic materials is aimed on discovering
magnets showing new unexplored phenomena. Exotic properties, such as quantum
disordered magnetic states, are of fundamental interest, but also could be used
in new technologies. While a stereotype of a magnetic material is an inorganic
compound, this research is aimed on organic magnets. The activities include
identifying new organic magnets and understanding how to tune magnetism in them
with such external stimuli as pressure. This program shows how to study and
control magnetism through its interaction with light. This research involves
training of students of various levels, both graduate and undergraduate is
carried out. A focus is a support of women interested in STEM. The PI and her
group members are involved in community outreach activities, such he Open House
Day in the Department of Physics and Astronomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to discover and study new paradigms for
spin liquid state. A large effort of the community to find this state of matter
is primarily dedicated to inorganic materials. In contrast, this work is focused
on organic materials, inspired by the fact that they have already produced large
number of spin liquid candidates with S=1/2 on triangular lattice. The current
research goes beyond that state, exploring a possibility of a spin liquid state
driven by coupling to fluctuating electric dipoles in a quantum paraelectric
(quantum dipole liquid). Within this proposal the PI plans to test a hypothesis
that quantum dipole liquid materials can be tuned into a ``simple'' Mott
insulating state with S=1/2 on triangular lattice by a change in the electronic
orbital overlap within molecular dimer units. New paradigm in terms of materials
will be a study of magnetic metal-organic frameworks, where magnetic metal atoms
or clusters are connected by organic linkers into two- or three-dimensional
networks. Theory predicts that these materials with frustrated lattice of metal
clusters can produce spin liquid and Kitaev spin liquid state. In this proposal,
Raman scattering spectroscopy will be used as the main tool to discover new
material properties and to understand the driving
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.