* 2004557
* Ions at aqueous interfaces: X-ray fluorescence and scattering studies
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Pulak Dutta, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 04/30/2024
* USD 534,892.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Solutions of salts in water play essential
roles in our bodies, in food and drink, in the ocean, and elsewhere in everyday
life. These are fascinating soft matter systems that contain many surprises. The
behavior of dissolved ions is quite complex, and some remarkable unexpected
behaviors have been observed in such systems. For example, dissolved ions that
are thought to be very similar, such as sodium and potassium, affect polymer and
protein molecules in completely different ways ----this is known as a ‘specific
ion effect’. Another unexpected phenomenon is known as overcharging or charge
inversion: under certain conditions, molecules or oil droplets in water will
change the sign of their electric charge, and thus start moving in the ‘wrong’
direction in the presence of an electric field. In this project, X-ray beams
from synchrotron radiation facilities are used in order to gain a subnanoscale
quantitative view of these systems and thus shed light on the origins of these
novel phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal addresses fundamental questions regarding the behavior of ions near
aqueous solution interfaces. Gouy-Chapman-Stern theory describes the
distribution of such ions, but does not properly account for the discreteness of
ionic charge, and there is increasing evidence that it fails in many cases.
However, there is no consensus about why it fails and how to develop a more
universal picture. The goal of this project is to study the nanoscale ionic
structures and processes underlying the nonintuitive phenomena of charge
inversion (also known as overcharging), and specific ion effects (such as the
Hofmeister series). The primary experimental probes used in this research are
X-ray scattering and fluorescence spectroscopy, using synchrotron radiation.
Ions in aqueous solution affect the behavior of colloids, polymers, batteries
and some capacitors, and many other everyday materials and devices. Dissolved
ions affect the physical properties of membranes and modify the behavior of
proteins and DNA; indeed they are crucial to life. All these and other processes
benefit from a better nanoscale understanding of how ions in aqueous solutions
arrange themselves near interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.