* 2004421
* Synthesis of New Chalcogenide-Containing Perovskite Semiconductor Nanomaterials: Towards Earth-Abundant and Non-Toxic Solar Absorbers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Sidney Creutz, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2023
* USD 263,810.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The discovery and refinement of new
materials for renewable energy production and storage is one of the most
impactful challenges for materials chemistry in the 21st century. Recently,
there has been considerable focus on a class of materials known as lead halide
perovskites for applications in solar cells, but they may be limited by concerns
about the toxicity of lead. Therefore, there is an ongoing need for the
development of emerging classes of semiconductor materials which could show
similarly promising properties, but without the corresponding drawbacks; they
should be non-toxic, highly stable, solution-processible, and ideally composed
of earth-abundant elements. Many materials with potentially promising properties
have been proposed computationally, but only a small subset have been realized
experimentally. This research project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, involves
the development of new synthetic methods to access emerging and proposed
inorganic semiconductors using solution synthesis. The project focuses on two
classes of lead-free perovskite materials containing sulfur or selenium whose
synthesis is currently either unknown or very limited. The development of facile
synthetic routes to these materials in solution allows for experimental
validation of their properties and lays the groundwork for their potential
application in solar cells or other devices. Through their involvement in this
project, graduate and undergraduate students are trained in materials chemistry
and in renewable energy science, preparing them for future careers in energy
research and green technology. Concepts related to this work, and materials
chemistry in general, are also being developed into coursework to reach a
broader audience of students at Mississippi State University.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This research project
focuses on the development of two classes of chalcogenide-containing inorganic
materials based on a perovskite lattice, which have been proposed as promising
non-toxic and earth-abundant replacements for the hybrid lead halide
perovskites, but whose synthesis is either unknown or underdeveloped. First, the
research team is targeting the synthesis of chalcogenide perovskites including
BaZrS3 and SrHfS3 as colloidal nanocrystals using solution synthesis approaches.
Synthetic methods include the use of reactive sulfide and metal precursors
(e.g., trimethysilyl sulfide and metal alkoxides and amides), the use of single-
source precursors such as metal dithiocarbamates and heterobimetallic metal
thiolate clusters, and the sulfurization of oxide nanocrystals. Synthesis as
nanocrystals allows for the potential use of these materials as colloidal inks
for solution-processing. Additionally, the research team is investigating the
preparation of mixed-anion halide-chalcogenide perovskites such as CsBiSI2,
CsSbSI2, and CsSnS2Cl, through approaches such as anion exchange on colloidal
nanocrystals of chalcogenide or halide precursors. Through this approach, it is
possible to access compositions, structures, and morphologies that may be
metastable and difficult or impossible to access through direct synthesis under
thermal equilibrium conditions. The materials prepared are characterized in
terms of their compositional, structural, and optical properties and compared to
computational predictions. This project is supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.