* 2004237
* RUI: Sortase-Mediated Ligations for Probing Binding Mechanisms of Large Disordered Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sergey Smirnov, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2024
* USD 344,000.00

The functions of most cellular proteins are understood to depend on their shape
or structure. Many proteins, however, include parts where the structure is not
well defined. The shape and thus the functions of these intrinsically disordered
regions (IDRs) of proteins are difficult study. With this award, the Chemistry
of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is supporting the research
of Dr. John Antos and Dr. Sergey Smirnov from Western Washington University to
develop experimental methods to study the structures of IDRs. The research team
is using use a splicing enzyme (sortase) to insert specific chemical tags into
proteins that allow their shapes and changes to their shapes to be monitored by
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. This project applies these
methods to determine the key functional properties of dematin, a protein with a
large IRD that helps control red blood cell shape and function. Results from
these studies set the stage to study many types of IDRs in proteins that are
prevalent across multiple kingdoms of life. The project prepares the next
generation of scientists by training participating undergraduate and Masters
level graduate students in state-of-the-art methods for analyzing protein
structure and function. The project provides research opportunities to engage
and attract underrepresented groups and high school students into the natural
sciences. In addition, Drs. Antos and Smirnov incorporate authentic research
experiences into Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) for
biochemistry courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately one-third of
eukaryotic proteins contain within their polypeptide sequences sizable
intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs), which are critical for a variety of
cellular functions. Many of these IDRs are large (hundreds of residues), which
makes the site-specific study of these dynamic protein segments and their
binding interfaces technically challenging. For example, the application of NMR,
one of the preferred methods for studying IDRs, is hampered by severe spectral
overlap of resonances originating from large IDRs. Similarly, the targeted
insertion of functional labels such as spectroscopic reporters or post-
translational modifications is often impossible due to competing labeling of
multiple identical sites in extended IDR sequences. This project addresses such
problems via robust and efficient site-specific sortase-mediated ligation
strategies tuned for large IDR-containing substrates. This includes the
development of guidelines for the use of site-specific ligation strategies in
the context of large IDR-containing protein substrates. The set of methods
developed lead to the generation of derivatives of the erythrocyte-controlling
protein dematin segmentally labeled with NMR-active isotopes (15N and 13C). Such
derivatives enable characterization of a crucial regulatory intramolecular
binding interface involving the large, 315-residue IDR that is central for
dematin function and regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.