* 2004021
* CAS: Acoustically Driven, Voltage-Free Spray Interface to Couple Capillary Electrophoresis and Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Lisa Holland, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 413,713.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Lisa Holland of West Virginia University is
working to improve our ability to perform chemical analyses important for health
studies, monitoring industrial processes, and many other elements of research
and discovery. Specifically, a new instrumental interface is being developed to
effectively couple a tool capable of separating the components of extremely low-
volume solution samples (capillary electrophoresis, CE) with a very powerful
means of identifying the separated components (mass spectrometry, MS). To meet
this challenge, molecules in solution are converted to gas-phase ions by
applying high frequency sound waves to the liquid exiting the capillary used for
the separation. The approach significantly reduces solvent consumption relative
to more widely used liquid chromatography/MS approaches, thereby improving
sustainability. Students engaged in these innovative studies gain key
interdisciplinary research skills. Dr. Holland is devising innovative ways to
integrate concepts relevant to her research into her undergraduate courses,
greatly enhancing student career preparation. A low-cost handheld instrument and
accompanying curricular materials are being developed for use in the teaching
laboratory and for continuing education training of scientists within and beyond
the field of separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CE-MS interface being
developed in the Holland lab focuses on acoustically driven nebulization, an
approach by which the high separation efficiency of CE can be preserved while
the ionization process remains unaffected by the electrophoretic current.
Integrating the acoustic probe with the electrophoresis ground improves both the
ruggedness and ease of use of the interface. Better understanding of the effect
of acoustic energy on droplet formation is being pursued through collaboration
with Professor Tony Jun Huang of Duke University, with an aim of improving the
ionization efficiency. Parallel efforts seek to adapt electrokinetic sheath flow
systems to enable MS interfaces for zero-flow separation approaches such as
capillary isoelectric focusing and sieving. Dual detection with UV-visible
absorbance and MS is also being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.