* 2004995
* Colliding quasiparticles to reconstruct their effective Hamiltonians
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 570,000.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Our national competitiveness relies on our
ability to make information technology faster, more energy efficient, more
compact, and more affordable. Such innovation requires the discovery and
implementation of new methods to characterize and then optimize the responses of
materials to electricity and light. To fully understand how electrical charges
move in the extremely strong and rapidly-varying electric fields that pervade
modern electronics and optics, one needs to know quantities called Bloch
wavefunctions, which were derived mathematically more than 90 years ago but have
resisted experimental determination. The PI and his team have recently developed
a robust method to reconstruct Bloch wavefunctions from experimental data which
was demonstrated on a crystalline solid. The project supports reconstruction of
Bloch wavefunctions in a several semiconductors that are of current scientific
and technological importance. The graduate student researchers supported by this
project receive broad and deep training in experimental condensed matter
physics, and in turn mentor undergraduate researchers, inspire K-12 students by
giving them hands-on experience with simple electrical circuits and, upon
graduation are positioned for leadership in technical fields crucial to national
competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;For many
problems in modern condensed matter physics, it is important to know both the
energy eigenvalues of a quasiparticle effective Hamiltonian, as well as its
Bloch wavefunctions, from which the Berry curvature can be calculated. By
integrating the Berry curvature over the Brillouin zone, materials can be
classified topologically. Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy enables one
to measure the band structure of many materials. However, the Bloch
wavefunctions and Berry curvature, which are defined at each point in quasi-
momentum space, are extremely difficult to measure. This project exploits a
unique opportunity to reconstruct the effective Hamiltonian of quasiparticles in
semiconductors that is enabled by the phenomenon of high-order sideband
generation (HSG). HSG can be thought of as a three-step process in which (1) a
weak probe laser creates electron-hole pairs, (2) a strong terahertz-frequency
laser adiabatically accelerates the electrons and holes first away from and then
back towards each other, and (3) the electrons and holes collide and recombine,
emitting sidebands that carry off the kinetic energy associated with the
collision, and on whose polarization is imprinted the Berry curvature of the
bands through which the electrons and holes have been accelerated. In this
project, the parameters of the effective Hamiltonian that governs quasiparticle
dynamics in GaAs (including the effects of strain), GeS (a layered
semiconductor), and other semiconductors will be reconstructed by comparing the
calculated and measured matrices that relate the polarization of sidebands to
the polarization of the probe laser that excited them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.