* 2004857
* Transforming Discriminatory Discipline through Addressing Racial Stress: A Mixed-Methods Investigation
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Whitney Polk, Polk, Whitney
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Social
Psychology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Howard C. Stevenson at the University of
Pennsylvania this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the racial stress and coping processes associated with
discriminatory school discipline. Since 1975, research has demonstrated racial
disparities in school discipline disproportionately impacting Black youth (Child
Defense Fund, 1975). Black students receive more disciplinary referrals, harsher
consequences, and more punitive interventions compared to their peers, even when
cited for the same or similar infractions (Brown &amp; Tillio, 2013; Skiba,
Arrendondo, &amp; Rausch, 2014). Black youth are not only aware of these racial
disparities in discipline, but also associate differential treatment with
greater perceptions of inequity and discrimination (Bottiani et al., 2016; Hope,
Skoog, &amp; Jagers, 2015; Fisher, Wallace, Fenton, 2000). Research demonstrates
clear associations between racially disproportionate discipline and negative
academic, social, and economic outcomes for Black students, as well as the
academic and psychological costs of racial discrimination. However, the specific
effects of discriminatory school discipline on Black youth adjustment and
relations with racial stress are not well-known. Racial stress is the result of
repeated, prolonged exposure to discriminatory environments and interactions,
negatively impacting Black youth’s mental, physical, and emotional health
(Carter &amp; Helms, 2009; Harrell, 2000; Smith, Yosso, &amp; Solorzano, 2007;
Sue, Capodilupo, &amp; Holder, 2008). Schools become sites of racial stress when
students routinely experience discriminatory school policies, practices, and
interactions with educators. A growing body of research explores the role of
families in supporting racial stress coping among Black youth in response to
discriminatory events (Anderson &amp; Stevenson, 2018; Anderson, Jones, McKenny,
Anyiwo, Gaylord-Harding, 2018). However, there is limited research examining
school-based racial stress and coping in relation to discriminatory discipline,
and the role educators can play in reducing racial stress within discriminatory
discipline interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project
entitled, Transforming Discriminatory Discipline through Addressing Racial
Stress: A Mixed-Methods Investigation, is to examine two critical, timely, and
relevant topics- racially disproportionate discipline and racial stress/trauma.
The research project employs a mixed-method approach across two phases intending
(1) to qualitatively explore teachers’ and students’ understanding and
experiences regarding racial stress and discipline, and (2) to develop a
culturally competent transformative discipline intervention for educators to
address school-based racial stress and reduce discriminatory discipline
interactions. Phase 1 involves a qualitative exploration of educators’ beliefs
and practices regarding discipline and racial stress, as well as mixed-method
inquiry of Black students’ experiences and coping processes regarding
discriminatory discipline and racial stress. Phase 2 involves a pilot
intervention, informed by data collected in Phase 1, that addresses racially
stressful disciplinary interactions by testing aspects of the Racial Encounter
Coping Appraisal and Socialization Theory (RECAST) model (Anderson &amp;
Stevenson, 2018) and provides educators with opportunities to gain in-the-moment
trauma-informed discipline techniques. The proposed study intends to advance
scientific knowledge of Black youth racial stress, coping, and adjustment, to
improve educator-student relationships, reduce racial disparities in school
discipline, and to enhance the educational and professional experiences of both
Black youth and their educators, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.