* 2004536
* Nanoscale Investigation of Microwave Dynamics in Novel Ferroelectric Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Keji Lai, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 409,277.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;For materials with permanent electric dipoles,
the interaction with an oscillating electromagnetic field leads to energy
dissipation in the microwave regime. In ferroelectric materials, the effective
alternating-current conductivity due to dipolar loss can be very different from
the direct-current conductivity due to mobile electrons. Using a specialized
microscope, the research team aims to study the local response of ferroelectric
samples to microwave excitations, the fast switching of spontaneous
polarizations, and the feasibility of device structures based on structural
dynamics. The fundamental knowledge on the nanoscale microwave dynamics in
ferroelectric microstructures may directly influence their applications in
nanotechnology and lead to novel device configurations. An integrated research
and education program at University of Texas at Austin is established such that
students at different levels are trained to participate in fundamental material
research and master advanced microscopy
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Bulk
ferroelectrics with complex domain structures are usually not compatible with
microwave applications because of the strong dielectric dispersion. The
situation, however, could be different if one can take advantage of the
localized dielectric loss by addressing individual domain walls and other novel
polar structures, which is nontrivial because of the difficulty to perform
nanoscale impedance spectroscopy. Using a microwave impedance microscope with
tunable frequencies, the research team plans to study many profound scientific
questions such as the local response of domain walls, vortices, and polar
skyrmions to microwave excitations and the giga-Hertz polarization switching of
ferroelectric thin films under strong driving fields. The collective microwave
dynamics of novel polar configurations is a vivid demonstration of emergent
phenomena. The results are also critical for the applications of ferroelectric
microstructures in communication systems. The research activities on advanced
materials and technologies are integrated with outreach to local high school
students through lab experience, Saturday workshop, and summer camps. The active
involvement in frontier research will influence their career path towards
physics or other STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DMR grant supports
research to understand microstructures within ferroelectric thin films under
strong AC driving fields with funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP)
Program in the Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.