* 2004236
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: A framework for solution of coupled partial differential equations on heterogeneous parallel systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ponnuswamy Sadayappan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2024
* USD 367,000.00

This project is aimed toward the development of a transformative software
framework to more easily calculate complex mathematical models for science and
engineering research. There is currently significant burden on scientists who
need to execute their mathematical models on different supercomputers; code
developed for one supercomputer must often be re-developing or significantly
adjusted to run on other supercomputers. Streamlining this development process
will make modern hardware including supercomputers more accessible and impactful
for scientific computations. Beyond the benefits to the computational science
research agenda of this project, the new software infrastructure is expected to
similarly help other domain scientists who develop similar types of mathematical
models. All developed software will be publicly released with an open-source
license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to develop a framework for code
generation and efficient parallel solution of a large coupled set of partial
differential equations (PDEs) with minimal user intervention. The Finite Volume
Method will be used for discretization of the PDEs on unstructured meshes. From
user-specified PDEs and their boundary and initial conditions in symbolic form,
and characteristics of the target hardware platform, the framework will perform
efficient code generation and enable load-balanced parallel execution. The
generated parallel code can either be compiled and used as is, or can be used as
a starting point for the insertion of additional physical models and features by
advanced users. The software will be demonstrated for two problem types: (1)
computation of reacting flows, in which multiple space and time dependent PDEs
are non-linearly coupled, and (2) solution of the Boltzmann Transport Equation
(BTE) for phonons, in which the discretization of the 7-dimensional BTE results
in thousands of space and time dependent coupled PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.