* 2004008
* Mechanisms of Surfactant-Mediated Crystallization of Colloidal Quantum Dots
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Owen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 472,535.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jonathan Owen at Columbia
University is studying the fundamental processes that control the growth of
nanometer scale crystals. With deeper understanding of crystal growth
mechanisms, scientists can design and manufacture crystals with improved
performance in solar cells, light emitting diodes, lasers, and infrared cameras
capable of capturing images at night. In this project, crystal growth kinetics
is monitored with X-rays generated at synchrotron light sources that allow the
first moments of crystal formation to be visualized. Mathematical models are
developed to describe the evolution of the growing crystals and predict the
growth of new materials. Professor Owen develops an educational program that
integrates the research with the education of high school, undergraduate and
graduate student researchers, including students at New York City schools
serving under-represented elementary, middle school, and high school students.
The group communicates the value of research on nanoscale materials to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concentration and temperature dependence of
lead selenide and lead sulfide nucleation and growth is probed in this project
using in situ optical spectroscopies and X-ray scattering. The solute
concentration and the nanocrystal size and yield are monitored in real time. The
atomic structure of intermediates formed during the nucleation phase is probed
in situ using pair distribution function (PDF) analysis of X-ray scattering.
These studies are complemented by ex situ studies of the precursor conversion
reaction and the size dependence of the growth kinetics to arrive at a holistic
understanding of each of the coupled phases of the reaction. Rate equation
models and structure prediction methods are used to model the evolution of the
solute and nanocrystals throughout nucleation and growth. Professor Owen is
using a synergistic approach to help determine whether the nucleation mechanism
follows a classical process involving a critical nucleus whose radius changes
with the supersaturation, a rate limiting transition between specific “magic
size” clusters, crystallization from an amorphous intermediate, or a molecular
process. A deeper understanding of crystal nucleation growth can accelerate the
design of a broad array of new materials for luminescent displays, solid state
lighting, and photovoltaics. Professor Owen is also working with high school,
undergraduate and graduate students closely on this project. He develops a
laboratory module to teach high school students about luminescence and shares
the teaching tools with local schools serving underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.