* 2004869
* GOALI: Additive and Stoichiometry Engineering in Perovskites: Building Deeper Understanding of the Impact on Optoelectronic Properties for Energy Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Oki Gunawan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

A key challenge for the semiconductor industry is to develop new materials and
devices for cheaper, better performing and more pervasive electronic and energy
technologies, including solar cells, light-emitting devices and memory/logic for
computation. Over the last ten years, tremendous progress has been demonstrated
for the “perovskite” semiconductor family, which offers the promise of both high
device performance and potential for ultra-cheap fabrication. As an example,
power conversion efficiencies (a key performance metric) for perovskite solar
cells has risen from 3 to more than 25 percent over an unprecedented short
period of time, and processing for the perovskite component is achieved using
simple and cheap solution coating methods. A critical aspect enabling this
progress has been the empirical study of how small variations in perovskite
composition or additions of foreign components can improve perovskite material
formation or device performance. While operational advancements have been made,
the mechanism of improvement is not generally understood. This project involves
a joint university (Duke) – industry (IBM Corp) collaboration and focuses on
using state-of-the-art fabrication and characterization techniques to explore
the impact of compositional modifications in perovskite materials and devices.
The research targets improved understanding to enable design and demonstration
of better performance energy and electronic devices. The project further
provides a valuable opportunity for undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
researchers to experience industrial research through active collaboration with
IBM. A partnership with the Duke Shared Materials Instrument Facility also opens
a pathway to expose a broad range of younger and non-specialist students to
project-related concepts and STEM opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
perovskite solar cell literature provides a plethora of new recipes and
processing techniques to improve performance. Although solar cell performance is
widely used to judge effectiveness of additives/stoichiometry relative to
targeted goals, such device structures are complex and may hide intrinsic
impacts on perovskite transport/recombination properties (e.g., carrier density,
mobility, recombination lifetime and diffusion length). This project targets in
depth studies on stoichiometry variations and three classes of additives
(polymers, fullerenes and molecular dopants) within perovskite films to more
fully understand processes involved in material and device improvement and to
push the boundaries of compositional engineering. Through a university (Duke) –
industry (IBM Corp) collaboration, the research aims to: 1) Clarify the location
of the additives and assess stoichiometry modulation within the perovskite
films; 2) determine the impact of additives and stoichiometry variation on
carrier density and transport/recombination properties using a newly developed
(by GOALI partner IBM) advanced measurement—i.e., carrier-resolved photo-Hall—as
well as other characterization approaches (e.g., current-voltage, admittance
spectroscopy, photoluminescence, photoemission); and 3) ultimately validate
performance and stability improvements through device
fabrication/characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.