* 2004238
* Spin-Dependent Charge Transport through Chiral Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Paul Weiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2024
* USD 510,000.00

Professor Paul S. Weiss of the University of California, Los Angeles is
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
of the Division of Chemistry to study charge transport through organic chiral
(e.g., helical) molecules and assemblies. The chiral molecules and molecular
assemblies are placed on magnetic surfaces and nanostructures. A number of
versatile spectroscopic and microscopic measurements and imaging techniques are
used to probe the ultrafast charge transfer movements through molecules and
assemblies that are attached to surfaces. The research results may advance the
general fields of spintronics and magnetism. Better understanding of these
organic assemblies paves the way for their use as complements or replacements
for current spintronic devices, such as computer logic and memory with low power
and high density. In the course of conducting the project, students are trained
in a multidisciplinary environment, including international collaboration. In
addition, Professor Weiss gives popular talks through different venues, such as
National Public Radio (NPR) and courses for high school students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to elucidate the molecular, substrate,
and interfacial properties that contribute to spin-selective charge transport in
chiral molecular assemblies adsorbed on metal and semiconducting surfaces. The
ultimate goal is to understand the processes involved and to assess the future
practicality of implementing chiral organic assemblies as spin filters within
device architectures. First, the mechanistic role of molecular spin-orbit
coupling on electron spin filtering by DNA monolayers are determined. Heavy
metal ions are incorporated within DNA molecules to manipulate and to enhance
helix-induced spin-orbit-coupling. Monolayers of DNA are formed on ferromagnetic
substrates and on the surfaces of GaN Hall effect devices, and the effects of
mercuration are probed using spin-dependent electrochemistry, photoelectron
spectroscopy, and Hall voltage measurements. Second, the coupling between
ferromagnetic substrates and quantum dots tethered via chiral ligands is
investigated. The dependence of photoluminescence lifetime of the chiral
molecule-functionalized quantum dots are measured as a function of handedness
and substrate magnetization using fluorescence lifetime imaging of patterned
arrays of chiral quantum dots. The chiral signature, composition, and geometry
of the quantum dots, as well as the lengths of tethering molecules (and thus the
electronic coupling to the substrate) are tested. Finally, ultrafast charge
transfer measurements between carboranethiolate enantiomers and magnetized
substrates using core-hole clock spectroscopy are
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.