* 2004125
* Tunable topological hybrid materials via interface- and topology-engineered heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Seongshik Oh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 650,000.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;A new class of materials called topological
materials has emerged with attractive properties for making exotic electronic
and quantum devices. However, these properties are affected by defects which
hamper their potential applications. This project provides a novel way of
controlling these defects as well as developing tunable hybrid materials by
combining a variety of topological and non-topological materials. Availability
of more topological materials with superior or new properties enables
development of technology for quantum computing and quantum information. The
project includes close collaboration with many other researchers. Postdocs,
graduate and undergraduate students recruited from underrepresented groups
receive training and mentoring to become next generation leaders in thin film
quantum materials. Planned outreach activities to local elementary schools
foster positive images of science and scientists to the broad
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Topology has
emerged as a new paradigm of classifying electronic materials over the past
decade, and a series of topological materials including topological insulators
and topological semimetals have been discovered. However, native defects,
working as self-dopants, have long been a major hurdle in the way to reaching
the quantum regime of the topological states. In recent years, the principle
investigator has demonstrated that majority of these defects originate from
interfaces and with proper interface-engineering schemes, most of these defects
can be eliminated. Furthermore, it was shown that topology and other critical
properties of certain topological materials can be continuously tuned through
thin film engineering schemes such as solid mixing and digital layering.
However, most of the topological materials investigated so far have been
thermodynamically-defined compounds. This project seeks to extend the boundary
of topological materials beyond the thermodynamic limit and search for new
topological phenomena by developing a series of tunable artificial topological
materials with various thin film engineering schemes such as solid-mixing,
digital-layering, dimensional confinement, and interfacial defect engineering.
By combining a variety of interface and topology-engineering schemes, this
project develops tunable topological hybrid materials and explore yet-to-be-
discovered topological quantum effects, along two Thrusts: 1. Tunable artificial
topological materials and 2. Tunable interfacial topological superconductors.
These materials allow exploring the boundaries between kinetically vs
thermodynamically-driven growth landscapes and uncovering new physics where
topology, magnetism and superconductivity meet, including and beyond minimal
magnetic Weyl semimetals, high temperature quantum anomalous Hall phase, axion
insulators, and interfacial superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.