* 2004683
* Collaborative Research: The Impact of Mesoscale Structure on Multiexciton Dynamics of Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Matthew Sfeir, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 302,849.00

This collaborative project studies intimate details of the way organic polymers
can be designed for uses in next-generation solar cells and other light-active
electronic devices. One promising but unproven way of harnessing light-energy
efficiently involves a special class of organic molecules that, when properly
assembled, can recover energy that is normally lost as heat. However, organizing
these molecules in the optimal way has proven to be a challenge, such that the
beneficial impacts of this approach have not been realized to date. This project
develops a new approach to assembling light harvesting molecules so that they
are organized in a brush-like arrangement. The researchers use ultrafast cameras
to study the flow of energy of the assemblies and use this information to
optimize their structures. The discoveries that ensue from these studies can
lead to transformative technologies for energy and information applications. The
collaboration provides the participating students with opportunities to: develop
interdisciplinary communication skills; work in teams; tackle challenges outside
their respective core subject; disseminate their findings to chemists,
physicists, and the community as a whole. The principal investigators focus on
outreach activities targeting socioeconomically challenged communities in
Harlem, NY, as well young chemists and postdoctoral scientists, with particular
emphasis on those who belong to under-represented groups in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple exciton generation is now a rapidly growing area
in photophysics that has yet to be acutely understood. The molecular version of
multiple exciton generation is singlet fission – the generation of two
independent triplet excitons from a single photon. From this light harvesting
mechanism, unconventional exciton dynamics can be envisioned to exploit a) the
amplification properties that result when two excitons/charge carriers are
created from one photon (optoelectronics), b) the rapid population of spin
correlated quantum states (quantum information), or c) the activation of
localized multielectron reaction centers (photochemistry and photocatalysis).
This proposal is rooted in fundamental studies of organic macromolecule
structure-property relationships that govern the singlet fission multiexciton
dynamics necessary for future implementations in device architectures. The
researchers use a molecular engineering approach to control fundamental
multiexciton dynamics and exciton transport across multiple length scales – from
individual molecules (triplet pair formation processes) to nano-/micro-scales
(free triplet formation and transport). Understanding the influence of the
chemical nature of the chromophores themselves and their spatial arrangement,
strategically tethered within macromolecules, provides the fundamental
information necessary to solve some of the unifying and inherent challenges in
developing next generation singlet fission device
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.