* 2004968
* Collaborative Research: One-Dimensional Correlated and Topological Electronic States in Ultra-Clean Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ethan Minot, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 202,683.00

Non-Technical: &lt;br/&gt;By integrating metals and semiconductors into
circuits, humans have learned to control the flow of electrons to process
information. Despite enormous successes in this field, there are still unsolved
challenges. Existing methods to control electron flow produce imprecise levels
of electrical current, and often lead to energy wasted as heat. In this project,
the team explores a new way of controlling electric current using a novel method
for pumping electrons. The pump is built from a single carbon nanotube that is
integrated with a microscopic pattern of wires that controls a time-varying
electric field. The pump is predicted to carry an electrical current without
dissipation of energy. It is also predicted to be useful as a metrological
standard for generating a precise current from a frequency source. Additionally,
the system unravels new knowledge about the behavior of interacting electrons
which is fundamentally different in such reduced-dimensional systems. The
project trains students including under-represented minorities and strengthens
the pipeline that feeds the science and engineering workforce. Outreach
activities for high-school students from under-represented minorities include an
annual science summer camp. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;One
dimensional (1D) electronic systems are naturally correlated, in contrast to the
Fermi liquids that usually form in higher (two and three) dimensions. While
topological order has been studied intensely in 2D and 3D, it has received
relatively little attention in 1D where the combination of topology and
correlations leads to fascinating possibilities. In the early 80s, Thouless
predicted that the same topological invariant as in the quantum Hall effect
arises in 1D systems, when the magnetic field is replaced by a time-varying
periodic potential. This system, known as an adiabatic charge pump or Thouless
pump, has not been realized cleanly in condensed matter, due to problems of
single-electron charging and sample disorder. The research teamâ€™s preliminary
results demonstrate the suitability of their long, suspended, ultra-clean carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) for realizing the Thouless pump, and related exotic phenomena.
Electrons in a long, ultra-clean CNT form either a Wigner crystal, Luttinger
liquid, or a correlated insulator state. Upon application of the periodic
potential, the system may then evolve into an integer Thouless pump, a
fractional Thouless pump, an artificial Mott insulator or other exotic states.
This project focuses on the rich physics that can be found in, and between,
these exotic states. To access and control the various phenomena, the team will
tune (i) the electron density in the CNT, (ii) the wavelength of the external
potential, and (iii) the Coulomb interaction strength (a function of CNT band
gap). The specific aims of the project are: 1. Map the parameter space of 1D
correlated states in the CNT system without an external periodic potential. 2.
Introduce topological order by generating an external periodic potential with
surface acoustic waves and a precision flip-chip geometry. 3. Study the
interplay of correlations and topological order in 1D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.