* 2004462
* Infrared Quantum Materials Based on Scandium-Containing III-Nitrides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Oana Malis, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 431,877.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing new
technologically useful materials by incorporating a rarely used metal (scandium)
into traditional semiconductors. This combination has unique light emitting and
detecting capabilities with broad benefits to society including novel devices
for medical imaging and solar cells. The research aims to understand, control,
and adjust the atomic arrangement of these new materials to maximize light
absorption in the invisible infrared range. The project also explores the effect
of atomic imperfections in the semiconductors on the movement of free electrical
charge. This program also links the research with the educational goal of
increasing learning opportunities for students of all ages, inside and outside
the traditional classroom. The investigators and students involved in this
project participate in outreach activities organized either in-house or at local
schools to increase exposure of K-12 students and the general public to modern
scientific topics in materials science in a fun, project-oriented environment.
Lesson plans are designed and experimental demonstrations of basic optical
properties of matter are built for the middle-school summer camp “Physics Inside
Out” at Purdue. To maximize impact at the high-school level, the activities
engage teachers in summer research. In particular, the teachers are developing
inquiry-based lesson plans incorporating concepts related to quantum science
into the high-school curriculum to fulfill Indiana standards. The researchers
also organize a hands-on workshop with take-home materials for the annual
meeting of the Hoosier Association of Science
Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;This
project sets the foundation for a novel type of infrared materials using optical
transitions between quantized states in the conduction band of nitride
semiconductors incorporating the group IIIB transition-metal scandium. These
semiconductors have unique electronic properties that make them suitable for
advancing the functionality of semiconductor optoelectronic devices into
spectral ranges currently inaccessible with other material systems. The
innovative approach employs an emergent optoelectronic material, the wurtzite
phase of Sc-Al-nitride that is lattice-matched to GaN, to mitigate strain-
related issues that have impeded progress of nitride optoelectronics into the
infrared so far. The research effort is interdisciplinary and involves material
design and growth, plus structural and optical characterization. Polar and
nonpolar ScAlN/GaN heterostructures are designed using extensive band-structure
calculations. To achieve maximum material purity and monolayer-control of the
atomic structure, the Sc-containing materials are grown by plasma-assisted
molecular beam epitaxy on high quality quasi-bulk GaN substrates. The decisive
task is to identify the epitaxial growth conditions that satisfy the most
stringent requirements imposed by near-infrared optical processes. In order to
correlate microstructure with optical and electronic properties, the structure
of the semiconductor materials is comprehensively characterized with high-
resolution x-ray diffraction, advanced transmission electron microscopy, and
atom probe tomography. The band structure of the materials is probed
experimentally with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and
photoluminescence. The growth of these emergent materials advances the state-of-
the-art in transition-metal nitride epitaxy. Uncharted mechanisms of material
growth on polar and non-polar GaN substrates are scrutinized. This research also
contributes to the knowledge base of the physics of infrared optical
transitions. These infrared materials are expected to enable optoelectronics
with functionality unmatched by current technologies. Moreover, the novel class
of Sc-containing semiconductors benefit other applications such as high-electron
mobility transistors, ultraviolet, thermoelectric, piezoelectric, and plasmonic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.