* 2004010
* Dissociative Bio-orthogonal Reactions of Isonitriles and Tetrazines
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Raphael Franzini, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 12/31/2023
* USD 375,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program supports the group of
Dr. Raphael M. Franzini from the University of Utah in a collaboration with Dr.
Randall Peterson from the University of Utah to develop new chemistries to study
and manipulate biomolecules in cells. Countless biological components are
precisely orchestrated during cellular processes. One such process is the
interaction of proteins with each other during cell signaling events. Studying
these processes and events with high precision often requires activation of
specific biological components at specific times during a measurement. One way
to achieve this goal is to use chemical reactions. However, in order to be
practical under typical biological conditions, such a chemical reaction needs to
be completed in a few minutes. To obtain such short reaction times, the size of
molecules involved in the reaction should be as small as possible to minimize
their interference with the large biomolecules in the system. This award funds
the development of new chemistries that meet these requirements and provides
formal research training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
toward becoming leaders in chemistry and biology. An integral part of the
research program is the establishment of the Summer Experience Advancing
Research in Chemical Biology (SEARCH) program that provides research and
mentoring opportunities to encourage high school students to enter a career in a
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project explores the bioorthogonal chemistry
of isocyanides to enable the rapid uncaging of molecules of interest in cells.
The isocyano group is unique because although consisting of only two atoms it
readily undergoes bioorthogonal reactions. The project advances isocyano-based
groups that can be removed by exposure to tetrazines, which are another type of
bioorthogonal moiety. Particular goals are to make the release reaction faster,
the masking groups smaller, and to reduce the tetrazine concentration needed for
the reaction to occur. The chemistry is used to study the activity of proprotein
convertases during the early embryogenesis of zebrafish with spatial and
temporal resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.