* 2004429
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Investigation of Microscale Residual Stresses in Additively Manufactured Stainless Steel
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Wen Chen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 345,470.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing, also called 3D printing,
is a disruptive technology for the manufacture of engineering components in
automotive, aerospace, defense, biomedical and other industries. The high-
temperature laser beam used for additive manufacturing of metal alloys usually
produces highly heterogeneous microstructures that result in large inhomogeneous
residual stresses in 3D-printed materials. Residual stresses are generally
detrimental to the performance of a material or the life of a component, thus
limiting the wide adoption of additive manufacturing in engineering
applications. While the macroscale residual stresses have been widely studied in
the field of metal 3D printing, the origin and control of the microscale
residual stresses remain largely unexplored. This collaborative research aims to
understand and control the microscale residual stresses in additively
manufactured stainless steel. Due to its excellent combination of mechanical
properties, corrosion, and oxidation resistance, stainless steel is a workhorse
material used in a wide range of applications such as cars, ships, airplanes,
nuclear power plants, medical implants, etc. The research will investigate the
effects of 3D-printed microstructures on the resultant microscale residual
stresses in stainless steel by integrating microstructural characterization,
mechanical testing, and computational modeling. Mechanistic insights gained will
be applied to guide additive manufacturing, so as to mitigate the microscale
residual stresses in 3D-printed stainless steel. Results from this research will
lay a solid foundation for future development of additively manufactured
metallic materials with tailored microstructures and outstanding mechanical
performance. The project will promote teaching, training, and learning through
multi-discipline approaches, broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups, and enrich curriculum development efforts, particularly in the
interdisciplinary areas of materials science and advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Additive
manufacturing of metal alloys via laser powder bed fusion and laser engineered
net shaping technologies features highly localized melting processes, fast
cooling rates, and strong temperature gradients. These extreme laser-printing
conditions result in highly nonequilibrium microstructures that lead to severely
inhomogeneous residual stresses in additively manufactured materials. The
research aims to elucidate the fundamental relationships between the additive
manufacturing methods, heterogeneous microstructures and microscale residual
stresses in 3D-printed stainless steel. The project consists of two major
thrusts. Thrust I involves 3D printing, microstructural characterization,
mechanical testing and in situ synchrotron x-ray measurements of residual
stresses in stainless steel for a large range of printing schemes and
parameters, and accordingly a variety of printed microstructures. Thrust II
involves the development of microstructure-sensitive crystal plasticity finite
element models that account for the heterogeneous grain structures and sub-grain
solidification cell structures. The impact of both intergranular and
intragranular residual stresses on the mechanical responses of printed samples
will be systematically studied by combining experiments and simulations.
Mechanistic insights gained will be applied to guide the optimization of
printing schemes and parameters, so as to alleviate the microscale residual
stresses in 3D-printed stainless steel. The integrated experimental and modeling
approach developed is generally applicable to understand and control the
residual stresses in other additively manufactured metal alloys. The project
will engage high school students and underrepresented minorities for research.
These activities will provide opportunities to inspire their interest in
pursuing future career in advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.