* 2004561
* Student Travel Support for Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation (VMCAI) Winter School 2020
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Ruzica Piskac, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 01/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

This travel grant provides support for 15 US-based students to attend the 32nd
Winter School on Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation
(VMCAI) to be held in New Orleans, January 2020. VMCAI, one of the premier
conference in formal verification, provides a forum for researchers from the
communities of Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation,
facilitating interaction, cross-fertilization, and advancement of hybrid methods
that combine these and related areas. The VMCAI winter school will give students
the knowledge required to enter the field and present them with some of the
newer research directions in the field. Students have much to gain from
attending winter school's learning state-of-the-art methodologies, being exposed
to new research questions, and interacting with senior researchers in their
chosen area of expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This travel grant will enable
career development and learning opportunities for US-based and/or US citizen
graduate students. Attending conferences like the VMCAI winter school is an
important component of graduate school education for our society's future
computer science researchers. Students have the opportunity to discuss leading
edge research with world-class researchers in formal methods, and establish
networks, connections, and mentoring relationships that will serve them well
during their research careers. This project aims at increasing the participation
of students from underrepresented groups and those from smaller institutions of
education, to provide them with equal opportunities, rather than leave them
behind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.