* 2004147
* Structural and Electron Dynamics of the O-O bond Formation in Photosystem II
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yulia Pushkar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the Chemistry
Division is supporting Dr. Yulia Pushkar of the Department of Physics and
Astronomy at Purdue University to study the mechanism of dioxygen (O2) formation
in the naturally-occurring photosynthetic protein Photosystem II. This protein
uses the energy of sunlight to split water molecules into protons, electrons and
oxygen molecules, providing the majority of the oxygen in the Earth’s
atmosphere. Plants subsequently use the electrons and protons in chemical
processes resulting in CO2 fixation. The chemical center of Photosystem II
responsible for water-splitting contains manganese and calcium ions, that work
together in the crucial chemical catalysis process that sustains our biosphere.
Establishing the fundamental mechanism of this process in molecular detail could
enable the design of new methods for CO2-neutral sunlight-powered energy
production. The planned educational activities focus on increasing opportunities
for and the participation in research activities for students from backgrounds
underrepresented in STEM careers. Dr. Pushkar advises in research students who
participate in the Minority Access to Research Careers and Access Internally for
Minorities, the Louise Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, and Research
Experiences for Undergraduate Programs. She also mentors student recipients of
Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships, Discovery Park Undergraduate Research
Internships, and the Edward S. Akeley Award and Lijuan Wang Award for Women in
Physics and contributes to the training of young women scientists through
research and presentations in Purdue’s Women in Physics and Women in Science
Programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research in this project focuses on the use of
laser pump X-ray probe time-resolved X-ray emission, absorption and scattering
to study the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) of Photosystem II, which participates
in the O-O bond formation and O2 evolution, the critical step of photosynthesis.
The analysis of the electronic structure of the Mn4Ca cluster is conducted with
microsecond (µsec) time resolution and the structural changes in the cluster are
determined with ~0.02 Å precision. Critical technology developments are made in
high-resolution, high-sensitivity X-ray spectrometers, nanoliter drop-on demand
sample delivery systems, and biological time-resolved X-ray spectroscopy at
newly developed high-flux synchrotron beamlines. The experimental results are
interpreted in the framework of currently available structural models of the
OEC. Complementary DFT calculations are conducted to monitor the energy profile
of the proposed chemical transformations in the OEC. Elucidation of the
structural changes in the OEC that accompany the critical catalytic step of O-O
bond formation and elucidation of the nature of the species activating water by
combined experimental data and DFT modeling are stepping stones for
understanding the details of the mechanism of catalytic water-
splitting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.