* 2004278
* SBP: Harnessing Latinx Parents' Math Support to Increase Adolescents' Math Motivation and Achievement
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Nestor Tulagan, Tulagan, Nestor B
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Science of Broadening Participation program. The goal of the SPRF program is to
prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers
in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Sandra D. Simpkins at the
University of California, Irvine, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist examining how Latinx families and organized after-school
activities (ASAs) can build partnerships to foster students’ math motivation and
achievement. Youths’ math achievement and motivation in middle school is a
critical gateway to STEM aspirations and pursuits in high school and college.
However, many Latinx and underrepresented minority youth turn away from STEM
pursuits because they perceive math to be too challenging or unimportant to
their lives. Adolescents need to have positive experiences in educational
contexts that boost their interests, values, and ongoing mastery. Family
environments and ASAs are informal educational settings that extend what youths
are learning in school, which is particularly important for Latinx youth
attending lower-quality schools. As ASAs increasingly put forth initiatives to
increase parent involvement in Latinx youths’ education, successful partnerships
between families and ASAs hinges on leveraging Latinx families’ cultural funds
of knowledge and parents’ culturally-grounded support in math and STEM more
broadly. These funds of knowledge can provide vital insights to how ASAs can
make math and STEM relevant to youths’ lives and may help parents further
enhance their math support at home. This project seeks to understand how Latinx
parents’ support their adolescents in math and uncover the ways in which ASAs
can better leverage Latinx parents’ cultural funds of knowledge to maximally
increase youths’ competence and motivation in math. By studying how ASAs can
harness parents’ math support to increase youths’ math motivation and
achievement, this project hopes to bolster family-ASA partnerships to effect
positive educational success among Latinx youths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to understand Latinx parents’ cultural funds of knowledge in math;
identify opportunities for ASAs to enhance their math support; develop a
reliable, valid measure of Latinx parents’ math support that captures a more
complete and culturally-grounded set of parental behaviors; and examine the
links between parents’ math supports and youths’ math motivation and
performance. To accomplish these research aims, data will be collected from both
parents and youth participants of a math ASA through mixed methods approaches,
including surveys and in-depth qualitative interviews. Study findings will guide
efforts by researchers and ASA leaders to develop practical, cost-effective
resources aimed at enhancing parents’ math support. The integration of basic and
applied approaches will extend substantive knowledge on family influences within
Latinx communities and provide vital, enriching information that illuminates the
effective ways in which parents and ASAs may reciprocally inform one another to
improve youths’ math motivation and achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.