* 2004810
* Plasmon Enhanced Optical Magnetism in Metal Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Dong Son, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 11/30/2021
* USD 149,976.00

This research examines strategies for generating and controlling magnetic fields
with light. The magnetism is the result of an interaction of light with gold
metal. Although gold metal has no magnetic behavior in the dark, and light does
not usually generate stable magnetic fields, two features of this system enable
light-induced magnetism. First, the gold is prepared in the form of very small
particles, called nanoparticles, that are much smaller than the wavelength of
light. Because of their small size, gold nanoparticles have a unique ability to
greatly concentrate and enhance the absorption of light. Second, the light is
circularly polarized, meaning that the beam of light also causes rotational
motion of electrons in the metal nanoparticles. These combined effects produce
large circulating electric currents in the nanoparticles that, in turn, give
rise to magnetic fields. Each nanoparticle behaves like a small, very strong
magnet. The magnetic field is only present when the light is shining, so the
magnetism can be switched on and off as quickly as the light can be turned on
and off. With better understanding, this behavior can allow for even smaller and
faster magnetic switching than current computer memory systems that store
information in switchable magnets. This work also supports student training in
scientific communication to non-technical audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research analyzes the optical, magnetic, and thermal behavior that results from
resonant enhancement of coherent, rotating charge displacement in plasmonic
metal nanostructures during excitation with circularly polarized light. The
generation of magnetic fields in matter due to the direct transfer of angular
momentum from circularly polarized optical fields is termed the inverse Faraday
effect, and is the central focus of study in these experiments. The inverse
Faraday effect is analyzed using both time-resolved pump-probe spectroscopy and
continuous wave spectroscopy on colloidal suspensions of gold nanoparticles that
are designed to provide plasmonic enhancement of the incident optical field.
Experiments are focused on distinguishing optically-induced magnetism from other
non-linear optical phenomena, such as the optical Kerr effect, or non-coherent
thermalization processes. The experiments also quantify the magnitude, frequency
dependence, time response, and microscopic mechanism of the optically-induced
magnetism, in order to elucidate new avenues of optoelectronic and opto-magnetic
functionality in nanostructures enabled by ultrafast, optically modulated
magnetic field generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.