* 2004800
* Unlikely Alliances in Rural-Urban Water Conflicts
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Kate Berry, Borgias, Sophia L
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 63,250.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Kate Berry at
University of Nevada, Reno, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating rural-urban water conflicts in the Western United
States. As cities increasingly look to rural areas for water supplies, they are
often met with staunch resistance. Yet, the dynamics of conflict and cooperation
over rural-urban water transfers are not well understood. This research
addresses this gap by examining resistance to two large rural-urban water
transfers. In particular, it seeks to understand the dynamics of alliance and
alignment among diverse Indigenous and non-Indigenous actors resisting these
transfers. The project aims to contribute a more nuanced understanding of what
are called unlikely alliances. More broadly, it seeks to advance understandings
of the role of contestation and collective action in water governance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project engages scholarship on unlikely
alliances, hydrosocial territory, and territorial pluralism to answer three
research questions. First, why and when are Indigenous and non-Indigenous actors
finding strategic alliance or alignment over shared resistance to rural-to-urban
water transfers? Second, how is alliance or alignment among diverse actors
shaping and shaped by the way hydrosocial territories are constructed,
mobilized, and contested in water transfer conflicts? Third, how do assertions
of Indigenous governance and tribal sovereignty shape the ways actors navigate
territorial pluralism as they ally or align in pursuit of water justice? To
address these questions, the project employs qualitative methods in a
comparative case study of two water transfer conflicts in the Great Basin
region. Methods for data collection include interviews, archival research and
document review, participant observation of meetings and events, and focus
groups that will be used to discuss and gather feedback about preliminary
findings. The results of the study will inform key water policy debates and
provide insights for activists and organizations interested in building more
diverse coalitions. By examining the diverse visions of hydrosocial territory
asserted in rural-urban water conflicts, this research will contribute to
scholarly understandings of how actors pursue water justice and build new water
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.