* 2004973
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Community-Based Weather and Climate Simulation With a Global Storm-Resolving Model
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* William Skamarock, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,993,269.00

Global Earth System Models (ESMs) use mathematical equations to simulate both
weather and climate. ESMs include the dynamics of the atmosphere, oceans, land
surface, ice, and vegetation. They can be used to make predictions of use to the
public and policymakers. Todayâ€™s ESMs use coarse grids with cells about 100 km
wide. Important weather systems like thunderstorms are too small to be simulated
with such grids. One way to improve ESMs is to use finer grids that can directly
simulate thunderstorms, but such models can only be run on very powerful
computers. This project, called EarthWorks, will create an ESM capable of
resolving storms by taking advantage of recent developments in high performance
computing. EarthWorks will also use artificial intelligence to improve and speed
up the model, and state-of-the-art methods to limit the amount of data produced
as the model runs. The EarthWorks ESM will be built by spinning off and
modifying a copy of the most recent version of the widely used Community Earth
System Model. The modified model will represent the atmosphere, the oceans, and
the land surface on a single very high-resolution grid, with grid cells about 4
km wide. It will have improved forecast skill, and produce more realistic
simulations of past, present, and future climates. The project will make the
model and its output openly available for use by all
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The open-source Community Earth System Model
(CESM) is both developed and applied to scientific problems by a large community
of researchers. It is critical infrastructure for the U.S. climate research
community. In the atmosphere and ocean components of the CESM, the adiabatic
terms of the partial differential equations that express conservation of mass,
momentum, and thermodynamic energy are solved numerically using what is called a
dynamical core. Atmosphere and ocean models also include parametric
representations, called parameterizations, that are designed to include the
effects of storm and cloud processes that occur on scales too small to be
represented on the model's grid. Despite decades of work by many scientists,
today's parameterizations are still problematic and limit the utility of ESMs
for many applications of societal relevance. Fortunately, recent advances in
computer power have made it possible to parameterize less, by using grid
spacings on the order of a few kilometers over the entire globe. These "global
storm-resolving models" (GSRMs) can only be run on today's fastest computers.
GSRMs are under very active development at a dozen or so modeling centers around
the world. Unfortunately, however, the current formulation of the CESM prevents
it from being run as a GSRM. This project, called EarthWorks, will create a new,
openly available GSRM by spinning off and intensively modifying a copy of the
CESM. To accomplish this goal, the researchers will use recently developed and
closely related dynamical cores for the atmosphere and ocean. All components of
the model will use the same very high-resolution grid. This high resolution will
make it possible to eliminate the particularly troublesome parameterization of
deep cumulus convection (i.e., thunderstorms), and thereby reduce systematic
biases that plague current ESMs. Earthworks will exploit the pre-exascale and
exascale technologies now being brought to market by high performance computing
vendors. The new exascale ESM will run the most computationally intensive
components on powerful graphics processor units (GPUs), and exploit node-level
task parallelism to execute the rest of the model asynchronously. The component
model codes are close to completion and are currently being tested on GPUs.
EarthWorks will use a simplified component-coupling approach, incorporate
machine learning where feasible, and leverage lossy compression techniques and
parallel I/O tools to deal with the enormous data volumes that will be generated
as the model runs. The completed model will be simple, powerful, and well
documented. The project will apply it to pressing scientific problems in both
numerical weather prediction and climate simulation. The model and its input
datasets will be made openly available to the broad research community, via
GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.