* 2004187
* Confined Inner-scroll Reactions for the Production of Hetero-Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* John Wiley, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular ,and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor John B. Wiley at the University
of New Orleans is studying chemical reactions in confined assemblies. Nanosheets
can be viewed as very thin paper-like structures consisting of a few layers of
atoms. Under certain conditions, these sheets can scroll to capture preformed
atomic clusters (nanoparticles) where the combination of particles and scrolls
is akin to peapods—nanoparticle “peas” within a nanoscroll “pods”. Such
architectures are allowing Professor Wiley to transform the confined
nanoparticles into unique structures and wires. The resulting nanostructures
offer an important avenue to next generation electronic devices as well as
materials for catalytic reactions, magnetics, energy storage devices, and
environmental remediation. This research project is also providing advanced
training in nanochemistry to graduate, undergraduate and high school students.
Professor Wiley is also partnering with industry to provide internship
opportunities to his students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is
advancing peapod nanocomposites by exploiting reactions within scrolled
assemblies. Specific efforts are focusing on the modification of composition and
structure of captured nanoparticles while developing methods for joining
adjacent particles. These methodologies are important for the production of
technologically-significant, heterostructured nanoparticles and nanowires.
Advances may allow researchers to access much more intricate, highly tuned
nanostructures, impacting next-generation electronic devices that exploit
nanoscale heterojunctions based on metal-semiconductor, semiconductor-
semiconductor, metal-metal oxide, and metal/semiconductor-magnetic contacts.
Further, the nanopeapods themselves are of interest for their fundamental
nanoparticle-nanoparticle interactions as well as for producing materials of
technological importance in the areas of catalysis, plasmonics, magnetics,
environmental remediation, and energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.