* 2004393
* Intramolecular and Intermolecular Packing in Polymer Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Toshikazu Miyoshi, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 594,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 2/3 of all
commercially available polymers are semicrystalline including an enormous number
and variety of materials in our lives as well as in all kinds of high-technology
applications. Tuning of polymer crystallization through the macromolecular chain
structures or through high-order structural assemblies has been improved over
the last half century. However, a fundamental problem of widespread importance
is to understand the mechanism of polymer crystallization at the molecular
level. Many factors, such as molecular entanglement, mobility, molecular weight,
solvent-polymer or polymer-polymer interactions, polymer concentration, and
others influence the chain-level structure of semicrystalline polymers during
crystallization. This project is aimed at characterizing intramolecular and
intermolecular structures of specially labeled semicrystalline polymers in
crystals grown from the melt or from solution. The research is expected to
enhance foundations about: (i) entanglement effects on chain-folding structure
in melt-grown crystals, (ii) molecular weight effects on chain-folding motif in
single crystals, (iii) early stage of polymer crystallization in dilute
solutions, (iv) chiral recognition of helical polymers, and (v) molecular
dynamics of stereoregular polyolefin-type materials. The established foundations
will be important for understanding crystallization mechanisms and for designing
novel polymer materials. Graduate students trained in this project will acquire
broad experimental skills covering polymer synthesis, materials
characterization, advanced NMR characterization, and numerical simulations. They
will have opportunities to present technical talks and posters at national and
regional meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long and flexible semicrystalline polymers fold to
various extents during crystallization. Folding generates intramolecular packing
in addition to intermolecular packing. Understanding of intramolecular and
intermolecular packing structures is essential in the crystallization process of
long polymer chains. This project will focus on evaluation of the intramolecular
and intermolecular packing structures of 13C labeled semicrystalline polymers in
solution and melt-grown crystals by using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy. A biodegradable polymer, poly(lactic acid) (PLA) will be used as a
model system, since established decomposition route allows us to re-use 13C
labeled monomer to effectively synthesize a variety of 13C labeled PLAs with
precisely controlled and diverse molecular weights from 2K to over 100K g/mol.
First, the project is aimed at entanglement effects on the intramolecular
packing structure of poly(L-lactic acid) by investigating (i) Mw effect on the
chain-folding structure and (ii) blending effect of low Mw component on the
chain-folding structure of long chains in melt-grown crystals. A second thrust
aims at elucidating (i) Mw effect on the molecular dimension of the folded
chains in solution-grown crystals and (ii) precursor structure in dilute
solutions. Recently developed Dynamic Nuclear Polarization NMR significantly
enhances sensitivity of the 13C labeled polymer signals (~ 400 times) and thus
may allow to directly analyze the chain-level structure of 13C labeled polymer
in the frozen solution state. This experiment will shed light on the early stage
of polymer crystallization at the molecular level. A third thrust aims at
understanding the importance of both intermolecular and intramolecular packing
on polymer crystallization. A model system of PLA stereocomplex will be used to
address Mw effects on both intramolecular and intermolecular packing structures.
Finally, detailed molecular dynamics and mechanical properties of recently
developed polyolefins will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.