* 2004287
* NSF-BSF: Transformation, modulation, and coupling of polariton and exciton quantum fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Loren Pfeiffer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 614,102.00

Nontechnical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project brings together an
international team and studies how light interacts with electrons when trapped
in macroscopic-scale semiconductor structures. These interactions lead to very
intriguing phenomena which can be exploited for making quantum devices with
remarkable functionalities. The interactions will be created by directing light
signals onto semiconductor microscale structures kept at very low temperatures
and on which ultra-short voltage pulses are applied. Knowledge gained from this
project provides new ways of transporting, storing, and using these exotic
signals for building complex circuits, switches, and other novel quantum
photonic technologies. The research project also trains graduate, undergraduate
and high-school students to be the next generation of leaders in science and
industry. It includes outreach activities for K-12 and recruits underrepresented
students in this multi-disciplinary research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Exciton-polaritons are
artificial quasi-particles in the form of a quantum super-position of light and
of electrons, trapped in semiconductor structures. They are known to behave like
an ultra-lightweight gas of artificial atoms, combining the properties of both
light and massive particles. It was shown that at low temperatures these quasi-
particles condense to a collective quantum ground state known as a Bose-Einstein
condensate. In this project, new methods will be developed to transform the
coherent polariton quantum fluid into a fluid of dipolar exciton. These dipolar
excitons are long-lived and strongly interacting atom-like particles in a
semiconductor, featuring rich many-body physics phenomena that have just begun
to be understood. The ability to perform transformations between two very
different types of quantum fluids, one which is strongly admixed with light and
weakly interacting, and one which is much more matter-like and strongly
interacting, will allow integrating the different, complementary features of
each of the fluids, and will open up a wide range of new ways to manipulate
quantum fluids of matter and of light in semiconductors. The ability to modulate
the collective ground states can lead to new insights on the complex physics of
quantum fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.