* 2004474
* Probing moire flat bands with optical spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Jun Yan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 392,423.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;When a layer with a periodic pattern is
laid on top of another similar pattern with minor difference(s) in pitch or
orientation, moiré interference patterns appear. Such moiré patterns can occur
even at an atomic scale by slightly misaligning the stacking of two 2D (two-
dimensional) crystals, which can dramatically modify the properties of the
atomic stacks. For example, on its own, graphene (a layer of carbon a single
atom thick) conducts electricity like metal does, but with a moiré pattern it
can behave either like plastics which don’t conduct electricity or like a
superconductor which conducts electricity without generating any heat. This
research investigates the unusual behaviors of electronic structures due to
moiré patterns. Knowledge acquired through this study will reveal fundamental
properties of moiré-patterned 2D systems and pave the way for developing devices
that make use of these surprising phenomena. Beyond scientific and technological
impacts, this project brings modern materials physics education to the broader
Western Massachusetts community through workshops and lab visits. A new summer
research internship will be established in collaboration with a Hispanic-serving
regional community college, to provide promising underrepresented minority
students with a science research experience in the principle investigator’s 2D
materials lab. The objective of this internship is to provide educational
enrichment opportunities and increase access to science careers to students who
are traditionally underrepresented, so that they will be better prepared for
matriculating into a four-year institution and later to graduate
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Moiré
superlattices with relatively long wavelength of ~10nm in 2D crystals can create
almost dispersionless electronic bands, where the kinetic energies of the
charges are strongly suppressed, giving way to Coulomb interaction that drives
strongly correlated phases. In this project, the PI uses versatile optical
spectroscopy techniques to investigate these moiré flat bands formed in stacked
atomic layers of graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides. Quantum states
such as Mott insulators, superconductivity, and Chern insulators are
continuously tuned by the electric fields. Fundamental properties of these
states are probed by measuring exciton polarons, magneto-phonon resonances and
electronic Raman susceptibility. This project advances scientific knowledge of
the quantum materials physics by focusing on three main questions regarding the
nature of the moiré flat bands: 1) What is the size and nature of the
spontaneously opened gaps in partially filled moiré bands? 2) Can the
interaction break the spin and valley degeneracy in the absence of an external
magnetic field, and what is the spin and valley polarization? 3) What kind of
novel excitations can the correlated states host? Understanding and tuning these
properties by the electric field effect are important not only for fundamental
physics, but also for future device applications harnessing these unusual
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.