* 2004275
* SBIR Phase I:  Human-Centered, Augmented Intelligence Software for Water and Wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Mason Throneburg, CONFLUENCY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 244,936.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from development of augmented
intelligence software improving planning and operational decisions for water and
wastewater systems. The most challenging issues for water utilities include
addressing aging infrastructure, adapting complex systems to changing
regulations, and addressing the impacts of environmental change. They arise from
interconnected infrastructure networks that interface with both the built and
natural environment. Current artificial intelligence and machine learning
solutions for water are narrowly defined for specific use cases. The proposed
intelligence software will enable transformative changes in water management by
seamless composition of hybrid models from simulators and data-driven models to
overcome data and information silos, enabling decision-makers to integrate data
in a system model that increases resilience at reduced customer costs. These
improvements can lead to significant reductions in the roughly $4.7 B annual
energy spend for water/wastewater, $50 B in combined sewer system programs, and
up to $1 T in aging infrastructure needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop methods for
combining multi-fidelity simulation models and data-driven models to support
decision-making for both long-term planning needs and real-time operational
decision support for water and wastewater systems. Meta-modeling techniques for
embedding physical system understanding from high-fidelity physics-based
simulators to low-fidelity models will be evaluated. Accuracy and runtime
tradeoffs will be evaluated for multiple reduced-order methods (e.g. linear and
non-linear equations, projection-based methods) to enable more efficient
optimization of large solution spaces. Domain applications include reduced-order
versions of the St Venant equations for one-dimensional flow, and analytical
solutions of biological, physical, and chemical processes in secondary
wastewater treatment. The project will evaluate multiple machine learning
methods, including deep neural networks, reinforcement learning, random forest,
support vector machines, and boosted learning algorithms, to detect patterns in
observed data for near-term predictive power toward operational real-time
decisions. Expert elicitation techniques will be used to quantify human
expertise for subjective decision criteria, integrating valuable tacit human
knowledge into the decision process. Meta-analysis of alternative hybrid
modeling workflows will be evaluated to identify computationally efficient
pathways to optimize complex planning challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.