* 2004825
* Manipulating Majorana bound states in S-TI-S Josephson junction networks: braiding, fusion, and parity dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dale Van Harlingen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 760,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award combines experimental condensed
matter physics and quantum information science research aimed at understanding a
newly-discovered class of materials and developing schemes for incorporating
them into advanced electronic devices for quantum computing. The focus is on
topological materials whose properties depend on the topology, or geometry, of
their electronic structure, enabling novel electronic states that can carry and
control currents in unique ways. Fabricating and measuring a series of advanced
hybrid devices that integrate these topological materials with superconductors
will enable exploration of the capabilities and limitations of this approach
that has been predicted to exhibit new physical phenomena and electronic
properties. In addition to their scientific interest, these unique materials can
be implemented in electronic circuits to create a new type of computer platform
in which the information is stored in quantum states protected from the
detrimental effects of the environment, a unique feature of topological devices
that has the potential to extend dramatically the speed and capability of large-
scale computers. Through the new science and applications that may arise from
this project, this research program exposes a diverse cadre of postdoctoral
researchers, graduate research students, and undergraduate students to
scientific issues and experimental techniques relevant to the development and
applications of new materials and phenomena. This training at the interface of
materials science and device physics has been demonstrated to be highly
effective in launching the careers of scientists and engineers in high
technology fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;Exciting new phenomena have been predicted to arise in hybrid
superconductor-topological insulator systems in which pair correlations induce
an effective complex superconducting order parameter exhibiting chiral edge
states, topologically-protected surface states, and Majorana fermions, exotic
excitations that are their own antiparticles. This project focuses on schemes to
nucleate these exotic excitations and manipulate them in controllable ways to
verify their existence and explore their stability and dynamics. A series of
specific experiments are designed to reveal their unique non-Abelian statistics
and to develop functional approaches to image, manipulate, readout the parity
that encodes their critical phase information, and braid them to perform logical
operations, all critical steps toward understanding the underlying physics of
these novel states and crafting a technology for quantum information processing,
quantum metrology, and quantum simulation/computing. Key experiments fall into
two categories: (1) investigation and characterization of the parity dynamics of
Majorana states in S-TI-S Josephson junctions and determine the materials and
device properties that affect it --- this includes experiments to observe and
characterize parity fluctuations, modeling of the interplay of Josephson phase
dynamics and parity transitions, and ways to improve parity lifetimes, (2)
development of schemes for braiding, fusion, and parity readout of Majorana
modes in the S-TI-S platform, all important capabilities required to implement
scheme. The field of topological physics is very new and researchers worldwide
are collectively just starting to explore the materials, measurements, and
theoretical concepts that will be important in achieving an understanding of
Majorana fermions and how to exploit them in electronic circuits. This project
explores the key unsolved problems in this field and paths for making
significant advances in understanding the nature of exotic Majorana fermions and
implementing them in functional superconductor circuits. It also provides
opportunities to train students in the science and technology of this field that
is anticipated to grow in the coming years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.