* 2004558
* Programmable 2- and 3-Dimensional Protein Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Faik Tezcan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 525,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Whether for constructing complex biological
devices like enzymes or for building sophisticated materials with advanced
physical properties like skeletal muscles, proteins have been nature’s premier
building blocks throughout the course of evolution. Yet, the ability of
laboratory scientists to control the self-assembly of proteins or to use them as
synthetic building blocks to generate new functions has been severely limited.
The overarching goal of the proposed research program is to overcome this
limitation by developing new protein design tools based on metal coordination
chemistry and DNA nanotechnology. In one project goal, the PI’s group will
construct complex, cage-like protein architectures which can ultimately be used
to encapsulate and release molecular cargo in a stimuli-dependent fashion. In a
second project goal, they will exploit the programmability of DNA self-assembly
to generate multicomponent protein architectures and elucidate the complex
energy landscape of protein-DNA interactions. In terms of the broader impacts,
the proposed effort will not only provide fundamental insights into biological
self-assembly processes, but also lend access to novel protein-based
functionalities and materials with potential applications in bio/nano-technology
and basic sciences (e.g., separations, catalysis, delivery, sensing, X-ray or
electron-diffraction-based structure determination). Due to its highly
interdisciplinary nature, this project will provide an expansive training ground
for graduate, undergraduate, and high school researchers, and help them tackle
complex scientific problems later in their careers. As a new educational
activity, the PI’s lab will start hosting STEM activities designed for Junior
Reserve Officers’ Training Corps from San Diego-area high schools. These
activities collectively will enhance the students’ understanding of proteins as
biomolecules and their self-assembly/crystallization as well as their novel uses
as building blocks for novel catalysts and materials. Importantly, the students
will be exposed to daily activities that are taking place in a research
laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
natural evolution has produced remarkable protein-based machines and materials
over the course of billions of years, it has only explored an infinitesimally
small fraction of the design/self-assembly space that could be achieved with the
available protein folds. Therefore, it would be highly desirable to have the
ability to craft ordered protein assemblies from scratch using building blocks
of choice, which would greatly broaden the structural and functional scope of
naturally existing protein assemblies and bioinspired materials. Previous
findings from the PI’s indicate that the tools and principles of
supramolecular/inorganic/polymer chemistry and protein engineering can be
combined in new ways to address outstanding issues in protein self-assembly and
to create novel biomaterials. In the proposed research, these efforts will be
expanded under two Objectives. Under Objective 1, the PI’s group will expand
their inorganic chemical toolkit through the use of unnatural metal chelating
functionalities and combine them with computational design to access complex,
stimuli-responsive polyhedral architectures that were previously out of reach.
Objective 2 will exploit the programmability of DNA self-assembly to generate
heteromeric/multicomponent protein architectures and to better understand the
complex energy landscape of protein-DNA co-assembly. The Objectives will take
advantage of two protein building blocks (cytochrome cb562 and Rop) to access a
multitude of oligomeric and polymeric protein assemblies in a modular fashion,
probe their structures and structural dynamics using state-of-the-art tools
(e.g., cryoEM, X-ray diffraction and scattering), and examine their emergent
functions (e.g., nucleic acid encapsulation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.