* 2004546
* A General and Robust Route to Highly Diverse Hollow Nanostructures with New Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Shengli Zou, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

Non-Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale materials with hollow
interiors (i.e., hollow nanomaterials) are critical components in many areas of
science and technology. The properties of hollow nanomaterials and their
usefulness in applications such as biosensing and catalysis have strong
dependence on their detailed structure such as shape and elemental composition
and can be different than those of solid particles of the same size.
Nevertheless, it has been a challenge to finely control the structure of a
hollow nanomaterial in chemical synthesis. The goal of this project, which is
jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program and the
Metals and Metallic Nanostructures program, both in the Division of Materials
Research, is to establish a general and effective method to synthesize hollow
nanomaterials with controllable structures and new properties. In addition to
synthesizing new materials, this project examines properties such as thermal
stability and unusual interactions with light that will be important for
eventual applications. This project provides multidisciplinary research training
for graduate and undergraduate students particularly from underrepresented
groups. Through a new NanoAmbassadors program, undergraduate students will be
involved in outreach on nanomaterials at their former high schools. The project
also provides high school students with summer research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hollow nanomaterials have found widespread uses in
many areas, including biomedicine, imaging, sensing, catalysis and electronics.
Controlling the structure of hollow nanostructures is an effective approach to
tailoring their physicochemical properties. The proposed work, which is jointly
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program and the Metals and
Metallic Nanostructures program, both in the Division of Materials Research,
seeks to develop a general and robust method to precisely control the structure
of hollow nanomaterials. This method relies on alternating processes of galvanic
replacement reactions and sacrificial template regeneration. As examples, design
and synthesis of hollow nanostructures made of gold, silver, platinum,
palladium, copper, and materials containing multiple metals are being
demonstrated. A series of hollow nanostructures with diverse structures and new
properties are being generated. Detailed structures of the hollow nanomaterials
and their structural responses to heating are revealed with high-performance
electron microscopy. Plasmonic properties of the nanomaterials are investigated
using both experimental measurements and computational simulations. This project
will benefit the engagement of graduate and undergraduate students, especially
those from underrepresented groups, in research. The research is also integrated
into outreach activities for K-12 students. Through a new NanoAmbassadors
program, undergraduate students will be involved in outreach on nanomaterials at
their former high schools. The project also provides high school students with
summer research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.