* 2004740
* Nickel 1+/2+ Oxides and Oxyfluorides Isoelectronic with Superconducting Cuprates
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Viktor Poltavets, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 475,682.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Superconducting materials can transmit electric
current without losses and create high magnetic fields, which has led to their
application in magnetic resonance imaging, levitation trains, electric motors
and generators. However, the mechanism of superconductivity in well-established
copper-based materials that superconduct at relatively high temperature is still
not fully understood. The recent discovery of superconductivity in thin films of
doped NdNiO2 confirmed that these materials, based on nickel, can exhibit
physics similar to the superconducting copper-based materials. In this project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division
of Materials Research, new Ni1+/Ni2+ nickel-based materials are synthesized and
their structure-property relationships are investigated in detail. This impacts
our understanding of the high-temperature superconductivity mechanism,
potentially guiding the design of new superconductors and contributing to
national energy security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational impacts of the
project will be achieved by training graduate and undergraduate students in the
areas of inorganic synthesis, electrochemistry, crystallography, and various
characterization techniques. The PI leads the High School Science Teachers Club
for teachers from the Greater New Orleans area. The Teachers Club is designed to
involve teachers in sharing effective teaching strategies and to educate
teachers on current research topics. With the goal of improving science
education, the Educational Equipment Lending Library, also established by the
PI, is being enhanced with new demonstrations to be used in outreach to high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Ni1+/Ni2+
nickelates with infinite NiO2 square-planar layers are the only real electronic
(d9/d8), and structural (MO2 planes) analogues to high-temperature
superconducting cuprates. However, only a few such nickelates are known and no
systematic investigation of doped d9/d8 nickelates has been performed. In this
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program within the
Division of Materials Research, comprehensive investigations of syntheses,
structures and properties of doped and undoped Ni1+/Ni2+ nickelates and
oxyfluorides with NiO2 planes are producing new cuprate analogues and systematic
structure-property relationships. Multiple families of compounds are being
studied: doped infinite-layer nickelates with d8/d9 and d9/d10 ratios analogous
to the superconducting cuprates, new n = 4 and 5 homologues of T-prime nickelate
series as well as fluorinated T-prime nickelates. High-pressure, high-
temperature synthesis is used for preparation of some doped parent Ruddlesden-
Popper compounds. Low temperature, soft chemistry techniques are used for the
preparation of the final (reduced) compounds. In addition to structure
determination by powder X-ray and neutron diffraction experiments, physical
properties are investigated by ambient and high pressure magnetic and transport
measurements, solid-state NMR and muon spin rotation techniques. The project
aims for discovery of nickelate superconductors and new fundamental insight into
cuprate superconductivity and, more generally, into materials with strongly
correlated electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.