* 2004030
* Collaborative Research: Constructing and Employing Pyrroles in Natural Product Biosynthetic Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* James Gumbart, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2023
* USD 438,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Drs. Vinayak Agarwal and James C. Gumbart from Georgia
Institute of Technology, and Dr. Eric W. Schmidt from the University of Utah to
investigate how nature uses genes and enzymes to construct the ring shaped
pyrrole molecule. The pyrrole ring is present in many molecules that serve
various roles in biology, and as a component of pharmaceutical molecules and
drug candidates. Several questions remain regarding how enzymes orchestrate the
construction of the pyrrole ring and how the pyrrole ring is recognized by other
tailoring enzymes to furnish more elaborate chemical structures. These questions
are answered by a cohort of graduate students, postdoctoral scientists, and
research scientists receiving interdisciplinary training in genomics, enzyme
chemistry, organic synthesis, and computational chemistry. In addition, hands-on
experimental instruction in chemical and biological sciences are provided to
Pacific Islander students, one of the most underserved communities in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project undertakes a biochemical
and structural characterization of enzymes involved in furnishing the
thiotemplated pyrrole ring derived from the proteinogenic amino acid L-proline.
Also, an atomistic description of how the pyrrole ring is recognized within
enzymological active sites is generated using X-ray crystallography. Both these
efforts are based on stabilizing small molecule-protein and protein-protein
intramolecular interactions using mechanistic covalent inhibitors. Efforts are
extended to discover pyrrole-based natural product biosynthetic gene clusters
from complex holobiont communities using a combination of metagenomic sequencing
and synthetic biological validation of candidate gene-encoded enzymes discovered
therein. Taken together, this study provides new molecular insights into the
enzymological construction of the heterocyclic pyrrolic ring and how this
synthon participates in natural product biosynthetic
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.