* 2004451
* Investigating many-body states of interlayer excitons in 2D atomic double layers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Jie Shan, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 475,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;Bose-Einstein Condensates are a state of matter
predicted by Bose and Einstein nearly a century ago and has been realized in
dilute gases of atoms at temperatures close to absolute zero. This discovery has
led to tremendous advances in science, precision measurements and quantum
information. However, one big hurdle for further technological advances is the
extremely low temperature that is required to create these condensates. In this
project, the research team develops a new type of Bose-Einstein Condensates
formed at high temperatures (&gt;100 K). The artificial atoms are formed in
atomically thin membranes of materials that are stacked layer-by-layer. This
could result in development of high temperature superconductors and
optoelectronic, photonic and quantum devices with unprecedented properties. The
project trains graduate and undergraduate students, preparing them as workforce
in emerging quantum technologies. The team also develops outreach materials for
use in inspiring and broadening participation among young
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Bose-Einstein condensation
(BEC) of a dilute gas of atoms occurs at temperatures close to absolute zero.
With much smaller mass, excitons (bound electron-hole pairs) are expected to
condense at considerably higher temperatures. The emergence of two-dimensional
layered semiconductors with very strong exciton binding (about half an electron
volt) and flexibility in forming van der Waals heterostructures has opened a new
exciting opportunity to explore high-temperature exciton condensate and other
emergent quantum many-body ground states. This research project builds on the
principal investigatorâ€™s prior works and expertise in van der Waals
heterostructures and aims to develop new solid-state structures for exciton
condensation and exciton condensate-based applications in optoelectronics and
photonics. By using optimized design of the double layer structure and an array
of experimental probes based on electrical transport and optical measurements,
the team aims to achieve three objectives. (i) Search for direct evidence of
exciton condensation in transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) double layers such
as long-range spatial coherence; (ii) Map the exciton condensation temperature -
density phase diagram in the BEC regime and near the BEC to Bardeen-Cooper-
Schrieffer (BCS) crossover; (iii) Search for equilibrium exciton condensates in
double layer systems consisting of small gap
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.