* 2004269
* Multiracial and Multicultural Children's Discrimination Attributions: Antecedents and Consequences
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Sarah Gaither, Albuja, Analia
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award is provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and is supported by SBE's
Social Psychology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising,
early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia,
industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of
training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Sarah Gaither at Duke
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating how parents teach their multiracial and multicultural
children about race and culture, and how this socialization influences
children’s detection, awareness, and internalization of identity-related
discrimination. This work examines colorblind socialization, which de-emphasizes
race and culture as meaningful groups, and essentialist socialization, which
holds that because racial and cultural groups have underlying defining essences,
these groups are fixed and meaningful. Though past work has highlighted the
pivotal role of racial and cultural socialization for minority children, very
little research has examine the socialization of multiracial and multicultural
families (those with either parents of different racial backgrounds, or at least
one immigrant parent), who reflect the fastest growing youth populations in the
U.S. Indeed, the multiracial population grew by nearly 50% between the 2000 and
2010 censuses, and approximately 46% of multiracial people are under 18 years
old. Similarly, 26% of children had at least one immigrant parent in 2017.
Moreover, children’s socialization and preparation for bias may influence the
way children interpret challenges to their identities through identity
questioning (being asked questions such as, What are you?) and identity denial
(being told to identify differently). Given that these experiences have negative
consequences for adults, it is critical to explore the antecedents of these
attributions earlier in development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
integrates social psychological research on identity denial and questioning with
developmental research on parent socialization and discrimination attributions
to explore the antecedents and consequences of multiracial and multicultural
children’s discrimination attributions for identity denial and questioning.
Three studies (1) examine the racial/cultural socialization practices of parents
with multiracial and multicultural children to explore the frequency of
colorblind and essentialist socialization, (2) test multiracial and
multicultural parents’ and children’s colorblindness and essentialism as
antecedents of children’s discrimination attributions, (3) explore
discrimination attributions with samples of younger children (ages 5-7 years)
and older children (ages 12-14 years) to explore developmental differences, and
(4) measure the outcomes of making discrimination attributions for identity
denial and questioning on children’s mood and well-being. Given that
discrimination attributions are associated with poorer academic performance,
greater depression and anger, these findings can aid future interventions to
support the healthy development of multiracial and multicultural
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.