* 2004213
* Fundamental Studies of the Hydrogen Bond Enhanced Halogen Bond (HBeXB) for Molecular Folding and Anion Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Orion Berryman, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 02/29/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Orion Berryman of the University of Montana is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) and the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B) Programs of the Division of
Chemistry to devise means to control how chain molecules are shaped into tubular
helical structures (foldamers). The project exploits a recent observation that a
hydrogen bond that is judicially placed in a chain molecule can cause the
molecule to fold, mimicking the folding ability of proteins and nucleic acids.
Special functional units are strategically placed inside the molecular tube to
allow for the transport of anions. The project helps define the requirements to
efficiently incorporate the hydrogen bonding into molecular design, producing a
new tool for molecular recognition and self-assembly. The project is expected to
impact many fields, such as drug development, separation science, environmental
remediation, bioengineering, materials development, and sensing. During the
course of this research, students at the graduate, undergraduate and high school
levels are trained in advanced chemistry research methods. In addition, Dr.
Berryman and his team will establish a permanent module at a local science
museum as well as a travelling exhibit to familiarize K-8 students and members
of the public with chemistry concepts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project builds
on a recent observation by Professor Berryman and his collaborators that
strategically placed hydrogen bonds and halogen bonds on chain molecules
synergistically induce folding into helical structures. Preliminary solution,
computational and single crystal diffraction studies show that hydrogen bond
enhanced halogen bonds reorganize molecular structure, strengthen binding, and
are robust enough to be measured in solution. The project explores the effect of
the hydrogen bond type, distance and angle on the strength, structure and
directionality of the halogen bond. The specific aims of this proposal are
threefold. The team seeks to quantify the influence of a proximal hydrogen bond
on halogen bond strength and directionality. They will determine how halogen
bonding selectivity is influenced by an intramolecular hydrogen bond. Finally,
they will promote folding and anion transport with the hydrogen bond enhanced
halogen bond. A suite of instrumental measurement techniques and DFT
calculations will be employed to support the research effort. The mechanism
causing the synergistic interaction can, in principle, be applied to pairs of
noncovalent interactions other than hydrogen bonding and halogen bonding, which
paves the way for the development of a set of tools for molecular
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.