* 2004489
* CAS: Modified Cellulose Nanomaterials and their Electronic and Optical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* James Watkins, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 495,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this hypothesis-
driven research proposal is to prepare cellulose nanomaterials that perform as
advanced functional materials. This will be accomplished by utilizing existing
feedstocks of nanocellulose, primarily cellulose nanocrystals (CNC), as a
platform for the development of a new class of advanced functional
nanomaterials. These nanomaterials represent a promising platform for the
attachment of specially designed polymer chains to allow the transformation of
simple, renewable, and abundant agricultural products into optically and
electrically active components that can be used in advanced applications. The
research goal entails the following: the researchers will (a) prepare and
characterize CNC modified with semiconducting polymers, (b) process the new
materials into thin films and gels and gain a detailed understanding of their
morphology, (c) demonstrate the advanced properties of these new materials in
light-emitting applications by fabricating and testing devices. The fundamental
questions answered by this project are applicable to a community of scientists
and engineers beyond those directly involved in the synthesis of semiconducting
polymers, cellulose, devices and nanofabrication. Adaptation of cellulose
nanomaterials as a feedstock in future products could reduce our reliance on
ecologically “challenged” raw materials and boost US-based agriculture and
biomass production. The project will provide research training and education of
a graduate student who will be trained in new synthesis techniques, advanced
characterization methods, and learn how to implement nanomaterials into actual
industrial fabrication processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this hypothesis-driven research
proposal is to prepare cellulose nanomaterials that perform as advanced
functional materials. This will be accomplished by utilizing existing feedstocks
of nanocellulose, primarily cellulose nanocrystals (CNC), as a platform for the
development of a new class of nanomaterials. These nanomaterials represent a
promising platform for the attachment of semiconducting polymer moieties to
allow the transformation of simple, renewable, and abundant hydrocarbons to
optically and electrically active components that can be used in advanced
applications. The goal will be accomplished through a project involving (a)
preparation and characterization of CNC modified with semiconducting polymers,
(b) processing the new materials into thin films and gels and gaining an
understanding of their morphology, and (c) studying the advanced properties of
these new materials for electroluminescence applications by fabricating and
testing PLEO and LEEC devices. The project will provide research training and
education of a graduate student and contribute to enhancing diversity and
exploration of commercial potential for these new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.