* 2004752
* Understanding the interplay of precipitates and dislocations on the reversible martensitic transformation in cyclically actuated NiTiHf shape memory alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 01/31/2024
* USD 494,826.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys (SMAs) can contract and
extend, like an artificial muscle, upon cooling and heating through a process
called martensitic transformation. Similar to muscles, shape memory alloys
experience fatigue after a number of operation cycles. The fatigue of shape
memory alloys is triggered and then exacerbated by the creation and accumulation
of ultra-small crystalline defects called dislocations. Recent work has shown
that the fatigue life of the SMAs can be dramatically improved by incorporating
nano-sized particles. The purpose of this project is to provide fundamental
understanding of how these nano-particles influence the fatigue of these SMAs by
using advanced and in situ electron microscopy to watch the interactions of the
nanoparticles with the defects in real time. These insights will accelerate the
development of fatigue-resistant and durable super-elastic SMAs that may
beneficially impact a wide variety of critical technologies, including
aerospace, energy conversion, biomedical, defense, and transportation. This
project will also provide multidisciplinary STEM educational and career
advancement opportunities for underrepresented students through the Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation program, as well as online STEM course
material based on this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the interplay between nanoprecipitates, dislocations, and
martensitic transformation, during thermo-mechanically induced, reversible
martensitic transformation. The new knowledge gained will elucidate how their
interactions control fatigue performance (both functional and structural) in
cyclically actuated high-temperature shape memory alloys (SMAs). The central
hypothesis is that the nanoprecipitates will suppress the transformation-induced
dislocation multiplication, glide, and rearrangement during thermal cycling,
thus dramatically modifying granular-level microstructure, and consequently the
fatigue performance. The experimental tasks to be undertaken include: 1)
identify precipitate characteristics, associated elastic strain, and local
chemistry, 2) determine the effect of precipitates on the transformation-induced
dislocation generation and structure evolution, 3) assess the effect of
precipitate-dislocation interactions on the austenite and martensite
microstructure evolution and the resultant functional fatigue, and 4) identify
the role of precipitate-dislocation interaction on persistent slip band
formation and crack initiation and growth (structural fatigue) in cyclically
actuated SMAs. The experimental results will be used to develop a detailed
description of the cyclic reversible martensitic transformation and fatigue
responses in precipitate-bearing SMAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.