* 2004579
* Collaborative research: Understanding relationships between synthesis, structure, solid-state electrochemistry, and phase stability in clathrates and related materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Svilen Bobev, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 289,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Clathrates are a class of materials with
cage-like structures that can naturally hold guest ions, a feature that may be
exploited for energy storage in rechargeable batteries. However, more research
is needed to understand how the structure of the clathrate affects ion migration
and the durability of the material under repeated electrochemical cycling.
Through this collaborative project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, researchers at
Arizona State and University of Delaware jointly identify structural features of
the clathrates that promote fast ion diffusion and develop new approaches to
synthesize these materials. Thereby they gather new knowledge connecting the
structural effects of clathrates and related compounds to their physical,
electrochemical, and materials chemistry properties. The fundamental science
gained from these studies could have far reaching impacts in other fields where
these materials have potential applications, such as superconductors,
thermoelectrics, optoelectronics, magnets, and photovoltaics. Additionally, this
collaboration between two universities and three different departments
(materials science, chemistry, and physics) exposes students to
multidisciplinary research. Outreach and educational activities also engage
students and provide interdisciplinary training and immerse them into areas
outside their immediate field of expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF,
identifies structural features that lead to fast ion diffusion and obtain better
understanding of electrochemically driven phase transformations in Li-Tetrel
(Tt) systems, particularly for clathrates and other open framework structures.
The specific objectives of the research are to: (1) Understand the structural
parameter space for Tt (Tt = Si, Ge, Sn) clathrate and clathrate-like materials
with high ionic mobility; (2) Re-map the phase space of Li-Tt systems, including
non-equilibrium phases, coupled with studies on understanding the ionic
transport within these phases, and (3) Use electrochemistry to inform solid-
state synthesis and vice versa, to enable new synthetic approaches for
clathrates and related materials that are either intermediates in the lithiation
pathways or can be used as precursors for the synthesis steps. Through a
concerted approach combining the synthetic, structural and electrochemical
characterization, and theoretical expertise of the PIs, this work furthers the
electrochemical understanding of clathrate materials, leading to new insights on
structural features that result in fast diffusion pathways, low ion migration
barriers, and phase stability. Novel synthetic approaches combining high
temperature coulometric titration and low temperature flux methods are used to
trap kinetic/metastable phases and controllably synthesize high quality single-
crystalline materials. Isostructural compounds containing key Li local
environments are employed as model compounds to understand the ion (de)insertion
processes in Li-Tt binary (and ternary/quaternary) compounds, with an emphasis
on Tt = Ge. By means of a unique feedback loop connecting electrochemistry and
synthesis, information about phases formed during electrochemical lithiation is
used to design novel precursors for synthesis of clathrates, and solid-state
reactions using chemical oxidation are adapted to develop electrochemical
synthesis methods with finer control over composition. Synchrotron X-ray studies
are used to characterize the local and crystalline structures and phase
evolution during electrochemical reaction and/or synthesis. In all cases,
density functional theory calculations support experimental findings and guide
materials design, particularly by identifying formation energies and ionic
transport mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.