* 2004926
* Motile colloids with tunable random walk: individual dynamics and collective behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Petia Vlahovska, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 561,052.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Flocks of birds and schools of fish are
familiar examples of emergent collective behavior, where interactions between
self-propelled (active) individuals lead to coherent motion on a scale much
larger than the isolated unit. Similar phenomena have been observed with active
micro-particles such as bacteria and motile colloids. Recently, the Quincke
instability (spontaneous spinning of a dielectric particle in an applied uniform
DC field) has attracted great interest as a means of propelling colloids, by
simply letting the particles roll on a surface. The research team lead by Petia
Vlahovska has found that Quincke rollers can be designed to perform Run-and-
Tumble-like locomotion mimicking bacteria such as E. coli. Populations of the
Quincke random walkers self-organize and exhibit behaviors reminiscent of
bacterial suspensions such as dynamic clusters and mesoscale turbulent-like
flows. However, the physical mechanisms underlying the self-organization are
unknown. To fill this void, the research team will carry out a combined
experimental and theoretical study that systematically explores the parameter
space of particle density, activity, shape and motility pattern of the
individual colloid. In addition to advancing basic knowledge, the research
outcomes may lead to the design of novel active materials (e.g., suspensions
with microstructure and effective viscosity tunable by electric field). The
visually appealing nature of the experiments will excite students and the
general public about active matter and electrohydrodynamics. The principal
investigator will be involved in the successful outreach programs at
Northwestern University to translate the relevance and significance of this work
to attract students from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Active particles
such as swimming bacteria or self-propelled colloids spontaneously assemble into
large-scale dynamic structures. The emergence of the collective states from the
motility pattern of the individual particles, typically a random walk, is yet to
be probed in a well-defined synthetic system. The Quincke random walker is a
promising new experimental platform to explore active locomotion at the
microscale and a testbed for the abundant theoretical models of the collective
dynamics of active matter. For the first time, the collective dynamics of run-
and-tumble microswimmers will be experimentally studied under well defined and
controllable conditions e.g., particle density, speed (i.e., activity) and
locomotion type (e.g., run-and-tumble and Levy walks), which can yield
potentially transformative knowledge about the relation between the macroscale
dynamics and the microswimmers motion and interactions. The experimental
research will be complemented by theoretical modeling of the Quincke-walker
dynamics, using microhydrodynamics approaches, to elucidate the physical
mechanisms of the observed phenomena. The project integrates knowledge across
the fields of fluid mechanics and soft matter, and thus the principal
investigator anticipates both a much deeper understanding of the underlying
physics as well as the discovery of new dynamical regimes and engineering
opportunities. The research is interdisciplinary which will be very beneficial
for the education and development of the students associated with the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant
supports research to develop a novel experimental platform and the planned
experiments and simulations for understanding the emergence of self-organization
with funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in DMR of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.