* 2004493
* Topologically Frustrated Dynamics and Memory in Polyelectrolyte Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Murugappan Muthukumar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2023
* USD 490,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macromolecules made of monomers
carrying electrical charges are ubiquitous in all living organisms and continue
to catalyze formulations of modern water-based materials. A fundamental
understanding of the behavior of such charged macromolecules dispersed in
aqueous electrolyte solutions continues to be a challenge. The origin of the
challenge lies on the fact that these molecules do not behave on their own as
individual molecules, but they are correlated over very large distances spanning
the whole collective system. As a result, the properties of charged
macromolecules are full of challenges without adequate conceptual framework to
understand their rich phenomenology. In fact, formulation of a fundamental
understanding of such strongly correlated macromolecules remains one of the most
difficult subjects in physical and biological sciences. Yet, such a fundamental
understanding is crucial to successfully design new materials for separation
science, highly water-absorbent goods, drug delivery, water-based electrical
conductors, and memory devices, in addition to rationalizing the rich
phenomenology already accumulated over many decades. The PI proposes to
formulate a fundamental understanding of how electrically charged macromolecules
move around in an electrolyte solution, or inside a gel, or from one region to
another through intervening barriers due to crowding, and how to endow
macromolecular memory effects in water-based systems. In addition to advancing
the field of charged macromolecules, the proposed activities include strong
support of diversity and training a new generation of scholars to enable their
future participation in the multi-billion dollar industry of water-based
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes experiments and theoretical
developments to investigate polyelectrolyte dynamics, polyelectrolyte gel
dynamics, topologically frustrated non-diffusive dynamical state, coacervate gel
composites, and macromolecular memory in hydrogels, by combining light
scattering, neutron scattering, impedance spectroscopy, rheology, single
molecule electrophoresis, statistical mechanics, field theory, and several
simulation techniques. Specifically, the proposal addresses (a) topologically
frustrated non-diffusive polymer dynamical state and its boundaries with the
entropic barrier and reptation regimes, (b) phase diagrams, structure and
hierarchical dynamics in coacervate gel composites, (c) electrical conductivity
of gel composites, and (d) memory in hydrogels. This proposal is aimed at
understanding charged hydrogel composites under severe non-equilibrium
conditions, and discovering new conceptual models for polyelectrolyte transport
and memory in aqueous charged polymer systems. A fundamental understanding of
the behavior of this important class of materials will help to design novel
water-based polymeric materials with enhanced benefits to society. Training of
graduate students and postdocs in this challenging research area is also an
important component of the proposed activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.