* 2004435
* Tuning Hydrate Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Swift, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Organic molecules can crystallize in a variety
of forms, some of which include water (hydrates, H) and others that do not
(anhydrates, A). H and A forms differ in their physical properties and their
relative stabilities. Changes in external parameters such as temperature and
relative humidity can induce H to A transformations. Dehydration may be
unintentional or intentional, though the mechanism(s) of the reaction and the
structure(s) of the final products are difficult to predict. In this project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, a deeper understanding of H to A transformations is
developed through a combination of data mining efforts and experimental studies.
The experimental studies make use of a range of complementary techniques
available on site and through collaborations with researchers at United States
National Laboratories. Developing a better conceptual framework for
understanding water uptake/loss from crystalline solids can significantly
improve our ability to predict the properties of this broad class of materials
and to employ solid state dehydration as a rational means to create new
crystalline forms. The insight gained through these studies has direct
implications for materials that touch all aspects of society including
pharmaceuticals, foods, electronic and energetic materials. Additionally, this
research provides strong interdisciplinary training opportunities for students
at many education levels and allows graduate students to gain valuable
experience at national laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrates are an important class of molecular
crystals, yet our collective understanding and ability to predict dehydration
mechanisms and reaction products is quite limited. With support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research,
this research establishes correlations between hydrate packing motifs and
specific dehydration mechanisms and anhydrous product topologies. Data mining
efforts are used to identify packing motifs which favor particular dehydration
mechanisms and anhydrous products. Time resolved synchrotron PXRD (at the
Advanced Photon Source) and quasi-elastic neutron scattering (at NIST) are
employed to monitor structural changes throughout the dehydration reaction and
the associated water dynamics. The predictive power of the correlations
identified through these structure-mechanism studies are then rigorously tested
through dehydration studies on new hydrate systems. Doping studies which aim to
restrict the molecular motions within the hydrate also help to refine our
mechanistic understanding of how dehydration reactions occur in crystalline
materials. This research provides strong interdisciplinary training
opportunities for students at many education levels and allows graduate students
to gain valuable experience at national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.