* 2004532
* Polymer networks to induce deformations and topological defects in liquid crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Leheny, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 08/31/2024
* USD 447,556.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals are not only interesting
for their role at the foundation of the 100-billion-dollar display industry.
They are ideal materials to create soft structures that are controllable with
external stimuli, and they provide a platform for physicists and chemists to
address fundamental scientific questions. Unlike disordered molecules in common
fluids, molecules in liquid crystals have some amount of order. Different types
of liquid crystals have significant variability in terms of molecular structure
and arrangement, which results in different mechanical and optical properties.
Understanding the differences and the similarities between liquid crystal phases
opens new paths to create not only the next generation of liquid crystal
displays but also of a broader range of liquid crystal-based nanomaterials;
furthermore, it helps answering fundamental questions regarding transitions
between different states of matter. The goal of this research is to quantify the
similarities and differences between liquid crystal phases by using polymers as
mediators. Polymers can be dispersed in liquid crystals to create an “imprint”
of the molecular order, which can then be transferred to a different liquid
crystal. The goal is to devise a new classification method by measuring the
compatibility of liquid crystal phases to accommodate distortions in the
molecular ordering seen in other liquid crystal phases. The impact of this
project extends beyond the physics community. Aligned networks of polymers are
present in biological systems, and this project helps elucidate the role they
have in tissues. Moreover, the broader goals of this project involve the
creation of lightweight materials with customizable properties. In terms of
societal impact, one goal is to involve young students and the general public
through outreach events about liquid crystals, whose visual appeal makes them
effective for illustrating science concepts. This project also aims to provide
the basis for several undergraduate theses, including theses by under-
represented minority students enrolled in a departmental bridge program in
collaboration with Baltimore-area colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses polymer networks templated in
liquid crystals to impose deformation on other liquid crystal phases. Templated
polymer networks can be obtained by dispersing monomers in low concentration in
liquid crystals. Once cross-linked, the polymers carry the memory of the
alignment. If the liquid crystal is removed from the polymer network, the same
network can be re-filled with another material, which will have to comply with
the deformations imposed by the polymers. The project has various goals, which
include (a) the creation of templated polymer networks with specific
distortions, (b) the analysis of the same networks re-filled with different
kinds of liquid crystals, and (c) the quantitative measure of compatibility
between the distortions and the identification of a “distance” between phases
that provides a new classification method of liquid crystal phases. Other
project goals involve using aligned polymer networks for 4D printing or as
lightweight material for applications in biology or energy storage.
Characterization of the liquid crystals are performed with optical microscopy,
combined with electron microscopy and small angle x-ray
scattering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant
supports research to study phase structure and ordering in liquid crystals with
funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in DMR of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.