* 2004642
* Collaborative Research:  Frameworks: Internet of Samples: Toward an Interdisciplinary Cyberinfrastructure for Material Samples
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Neil Davies, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2024
* USD 887,476.00

Research frequently uses material samples as a basic element for reference,
study, and experimentation in many scientific disciplines, especially in the
natural and environmental sciences, material sciences, agriculture, physical
anthropology, archaeology, and biomedicine. Observations made on samples
collected in the field and in the laboratory constitute a critical data resource
for research that addresses grand challenges of our planet's future
sustainability, from environmental change; to food, energy, and water resources;
to natural hazards and their mitigation; to public health. The large investments
of public funds being made to curate huge volumes of samples acquired over
decades or even centuries, and to collect and analyze new samples, demand that
these samples be openly accessible, easily discoverable, and documented with
sufficient information to make them reusable. The current ecosystem of sample
and sample data management in the U.S. and globally is highly fragmented across
stakeholders, including museums, federal agencies, academic institutions, and
individual researchers, with a multitude of institutional and discipline-
specific catalogs, practices for sample identification, and protocols for
describing samples. The iSamples project is a multi-disciplinary collaboration
that will develop a national digital infrastructure to provide services for
globally unique, consistent, and convenient identification of material samples;
metadata about them; and linking them to other samples, derived data, and
research results published in the literature. iSamples builds on previous
initiatives to achieve these goals by providing material samples with globally
unique, persistent identifiers that reliably link to landing pages with metadata
describing the sample and its provenance, and which allow unambiguously linking
samples with data and publications. Leveraging significant national investments,
iSamples provides the missing link among (i) physical collections (e.g., natural
history museums, herbaria, biobanks), (ii) field stations, marine laboratories,
long-term ecological research sites, and observatories, and (iii) data
repositories and cyberinfrastructure. iSamples delivers enhanced infrastructure
for STEM research and education, decision-makers, and the general public.
iSamples benefits national security and resource management by offering a means
to assure sample provenance, improving scientific reproducibility and
demonstrating compliance with ethical standards, national regulations, and
international treaties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Internet of Samples (iSamples)
is a multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional project to design, develop, and
promote service infrastructure to uniquely, consistently, and conveniently
identify material samples, record metadata about them, and persistently link
them to other samples and derived digital content, including images, data, and
publications. The project will create a flexible and scalable architecture to
ensure broad adoption and implementation by diverse stakeholders. iSamples will
build upon existing identifier infrastructure such as IGSNs (Global Sample
Number;) and ARKs (Archival Resource Keys), but is agnostic to identifier type.
Likewise, iSamples will encourage a high-level metadata standard for natural
history samples (across biosciences, geosciences, and archaeology), while
supporting community-developed metadata standards in specialist domains. Through
integration with established discipline-specific infrastructure at the System
for Earth Sample Registration SESAR (geoscience), CyVerse (bioscience), and Open
Context (archaeology), iSamples will extend existing capabilities, enhance
consistency, and expand their reach to serve science and society much more
broadly. The project includes three main objectives: 1) Design and develop
iSamples infrastructure (iSamples in a Box and iSamples Central); 2) Build four
initial implementations of iSamples for adoption and use case testing (Open
Context, GEOME, SESAR, and Smithsonian Institution); and 3) Conduct outreach and
community engagement to developers, individual researchers, and international
organizations concerned with material samples. The project will follow an agile
development process that includes community engagement as an important element
of creating software requirements and an implementation
timeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.