* 2004655
* Understanding Domain Walls in a Two-Dimensional Ferroelectric Material
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yi Gu, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 529,617.00

Nontechnical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;In materials that contain regions with different
structures and properties, the interfaces that separate these regions not only
influence the overall material characteristics, but also often feature unusual
physical properties not present in the surrounding regions. This project
investigates interfaces in a unique two-dimensional material consisting of
regions characterized by different spatial separations of positive and negative
electric charges. Knowledge of the behaviors of these interfaces lays the
groundwork for realizing faster computing using high-speed logic and memory
devices with large storage density and ultra-low power consumption, as well as
for exploring next-generation devices whose functions can be modified on the fly
to adapt to different demands and applications. Education and outreach
activities are an integral part of this project. In addition to providing
research training for students, this project involves the development of
classroom demonstrations and experiments that are integrated into an
undergraduate physics course. A week-long annual science camp for local middle
and high school students is developed by the principal investigator and offered
through the Parks and Recreation Department in the City of Pullman. The
principal investigator also works with local organizations to integrate the
developed activities into science exhibitions and science fairs that are open to
the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Two-
dimensional indium selenide is a unique ferroelectric material, with the
polarization sustained by covalent bonding and with interlinked out-of-plane and
in-plane polarizations. The strong covalent bonding leads to highly robust
ferroelectricity that persists down to the monolayer limit. The interlinked out-
of-plane and in-plane polarizations allow for defining and manipulating charged
domain walls using a local electric field. These domain walls have distinctive
lattice structures and are expected to exhibit many interesting and novel
characteristics. This project aims to develop a fundamental knowledge of the
domain wall properties, with the specific objective to understand how the
intricate coupling between the local polarization, lattice structure, and charge
carriers affects the domain wall electronic and phonon properties. The
experimental efforts utilize advanced electron microscopy and multi-functional
scanning probe microscopy techniques, such as tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
and various atomic force microscopy-based measurements with high spatial and
temporal resolutions, to probe local properties in individual domain walls.
Complementing these experimental investigations, density-functional-theory
calculations are used to determine the crystal lattices, electronic and phonon
structures, as well as charge carrier transport properties and dynamics in
domain walls. The correlation between experimental and theoretical studies
enables mechanistic insights and provides a fundamental basis for exploiting
unique domain wall properties in electronic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.