* 2004710
* LSAMP BD: University of Kentucky, KY-WV LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Martha Peterson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,074,997.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce for the nation through their efforts at
significantly increasing the competitiveness and numbers of students from
historically underrepresented minority (URM) populations to successfully
complete high quality degree programs in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Kentucky (UK), partner institution with the Kentucky-West Virginia
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (KY-WV LSAMP) will support
stipends and cost of education allowances for a cohort of 12 STEM
postbaccalaureate students over a two year period to pursue STEM doctoral degree
completion in materials science, chemistry, nanotechnology, manufacturing and
energy research at UK. The project provides potential to influence systemic
changes in STEM graduate education in the rural Appalachian region contributing
to scholarly knowledge on successful practices in STEM education in rural
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A core activity of UK’s BD program is mentoring
of both the graduate students and faculty. Evidence-based practices, elements of
the LSAMP model for successful recruitment and retention of participants to be
implemented include academic and social integration, financial support and
professionalization. The full alliance, consisting of 10 institutions in these
two states will support the cohort in activities such as the KY-WV annual
research symposium and other graduate seminars that emphasize preparation and
competitiveness for other graduate student support, including NSF’s graduate
fellowship. The institution has provided a plan to support and track this cohort
through completion of the terminal STEM degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be evaluated formatively and summatively during the two-year period
using a mixed methods approach. Dissemination of project findings will occur
through the institution’s website, STEM conferences, professional societies, the
Louis Stokes Regional Centers of Excellence and published papers in STEM
journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UK BD program will be implemented in a NSF
designated Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
jurisdiction thereby increasing research and education capability in the region.
The project is jointly supported by the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation and NSF EPSCoR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.