* 2004080
* Mechanisms of Triple Energy Transfer and Polaron Formation in Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Tianquan Lian, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 617,842.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Tianquan Lian and his group at Emory University to
study energy transfer process and excited state lifetimes of nanomaterial
systems critical to efficient and cost-effective solar energy conversion. This
research is aimed at advancing two specific types of energy conversion
technologies based on quantum dots (small semiconductor crystals). The first
technology is photon upconversion. This process refers to converting two low
energy packets of light (photons) into a higher energy photon, such as
converting invisible infrared light to visible light. The second technology is
the use of nanocrystals made from a specific category of materials called
perovskites often used in solar cells. Unlike traditional solar cells,
perovskite nanocrystals offer the possibility of tuning or adjusting the solar
cell properties. This research may provide important guidance on the design and
improvement of the energy conversion devices. Educational and broaden
participation activities include the development of a new course on renewable
energy and a demonstration module for the Atlanta Science Fair.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular,
and Nanochemistry Program, Professor Lianâ€™ group carries out the research with
three specific aims. The first aim is to test the theoretical models of triplet
energy transfer from quantum dots to molecular acceptors by examining its
dependence on the electronic coupling strength and driving force using lead
halide perovskite and cadmium chalcogenide quantum dots of different size and
shell thickness. The second aim is to investigate the effect of exciton fine
structure on triplet energy transfer rates from nanocrystals to molecular
acceptors by examining their temperature dependence and to control these rates
by changing the exciton fine structure through nanocrystal shapes. The third aim
is to study the property of polarons (formation mechanism, size and energy) in
low dimensional lead halide perovskite crystals, examining their dependences on
the size, nanocrystal dimensionality, cations and solvent/ligand environment.
The findings of this study can advance the understanding of triplet energy
transfer from quantum dots to molecular acceptors and polaron formation in low
dimensional perovskite nanocrystals. These advances, in turn, provide important
guidance on the design and improvement of the energy conversion devices that are
based on the abovementioned materials and processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.