* 2004667
* Nanostructured Materials with Percolating Bottlebrush Copolymer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Javid Rzayev, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric membranes play a vital role
in a number of societally impactful applications, such as water purification,
lithium ion batteries, and gas separations. The proposed research program will
take advantage of synthetic macromolecules with a brush-like architecture to
construct a new class of polymeric materials with three-dimensional networks
that can serve as polymeric membranes to help address a variety of challenges in
environmental and energy-related applications. Highly tunable molecular building
blocks will be prepared by newly developed synthetic methods to endow the
polymeric materials with nanoscopic interconnected cavities and channels for
efficient transport and separation of various molecules and ions. The proposed
research activities will advance the current understanding of the effect of
molecular shape, chemistry and interactions on materials properties, and create
new strategies for achieving structural control of polymeric materials. The
scientific aspects of the proposed research program will be integrated with
broader outreach and educational initiatives aimed at promoting exchange of
ideas through a scientific symposium, improving graduate and undergraduate
student training, and enhancing STEM education through teacher professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described in this proposal aims to
develop a new class of nanostructured materials with bicontinuous network
domains without the need for self-assembly by using bottlebrush copolymers as
covalently pre-organized nanoscopic domains. New chemistries will be programmed
into the bottlebrush architecture to exert precise control over their cross-
linking and degradation behavior. Nanostructured materials and membranes with
percolating pores or channels will be fabricated from bottlebrush copolymer
networks. Conformational behavior of bottlebrush copolymers in concentrated
solutions will be analyzed by scattering methods, and the effect of various
structural parameters on network morphology will be investigated by x-ray
scattering and electron microscopy methods. Three specific objectives will be
pursued: (1) fabrication of nanoporous materials by using fully degradable
bottlebrush porogens, (2) design and preparation of nanostructured ion
conducting membranes for energy storage applications, and (3) all solid state
fabrication of thin film membranes by using rapidly cross-linkable bottlebrush
network interconnectors. The successful outcome of this research program will
provide access to a robust materials design platform for scalable fabrication of
nanostructured materials with percolating networks in technologically relevant
form factors and suitable for additive manufacturing processes.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.