* 2004403
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 Annual International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB 2020)
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Russell Schwartz, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports student travel to the Research in Computational Molecular
Biology (RECOMB 2020) conference. RECOMB is an international scientific
conference bridging the computational, mathematical, and biological sciences,
founded in 1997 to provide a scientific forum for theoretical advances in
computational biology and their applications in molecular biology and medicine.
RECOMB 2019 will be the 24th Annual Meeting, to be held in Padua, Italy. The
meeting will feature keynote talks by international scientific leaders,
presentations of refereed research papers in computational biology, special
sessions and poster sessions. This project will provide support for up to 10 US-
based students to attend the meeting. Particular efforts will be made to promote
diversity through targeted invitation to applicants from groups underrepresented
in the scientific workforce . The project will promote education of US students
in the field of computational biology through exposure to state-of-the-art
research in their discipline and opportunities to talk with international
leaders in the field and receive feedback on their own work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting and proposed travel fellowships will have
particular value for educational purposes, creating a unique training
opportunity for up to 10 U.S.-based students of computational biology. These
students, selected from a competitive application process, will be awarded
travel fellowships that will provide partial support for registration, hotel,
and travel costs. By attending the RECOMB meeting, students will gain exposure
to the latest advances in computational biology, a field that has become central
to progress in the life sciences generally and whose practitioners are in high
demand at pharmaceutical, agricultural, environmental, consumer products,
biotech, software, hardware, and service companies. Students supported by the
project will bring back the knowledge they acquire to their labs, advancing
scientific development and workforce training of future US scientists. NSF
investment in this project will also help provide valuable networking
opportunities to supported students, advancing their careers and the nation's
competitiveness in an expanding, global industry that has become central to
progress in the life sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.