* 2004867
* RUI: Optical studies of pseudoelastic nanoparticle deformation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Lindsey Hanson, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2023
* USD 201,100.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscience is the study of the unique
properties that arise as you decrease the size of materials to less than a
thousandth of the width of a human hair. Among the many exciting new phenomena
and applications that have come out of such studies, one of particular interest
is that nanoscale materials show vastly different mechanical properties than
their bulk counterparts. For example, metal nanoparticles can deform much
further and recover from much larger strains than a large piece of the same
metal. This project studies that property, called pseudoelasticity, in order to
understand its origins, mechanisms and limitations. The researchers, including
the PI and team of undergraduate students, are using a new, non-invasive
approach to measure how the mechanical properties of gold nanoparticles change
with their size. This understanding will enable the design of materials with
exciting new mechanical properties like unusually high strength, the ability to
heal themselves, or the ability to report if they are damaged. In addition, this
research introduces undergraduate student-scholars, on the research team and in
the PI’s classroom, to cutting-edge topics in nanotechnology. The PI is also
translating the research into educational materials to introduce students from
middle school through college to the importance of physics and chemistry for the
design of new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Metallic nanoparticles and nanostructured metals are
increasingly important in modern electronic, structural and biomedical
materials. An in-depth understanding of the mechanical performance of
nanostructured metals is needed in order to both predict the behavior of devices
currently in use as well as to design ever-improved applications. This project
investigates the thermodynamics and kinetics of deformation in metal
nanoparticles in order to better understand the unique mechanical phenomena that
occur at the nanoscale. In particular, the researchers are taking advantage of
new approaches to mechanical characterization of metal nanoparticles in order to
study pseudoelasticity, a unique nanoscale phenomenon in which metal
nanoparticles can recover from very large mechanical deformation. Through all-
optical measurements, the research team is examining the size dependence of this
intriguing behavior in order to determine the mechanism of deformation and shape
recovery in small metal nanoparticles. The research is carried out at a
primarily undergraduate institution, and as such is also introducing the team of
undergraduate researchers to cutting-edge research topics and techniques in
nanotechnology. The research team is also actively involved in developing course
materials and outreach activities based on the research in order to introduce a
broader audience of students, from middle school through to college, to the
importance of fundamental physical and chemical phenomena in the design of new
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.