* 2004302
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Ghub as a Community-Driven Data-Model Framework for Ice-Sheet Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Abani Patra, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2025
* USD 574,537.00

Sea level rise is challenging societies around the globe. Planning for future
sea level rise in the US is critical for national security, public health, and
socioeconomic stability. However, current predictions of sea level rise remain
uncertain, because the future behavior of melting ice sheets - a primary cause
of sea level rise - is not well understood. A recent United Nations report (IPCC
Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate) summarized two
startling facts: (i) Recent sea level rise acceleration is due to increased ice
loss from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets; and (ii) Uncertainty related
to ice-sheet instability arises from limited observations, incomplete
representation of ice-sheet processes in current models, and evolving
understanding of the complex interactions between the atmosphere, ocean and ice
sheets. Improving our ability to forecast the health of ice sheets and hence,
predictions of future sea level rise, requires a large, long-lasting collective
effort among ice sheet scientists working closely with scientists from the
modeling and remote sensing disciplines. One challenge in this collective effort
is the range of disciplines and approaches to ice-sheet science - the degree of
specialization is an obstacle to efficient collaborative work. This project will
lower the barriers among sub-disciplines in ice-sheet science by creating and
promoting a centralized web-based hub, called “Ghub,” where datasets and tools
will be made accessible to the full range of ice sheet science fields of study.
Ghub is accessible to all interested scientists and lay personnel. Use of Ghub
includes access to datasets, analysis tools, and cloud computing power, as well
as the ability to develop and share new tools within the Ghub environment.
Several avenues of outreach and education as part of the Ghub project are
specifically aimed at framing ice-sheet science for general audiences, and
including students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
urgency in reducing uncertainties of near-term sea level rise relies on improved
modeling of ice-sheet response to climate change. Predicting future ice-sheet
change requires a tremendous effort across a range of disciplines in ice-sheet
science including expertise in observational data, paleoglaciology ("paleo")
data, numerical ice sheet modeling, and widespread use of emerging methodologies
for learning from the data, such as machine learning. However, significant
knowledge and disciplinary barriers make collaboration between data and model
groups the exception rather than the norm. Most modeling groups write their own
tools to ingest data and analyze output, newer and larger observational datasets
are not being fully taken advantage of by the modeling community, and paleo data
critical for constraining model representation of ice sheet history are largely
inaccessible to modelers. The diverse disciplinary approaches to ice-sheet
science has led to bottlenecks that slow the response to the developing crisis.
Coordination between data generators and modelers is critical for testing data-
driven hypotheses, providing mechanistic explanations for past ice-sheet change,
and incorporating newly understood physical processes and validating models to
improve their predictive ability. Solving the urgent problem of unoptimized
collaboration requires a novel, integrated, trans-disciplinary program that
lowers barriers across the distinct approaches to ice-sheet science. Fostering
collaboration between disciplines will lead to a transformational leap in ice-
sheet and sea-level science. To make the leap, we must improve the efficiency in
collaboration among traditionally disparate approaches to the problem. We will
develop a community-building scientific and educational cyberinfrastructure
framework including models and data processing tools, to enable coordination and
synergistic exchange between ice-sheet scientific communities. The new
cyberinfrastructure will be a significant bridge that connects the numerical
ice-sheet modeling community with rapidly growing observational datasets of past
and present ice-sheet states that will ultimately improve predictions of sea
level rise. The GHub cyberinfrastructure will also be a template for organizing
disparate scientific communities to address urgent societal needs in a timely
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.