* 2004305
* Polymer conjugates that adapt vancomycin to overcome resistance in Gram-negative bacteria
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kenichi Kuroda, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid spread of drug-resistant
bacteria is a severe global health crisis. In the last 40 years, there has not
been new antibiotics to treat drug-resistant bacterial infections. One issue for
creating a new antibiotic therapy is the impermeable outer membrane (OM) of
Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli, which prevents entry of certain
antibiotics. For example, vancomycin is a promising antibiotic of last resort,
but since it cannot penetrate the bacteria’s OM, it is not successful for Gram-
negative bacterial infections. The long-term goal of this study is to develop a
new way to convert vancomycin into an effective treatment of drug-resistant
Gram-negative bacterial infections. The information from this study will help
researchers create new rules to design a carrier that helps effective drugs
bypass the OM and reach the target sites within bacteria. The study increases
the number of antibiotics available to treat drug-resistant bacterial infections
and significantly improve a patient’s health. The proposed research is
interdisciplinary. Students and postdocs will learn molecular design, how to
build polymer-antibiotic pairs, and conduct research projects involving polymer
chemistry, biomaterials, and microbiology. To contribute to diversity, equity,
and inclusion, the PI accepts students from the University of Michigan’s
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program. The PI engages primary and secondary
schools through the ACS POLY/PMSE student chapter outreach program. The PI
participates in the UM’s Summer Research Opportunity Program as a research
mentor for under-represented students from across the country. The PI will also
build international research collaborations and student exchange programs with
research groups in Japan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Converting Gram-positive-only vancomycin to be
active against Gram-negative bacteria is a promising approach to increase our
arsenal of new antibiotics against drug-resistant bacteria. However, molecular
rules for the conversion have not been established for the large/globular
glycopeptide vancomycin. To that end, membrane-active polymer carriers will be
designed to pass through the outer membrane (OM), increase the local
concentration of vancomycin on the inner (cytoplasmic) membrane (IM), and
deliver vancomycin to the cell division septum region, where vancomycin would be
most active. The specific goals of this study are to understand the structure-
activity-mechanism relationship of the polymer-drug conjugates and determine
their therapeutic potential for clinical applications. To achieve these goals,
covalent conjugates of vancomycin with the cationic amphiphilic copolymers will
be synthesized through click chemistry. The antimicrobial activity and
underlying mechanism of action will be studied to determine the abilities of
conjugates to permeate the OM, concentrate vancomycin on the IM, and accumulate
at the septum. To evaluate the therapeutic potential of conjugates, the PI will
evaluate the cytotoxicity of conjugates to mammalian cells, potency against
carbapenem-resistant E. coli, and the spectrum of activity against other Gram-
negative bacterial pathogens. The expected outcomes will lead to a rational and
predictable guideline for molecular design of polymer carriers for targeted drug
delivery to the specific membrane structure within bacteria. The outcomes of
this research will also increase our understating of the physicochemical
interactions between polymer and bacterial cell structures, which can be
exploited to enhance the antimicrobial activity of
antibiotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.