* 2004658
* Elements: Open Access Data Generation Engine for Bulk Power System under Extreme Windstorms
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Zhaoxia Pu, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2024
* USD 498,032.00

The electric power grid is a critical infrastructure that is regularly disrupted
by natural disasters. Currently, there is a lack of correlated data on
windstorms and the physical and cyber power system infrastructure. This project
addresses that gap in knowledge in dealing with high wind disaster events for
preventative and restorative resiliency of electric power networks. By
integrating multiple data sources into a robust simulation tool, researchers can
design new methods to mitigate the impact of hurricanes and other extreme wind
events on power system operations. The outcomes of the research would positively
impact reliability, resiliency, and delivery of electric power to US population
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework is unique and will enable inter-
disciplinary research between atmospheric sciences, civil engineering, and
electric power engineering. A preliminary result is provided for the Texas power
system (using a digital surrogate model of the physical infrastructure and the
Texas synthetic power network) under the impacts of Hurricane Harvey. The
calculated damage using the model results in very similar structural damage and
power systems impact as the real disaster (the ground truth model). In addition
to three deliverable test cases (Texas, New York, and Florida), the project will
design automated tools to create new test cases in the future for other
researchers. The power system digital surrogate, correlation of datasets, and
overall data generation engine will enhance the national cyberinfrastructure
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical
and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) within the NSF Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.