* 2004768
* Exciton-plasmon states in nano-morphologically controlled semiconductor nanowires: From weak coupling to quantum entanglement
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Gerd Duscher, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 537,145.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;When a strong interaction between light and
matter occurs, new phenomena (entangled quantum states) arise, which are
generally not observed in nature. This quantum entanglement can potentially be
harnessed for quantum information technologies with drastically improved data
acquisition and processing. In this project, the research team uses
semiconductor nanowires, which are surrounded by metal nanoparticles to
investigate the interaction between light (in the form of plasmons) and
semiconductor (in the form of excitons). To achieve strong coupling and quantum
entanglement, the morphology of this nanostructure is modified by laser
processing inside a transmission electron microscope. The light-matter coupling
is investigated with optical methods and electron microscopy along with
theoretical modelling. This project opens new prospects for designing novel
quantum materials with significant impact in the areas of quantum information
and quantum science. The project fully integrates education and training of
graduate and undergraduate students with an emphasis on recruitment from
underrepresented groups. The training prepares the students for a wide range of
careers. Outreach to the public includes contributions to local STEM programs
and organized lab-tours of the electron microscopy facilities for high-school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Entanglement
and strong coupling are the basis for quantum computing and quantum sensing. As
a model system to study these quantum effects the research team is using an open
cavity semiconductor nanowire-metal nanoparticle system in which excitons and
plasmons can interact in regimes ranging from weak to strong coupling. Ultrafast
optical spectroscopy and electron energy-loss spectroscopy are uniquely combined
to study the energy transfer and many-emitter entanglement with high temporal
and high spatial resolution. Laser processing of these plasmonic nanostructures
inside the transmission electron microscope allows modifications of the
morphology during atomic resolution imaging providing a system to achieve and to
control quantum entanglement. The central thrusts in this project are to
synthesize nano-morphologically controlled metal/organic/semiconductor nanowires
and to study the coupling of excitons and plasmons. Both the change in the
nanostructure morphology and the inserted organic modulator critically modify
the coupling strength in this quantum system. The calculated dielectric response
function connects the loss function obtained from the electron energy-loss
spectroscopy measurements with the optical measurements. Complementary
theoretical modelling provides a fundamental understanding of these light-matter
interactions. The investigations of the research team open new prospects for
designing novel quantum materials to exploit strong coupling and many-emitter
entanglement with significant impact in the areas of quantum â€“information,
-chemistry and -biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.