* 2004719
* Self-Propelling Microbubblers for Active Cleaning of Biofilm in Confined Spaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Hyunjoon Kong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 495,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dense microbial films called
“biofilm” often foul medical tools, household items, and infrastructures such as
an endoscopes, bathroom tiles, and water supply pipes, and can lead to dangerous
infections. These biofilms are slimy aggregates of bacterial cells surrounded by
scaffolds adhering to anything they touch. About 80 percent of all medical
infections originate from biofilms that invade the inner workings of clinical
devices and implants inside patients. Cleaning of biofilms in such a hard-to-
reach area is extremely difficult because traditional disinfectants and
antibiotics cannot penetrate a biofilm's tough scaffolds. How can we let
antibacterial reagents cross over such a barrier of biofilms? This proposed
study attempts to develop a small particle that can penetrate and destroy tough
scaffolds by generating oxygen bubbles. The particle named “self-propelling
microbubbler” would be prepared by loading an oxygen-generating chemical on
diatoms – the tiny skeletons of algae. As a consequence, this system would
improve the delivery of antibacterial deathblow to the bacterial cells living
inside. While tuning the oxygen bubble generation rate and subsequent propulsion
speed of the micrububblers, this proposed study will examine extents that the
microbubblers can penetrate biofilm clinging to a material with complex
topology, damages the scaffold of biofilms, kill bacterial cells protected by
the scaffolds, and, ultimately, prevent the return of biofilm formation. In
parallel, for broad impacts, the unique microbubblers will be used as education
and training tools for a new generation of bioscientists and bioengineers.
Overall, this project will serve to improve people’s health, safety, and life
quality against infectious diseases and fouling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Biofilms composed of microbial cell
colonies and surrounding extracellular polymer substances (EPS) are major causes
of medical infection and material deterioration, thus threatening both human
health and sustainability. A variety of disinfectants were developed to date,
but none of these systems are active in removing biofilms forming in confined
spaces. To this end, this proposed study aims to assemble and analyze a “self-
propelling microbubbler” that can invade biofilms grown in the hard-to-reach
area and, subsequently, clean out both bacterial colonies and EPS. This study
hypothesizes that diatom particles doped with zinc oxide (ZnO) or manganese
dioxide (MnO2) catalysts decomposing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) eject oxygen
bubbles and, in turn, act as the self-propelling microbubbler in the antiseptic
3% H2O2 solution. After the invasion, the microbubblers would continue to
generate oxygen bubbles that fuse to produce a wave of mechanical energy capable
of destroying the biofilms. The self-propulsion of microbubblers will be studied
by analyzing the activation energy for H2O2 decomposition, the H2O2
decomposition rate, and the kinetic energy. In parallel, the extent that the
microbubblers remove biofilm in the micro-grooved substrate will be examined by
monitoring invasion of particles into the biofilm and subsequent changes in
stiffness, adhesion force, and chemical composition of the biofilms formed by
Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Finally, the efficacy of
microbubblers to killing biofilm bacteria will be evaluated by monitoring the
increase of intracellular oxidative stress, the reduction of viable cells, and
the recurrence of biofilm. The successful completion of this study will
elucidate the unique cleaning mechanism attained by chemical-to-mechanical
energy conversion and transform current disinfection strategies that rely on
chemicals mostly. In parallel, this project will make broad impacts by
incorporating the proposed research modules into several educational programs
developed for students at various educational levels and also disseminating the
research outcomes to a broad spectrum of communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.