* 2004769
* Ink-based additive manufacturing of high-entropy alloys from oxide and hydride powders
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* David Dunand, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing (3D printing)
of metals is revolutionizing US manufacturing for civilian and defense
applications, as it allows the creation of complex-shaped objects in a single
operation, typically by melting metal powders with a laser. Inspired by polymer
3D printing, this work focuses on a novel 3D printing method - 3D ink-extrusion
- to create strong and lightweight metallic objects. A liquid ink containing
metal-hydrogen (hydride) precursor powders and a binder is extruded into solid
filaments, layer by layer, which is then heated to remove the solvent, binder
and hydrogen, leaving behind a skeleton of metal powders. This skeleton is
heated at a high temperature to densify the metal powders to form a strong and
lightweight metallic structure. This promising approach has many key advantages
as compared to the more established manufacturing methods, including lower
costs, improved energy efficiency due to room-temperature printing in air, and
formation of more robust metal components. The overall goal of this project is
to identify and predict the critical parameters of this promising advanced
manufacturing method. Furthermore, a web-based free-access video game, PRIMA
(Printing Robots with Inks of Metals and Alloys), is being developed for
youngsters (grades 6-12) that conveys the design and scientific principles of
3D-printing techniques in order to excite, educate, and motivate them to pursue
STEM and manufacturing education and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study explores the fundamental physical
phenomena associated with a novel additive manufacturing approach, metallic ink-
extrusion printing. In this method, inks containing mixed (Co,Cr,Fe,Ni) oxide
particles or mixed (Hf,Nb,Ta,Ti,Zr) hydride particles are extrusion-printed into
filaments (stand alone or assembled into micro-lattices), which are then
reduced/decomposed to metals, inter-diffused to form high-entropy alloys (HEA),
and sintered. Systematic studies of the co-reduction (for oxides) or co-
decomposition (for hydrides), metal inter-diffusion and porosity evolution are
performed as a function of particle composition, size and packing fraction,
reducing species (H2 or C) for mechanistic insights. Also, the evolution of
pores (remaining from partial sintering or added via foaming/space-holders)
during the extrusion, homogenization and sintering of fibers, struts and micro-
trusses are examined by both ex situ metallographic techniques and in situ
synchrotron x-ray diffraction and tomography. These experimental data allow for
the development of diffusion-based models and finite-element models in order to
predict and optimize this novel manufacturing approach for specific mechanical
properties based on the synthesized micro-lattices, strut porosity, phases, and
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.