* 2004109
* Mechanistic Studies of C-X Bond Formation Chemistries
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Pinghua Liu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 419,997.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Pinghua Liu from Boston University to characterize the
enzymes that catalyze the formation of C-S bonds in the ergothioneine
biosynthesis. Although sulfur-containing molecules, both small molecules and
macromolecules, play many important roles in biological systems and sulfur
represents one percent of the entire cell dry weight, to date, details of the
biosynthesis of the vast majority of sulfur-containing molecules are still
missing. Hence, C-S bond formation reactions are at the frontier of natural
product chemistry and mechanistic enzymology. New insight into the details these
reactions may have downstream applications to industrial processes for the
synthesis of sulfur-containing molecules. The interdisciplinary nature of the
work renders it an excellent platform to train students on the path to STEM
careers. The central educational objective is that students learn how to apply
knowledge gained in basic research to solve real world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award focuses on the C-S bond formation
reactions catalyzed in biological systems by enzymes,specifically on the
elucidation of the mechanism of C-S bond formation in the biosynthesis of
ergothioneine. These reactions are unique because they involve an unactivated
sp2 C-H bond and because nature has evolved two different ways to activate this
bond to produce a C-S bond, one aerobic and another anaerobic. The Liu team will
use the tools of x-ray structure determination, computational protein design,
unnatural amino acid mutagenesis, and kinetic measurements to gain insight into
the mechanism of these enzyme-mediated transformations. For the aerobic pathway,
Dr. Liu systematically evaluates structure-function relationships for key non-
heme iron enzymes that catalyze C-S bond formation reactions and applies the new
knowledge to differentiate among a few mechanistic models for the reaction. For
the anaerobic pathway, the research focuses on the study of the source of sulfur
for the C-S bond formation reactions and the elucidation of the biological role
of these anaerobic reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.