* 2004685
* Holographic meta-lenses for point-spread function engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Nanfang Yu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 04/30/2023
* USD 359,999.00

The point-spread function of an optical imaging system (that is, its response to
a point light source) can be designed to achieve imaging modalities unattainable
in conventional imaging systems based on refractive lenses. Conventionally,
point-spread functions have been shaped by using apertures and optical phase
masks, leading to functions such as improved resolution in microscopy, extended
depth of field over which an object can stay in focus, and three-dimensional
tracking of moving objects. The proposed program will explore a new paradigm of
engineering point-spread functions by using flat “meta-lenses”, which are nano-
structured thin films that are able to locally change the amplitude, phase, and
polarization of light due to strong light-mater interactions. Powerful new
imaging modalities will be invented by jointly designing meta-lenses and image
processing algorithm as an integrated imaging system. The flat form factor of
meta-lenses allows them to be fabricated with mature planar fabrication
technologies developed by the integrated circuit industry and benefit from
economies of scale. Optical imaging components and systems demonstrated in this
program may have important implications for a variety of applications in machine
vision, biomedical imaging, and holographic technology. The project will train
graduate and undergraduate students to carry out innovative and in-depth
research at the intersection between nanotechnology, materials sciences, and
photonics. The project, with the support of Columbia Engineering School’s
Outreach Program, will broaden participation in science and engineering by
providing summer research opportunities to undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds. In addition, the project will promote a collaborative effort
between scientists and artists in producing engaging and educational
illustrations of scientific discoveries that are more accessible to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore a new paradigm of
engineering point-spread functions by holographic meta-lenses: single or multi-
layered nano-structured thin films that can provide complete, independent, and
sub-wavelength control of the phase, amplitude, and polarization of optical
near-field for multivariate manipulation of optical far-field over a large
wavelength and angular range. The holographic meta-lenses will be composed of a
library of complex and sub-wavelength pixels or “meta-atoms”. The project will
investigate: the structural dispersion engineering to create meta-atoms that
provide the maximum allowable phase dispersion for controlling light over a
continuous wavelength of a broad spectrum; the structurally birefringent and
multi-component meta-atoms to provide complete and independent control of
optical phase, amplitude, and polarization; and the multi-layered metasurface
systems for wide-angle optical control. The research work will study fundamental
limitations of optical control to establish the degree to which one optical
parameter (phase, amplitude, or polarization of light at a certain wavelength)
can be controlled by a unit volume of a structured material and to explore the
design rules for creating a structured material with minimal volume to control
multiple optical parameters independently and completely. To illustrate the
promise of the new paradigm of point-spread function engineering, the project
will demonstrate a few examples of holographic meta-lenses showing functions
that are beyond the capabilities of conventional imaging systems based on
refractive components and single-layer, phase-only
metasurfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.