* 2004875
* CAS:Scalable platform for materials fabrication from genetically engineered bacterial biomass
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Neel Joshi, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 458,276.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to
investigate the use of proteins derived from bacterial biofilms as a new class
of biopolymers for bioplastics production. There is an urgent need for
alternatives to conventional plastics, whose manufacture is projected to
increase, despite its significant contributions to global greenhouse gas
emissions, and the environmental damage caused by its lack of biodegradability.
Although a few biodegradable bioplastics exist, they lack the required physical
properties to be suitable as replacements for most conventional plastics because
they are made from a limited set of naturally occurring biopolymers. An
attractive solution leverages recent advances in the field of synthetic biology
to create entirely new biopolymers using engineered microbes. With a previous
NSF-funded grant, the investigators developed a method to produce customizable
protein polymers using engineered non-pathogenic E. coli. This technology
enables the molecular structure of the protein polymers to be tailored to
exhibit a desired set of properties, analogous to the way that synthetic
chemistry can be used to tailor the structures of conventional polymers. For
this project, they will further investigate the use of this platform for the
production of bioplastics with enhanced material properties. Their approach will
involve three aims: 1) engineering the structures of the protein polymers
themselves, in order to make them tougher; 2) engineering the microbes that
produce the protein polymers to maximize the amount that they produce; and, 3)
fabricating bioplastics from the microbial biomass and characterizing their
properties. The results from this work will help push the boundaries of national
biomanufacturing capabilities, helping shift them toward more sustainable
paradigms that will address the imminent challenges of climate change and
plastic pollution. The technical research plan is integrated with a plan to
introduce emerging topics related to biomanufacturing in coursework targeted
toward university students and enable them to advance the engineering of
biological systems with hands-on training and creative problem
solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal describes an integrated research and teaching effort that will push the
frontiers of biomaterials and biomanufacturing technologies and encompass the
training of science and engineering students at multiple skill levels. The
proposed research addresses an urgent need for biodegradable bioplastics with
enhanced material properties. Conventional plastics are a major source of
pollution in our waterways and landfills, and their manufacture contributes
significantly to global greenhouse gas emissions. Microbially derived
biodegradable bioplastics are an attractive way to address these problems
because they are amenable to scaled-up production via fermentation and can rely
on renewable feedstocks. However, existing methods for making microbially
derived bioplastics rely exclusively on a limited set of naturally occurring
biopolymers that exhibit sub-optimal material properties and require cumbersome
purification and downstream processing in order to be functional. This project
investigates the use of engineered microbes capable of producing protein
polymers, whose structure can be tuned through genetic engineering, as a means
for producing biodegradable bioplastics with enhanced material properties. In a
manner that is analogous to the use of synthetic chemistry to create petroleum-
derived polymers with structures highly tailored for specific applications, this
project will use synthetic biology to create new biopolymers with tunable
properties. The project aims focus on investigating complementary aspects of
this new biomanufacturing approach: 1) engineering recombinant protein fibers
produced by E. coli to exhibit increased mechanical robustness, 2) engineering
the E. coli chassis to maximize the production of these protein fibers; and, 3)
developing protocols that make use of whole microbial biomass in order to
streamline the bioplastic fabrication process in a manner that is suitable for
scaled-up manufacturing. The work will advance fundamental research in protein
engineering, metabolic engineering, and biomaterials science to advance its
aims. The proposal will also incorporate foundational aspects of biomaterials
and biomanufacturing theory and practice into new coursework to be developed at
Northeastern University (NEU), and the re-establishment of an iGEM team at
NEU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.