* 2004054
* Quantifying Surface Chemical Intermediates and Interfacial Redox Processes via Combined Raman Spectroscopy and Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Joaquin Rodriguez Lopez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 381,164.00

Chemical reactions at electrode surfaces are essential for a large number of
applications, which range from powering fuel cells to cleaning water. In
addition, understanding the intimate details of those reactions is crucial to
bolster renewable energy technologies. Unfortunately, all these important
reactions at electrodes also display a broad range of complicated chemical
reaction pathways that happen at a very small region close to the surface of the
electrodes. This makes it very difficult to observe and understand how these
reactions happen at the atomic level, which is key to improving them. Professor
Rodriguez-Lopez addresses this pressing challenge by introducing a measurement
technique where laser light, in combination with very small probes in a
particular arrangement, are used to identify the chemicals formed at the surface
of electrodes, while also identifying the reactions in which they participate.
By carefully choosing some key electrode materials, Rodriguez-Lopez improves the
ability to measure very small amounts of chemicals that speed up the product
formation. The methods help understand how a promising catalyst for a fuel cell
can lose activity, and how oxygen atoms at metals participate in key processes
for energy technologies. The research plan benefits society by including hands-
on activities for Hispanic children in the community. Advances electrochemical
science is also taught to a diverse group of students to ensure a workforce with
training at the forefront of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. Joaquin Rodriguez-Lopez at the University
of Illinois to study development of a hybrid microscopy system for examination
of chemical reactions at electrode surfaces. Exploring the mechanisms of
interfacial electrocatalytic processes is challenging, however knowledge about
reactive intermediate identity, surface coverage, and reactivity, is critical in
understanding in situ approaches. Dr. Rodriguez-Lopez investigates a
simultaneous, spatiotemporally matched approach for the in situ quantification
of reactive intermediates at electrochemical interfaces through integration of
scanning electrochemical microscopy with Raman spectroscopy. The research may
improve the spatial resolution of the technique by using micro and
nanoelectrodes of different sizes. Rodriguez-Lopez aims to help solve long-
standing challenges in electrocatalysis by correlating electrode reactivity to
surface properties of materials in fuel cells, electrolyzers, and batteries, as
well as in systems for water remediation, electrosynthesis, and corrosion
prevention. The project integrates educational and outreach plans that engage
students of Hispanic origin in scientific activities, as well as the
organization of an electrochemical bootcamp that helps ensure the presence of a
diverse workforce at the forefront of electrochemical and measurement
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.