* 2004012
* Elements: HPN-SSH
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Christopher Rapier, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 04/30/2024
* USD 439,505.00

The transfer of large data sets between computing resources is an integral
component of the scientific workflow. Multiple tools have been developed to aid
in this task but, despite significant performance bottlenecks, secure shell
(SSH) based tools like secure copy protocol (SCP) and secure file transfer
protocol (SFTP) remain popular due to ubiquity, ease of use, and minimal
administrative burdens. HPN-SSH, the project tool, was initially developed in
2004 to address this need. This award will allow the PIs to expand on the
original work of HPN-SSH and address new challenges created by advances in
computer technology and the needs of users. They will incorporate hardware
accelerated encryption; efficiently use modern CPUs by dynamically sizing the
number of threads; accelerate the cryptographic workflow by allowing it to work
in parallel; investigate making the default open source secure shell OpenSSH
cipher use multiple cores; create a ‘resume on failure’ feature enabling users
to restart transfers from the point of failure; and incorporate networking
metrics to aid in troubleshooting and performance analysis of HPN-SSH. HPN-SSH
will support and enhance research efforts across a wide range of scientific
domains by lowering the costs of entry to big data and remote computation
without compromising security or functionality. These benefits will extend to
business and industry, educational communities, and the general public as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transfer of large data sets between computing
resources is an integral component of the scientific workflow. Multiple tools
have been developed to aid in this task but, despite significant performance
bottlenecks, SSH based tools remain popular due to ubiquity, ease of use, and
minimal associated costs. To address these bottlenecks we developed HPN-SSH; a
series of patches that enable high performance throughput for the OpenSSH
application. These patches were initially released in 2004 and have become
widely used throughout the research, academic, financial, and technology
communities. This award gives the PIs opportunity to foster innovative
development in HPN-SSH that will benefit the community by significantly
increasing performance. With this grant the PIs will: incorporate on-die
hardware accelerated encryption in their multithreaded AES counter cipher;
efficiently use multicore CPUs by dynamically sizing the number of threads;
introduce pipelining and parallelization into the cryptographic workflow;
investigate the parallelization of the default OpenSSH cipher CHACHA20; create a
‘resume on failure’ feature enabling users to restart transfers from the point
of failure; and incorporate inline network telemetry to aid in troubleshooting
and performance analysis. This work will also advance the field of computer
science through the development and improvement of parallelization methods to
enhance the performance of cryptographic routines. As most widely used
cryptographic libraries and methods are highly serial in nature they are unable
to take advantage of multicore processors. As processor speed has remained
relatively stable over the past ten years we must distribute the cryptographic
workload over multiple cores in order to significantly increase throughput. HPN-
SSH will democratize access and extend the reach of the national
cyberinfrastructure by lowering the costs of entry without compromising security
or functionality. These benefits will extend to business and industry,
educational communities, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.