* 2004035
* Increasing the Reductive Stability of Self-Assembled Monolayers on Metallic Surfaces to Enable Reductive Electrocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* James Penner-Hahn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Professors Charles McCrory and James Penner-Hahn of the University of Michigan-
Ann Arbor are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry to study the sequence of events
(mechanisms) that cause single layer films of organic molecules on solid
surfaces (self-assembled monolayers, or SAMs) to detach from the surface under
electrochemical operating conditions. The process, which is called reductive
desorption, is poorly understood. A better understanding of the process paves
the way for the design of more robust SAM systems. A combination of
electroanalytical techniques, advanced X-ray and IR spectroscopies are used to
provide insight into the mechanism of desorption. Robust SAMs are critical for
many practical applications, including their use to anchor catalysts for
reactions relevant to energy and environmental chemistry, such as carbon dioxide
reduction for solar fuels generation and nitrate reduction for wastewater
remediation. This project also provides a platform to promote scientific
literacy through formal training of student researchers in communicating to the
general public, active engagement with the local community through interactive
demonstrations of the concepts of catalysis and corrosion, and hosting Detroit
high school students in summer research internships at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of well-defined self-assembled monolayers
(SAMs) to tether molecular catalysts to electrode surfaces facilitates the
careful mechanistic, kinetic, and spectroelectrochemical studies needed for new
catalyst development. However, the use of SAMs for tethering electrocatalysts to
electrode surfaces for reactions of societal importance, such as carbon dioxide
reduction and nitrate reduction, is limited by the reductive instability of
thiol-based SAMs on gold and other metal surfaces. The discovery of reductively-
stable SAMs for the direct immobilization of molecular catalysts to metallic
surfaces is an enabling technology in molecular electrocatalysis that may
facilitate careful and complete mechanistic and kinetic analysis of known and
emerging electrocatalysts. Currently, a lack of mechanistic understanding of the
reductive desorption process limits the rational design of new, more-reductively
stable systems. This project uses a combination of electroanalytical techniques
and advanced X-ray and infrared spectroscopies to probe the electronic and
physical structures of self-assembled monolayers during the reductive desorption
process, providing insights into the mechanism of reductive desorption. The
results of these mechanistic studies may facilitate the rational design of new,
more reductively-stable SAMs that enable the immobilization and in situ
spectroelectrochemical study of electrocatalysts for multi-electron
transformations important to energy and environmental
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.