* 2004102
* D3SC: Signaling Axes Modulated by Cyclic Dinucleotides
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Herman Sintim, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2023
* USD 444,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is supporting the
research of Professors Herman O. Sintim and Uma Aryal, from Purdue University,
West Lafayette, to determine the details of how various molecular components of
viruses and bacteria activate immune cells to cause inflammation. Immune cells
play important roles in eliminating tumors and also protecting organisms against
invading pathogenic bacteria and viruses. A new pathway or signaling was
recently discovered in immune cells, which sense molecules called cyclic
dinucleotides to control inflammation response. This project uses chemical
probes and proteomics to discover proteins that bind cyclic dinucleotides in
order to regulate signaling in immune cells. In addition, this research
increases workforce capacity in STEM by training graduate students and advanced
undergraduates to acquire a diverse set of specialized skills in chemical
synthesis, mass spectrometry, immunology and molecular biology methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyclic dinucleotides, such as cyclic di-guanosine
monophosphate, cyclic di-adenosine monophosphate and cyclic guanosine
monophosphateâ€“adenosine monophosphate, are known to signal via a stimulator of
interferon genes (STING)-controlled innate immune pathway and play major roles
in a wide variety of human diseases including various cancers, viral and
bacterial infections as well as autoimmune diseases. Thus far, the cyclic
dinucleotide-STING-TBK1 axis is well characterized, but other pathways and/or
protein targets that cyclic dinucleotides also affect are poorly characterized.
Understanding how cyclic dinucleotides regulate host cells physiology could
provide valuable insights into key determinants that shape the host-pathogen
interaction. The principal investigators use various STING-axis knockout cell
lines and proteomics to uncover cyclic dinucleotide mediated pathways that
channel through STING and non-STING pathways. They also globally profile post-
translational modifications of proteins in the presence of cyclic dinucleotide
signals. Using novel chemical probes, the investigators uncover mammalian
proteins that bind to cyclic dinucleotides or associate with STING. This study
provides insights into how cyclic dinucleotides affect signaling pathways in
mammalian cells beyond the well-characterized STING-TBK1
axis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.