* 2004555
* Structure-property study for dendronized polymer vectors for CRISPR delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Zhibin Guan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 525,000.00

Nontechnical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new molecular delivery
system for enabling the CRISPR-based genome editing technology. CRISPR-based
genome editing technology can precisely add, delete, and “correct” genes in
vitro or in vivo; therefore, it holds tremendous potential for therapeutic
applications and is actively being pursued for addressing a wide range of human
diseases ranging from hereditary diseases, cancer, to diabetes. However, one
major obstacle to implementing this technology is the lack of safe and efficient
delivery systems that can effectively transport the required molecular machinery
into cells to execute genome editing. To address this challenge, this project
proposes the design, synthesis, and investigation of a series of delivery
molecules made from natural amino acids and peptides. These compounds will be
evaluated for their efficiency and safety for delivering two pieces of RNAs into
cells for performing CRISPR-based genome editing. Structure-function studies
will shed light on important design principles for effective molecular carriers.
The proposed interdisciplinary research activities also provide excellent
trainings to students at various levels, ranging from K-12, undergraduate, to
graduate students, especially women, underrepresented minority students, and
those from institutes with limited research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to develop a new synthetic delivery platform for RNA-based
CRISPR and conduct fundamental structure-property studies on the new delivery
system to gain critical insights for the design of new gene delivery vectors.
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing offers a tremendous potential for therapeutic
applications and is actively being pursued for addressing a wide range of human
diseases. However, one major obstacle to implementing CRISPR-mediated genome
editing is the lack of safe and efficient delivery vehicles. The PI lab recently
developed an innovative design of bioreducible dendronized polypeptides (BDPs)
that show high efficiency for co-delivery of Cas9 mRNA and gRNAs. It is proposed
that further investigation of this system will generate a new platform delivery
system that can effectively and safely co-deliver CRISPR/Cas9 mRNA and gRNA into
various cells. Furthermore, capitalizing on BDP’s well-defined molecular
structure, we propose to conduct fundamental structure-property studies on the
BDP system with the aim to gain critical insights for the design of new gene
delivery vectors. If successful, the proposed study will provide a new, general,
and biocompatible delivery system for CRISPR technology and offer critical
insights for guiding the design of new gene delivery systems. The research and
broad impact activities will provide holistic trainings to students at various
levels, ranging from K-12, undergraduate, to graduate students, especially
women, underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.