* 2004169
* Electrochemical Stability and Reactivity of Atomically Precise Single Metal and Alloy Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Francis Zamborini, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Francis Zamborini and his group at University of
Louisville to create and study atomically precise metal nanoclusters using
electrochemistry. Metal nanoclusters are tiny metal pieces of less than 2
nanometers in diameter (~50,000 times smaller than the diameter of human hair).
They have interesting thermal, chemical, and optical properties that strongly
depend on their size and atomic composition. Some nanoclusters have interesting
light emitting properties. Others can speed up chemical reactions that are
important in chemical industry and renewable energy efforts such as catalysis
and fuel cells. This research creates atomically precise gold nanoclusters and
attaches them to electrodes with weakly bound linkages. The researchers then
study their properties using an electrochemical technique called anodic
stripping voltammetry. This electrochemical characterization tool is much faster
and cheaper than other techniques that are widely used for metal nanocluster
analysis such as electron microscopy, x-ray methods, or mass spectrometry. In
addition to the new knowledge gained about the reactivity and stability of this
class of materials, this research provides cutting edge research training to
undergraduate and graduate students. This research also promotes science to high
school and middle school students through classes, poster sessions, and
symposia.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program, this project aims to synthesize
atomically precise metal/alloy nanoclusters (APMNCs/ APANCs) with weak
stabilizers and analyze their size, composition, and reactivity by anodic
stripping voltammetry (ASV). New synthesis methods and purification strategies
now allow scientists to prepare metal nanoclusters with a single uniform size
with very high purity, i.e. APMNCs. The optical and catalytic properties of
APMNCs can be fine-tuned by adding a second metal to make APANCs. APANCs with
single atoms of a second metal have unique properties and reactivity. One
problem is that APMNCs and APANCs are usually synthesized with strong
stabilizing molecules that alter the bare metal or alloy chemical reactivity and
prevent their size and metal composition analysis by anodic stripping
voltammetry (ASV). ASV is much faster and cheaper than electron microscopy,
x-ray methods, and mass spectrometry. This project focuses on their synthesis by
a method called antigalvanic replacement (AGR) and the analysis of the single
metal atoms in the APANCs by the simple, low cost ASV method. The research team
plans to synthesize the APANCs directly on electrodes from Au APMNCs and study
the size-dependence of the AGR reaction at the single atom doping level by ASV
with support from other above mentioned methods in order to better understand
the mechanism. The team also aims to measure the oxidation potential of single
atoms (Ag, Cu, Pd, Hg, and Cd) alloyed to Au APMNCs as a function of cluster
size and dopant location and monitor the kinetics of the AGR
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.