* 2004252
* Investigation and Application of Pulse Shaping to High-Frequency Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) / Zero-field Optically Detected Magnetic Resonance (ODMR) Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Susumu Takahashi, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 475,003.00

With support from the Chemistry/Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging and
Physics/Quantum Information Sciences programs, Professor Takahashi and his group
at the University of Southern California are improving magnetic resonance
spectroscopic techniques - important tools for characterizing the structure and
motions/changes (dynamics) of chemical systems. They are working to improve our
understanding and control of the energy states of matter in order to enhance the
sensitivity and level of detail with which chemical systems can be probed.
Professor Takahashi is also developing programs to train graduate and
undergraduate students in the principles of quantum information science,
magnetic resonance spectrometry, and nanotechnology. The team enhances programs
of science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) education for high school
and elementary school students in the South Los Angeles
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectroscopy can provide detailed information about molecular structure and
dynamics. Like nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, pulsed EPR spectroscopy
becomes more powerful at high magnetic fields and frequencies. The spectral
resolution, spin polarization, sensitivity, and time resolution of pulsed EPR
all increase with increasing magnetic field and the associated Larmor precession
frequency. However, the measurement science of high field/frequency pulsed EPR
has yet to be explored due to technological challenges. In this project,
Professor Takahashi is utilizing a high-speed arbitrary waveform generator (AWG)
for improvement of quantum control and investigation of the measurement science
and applications of AWG-driven pulsed EPR at high fields and
frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.