* 2004212
* Identification and alignment of interested actors around civil wars using the text of UN General Assembly speeches
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* David Siegel, Mahmood, Zuhaib Sheikh
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Security and
Preparedness program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising,
early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia,
industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of
training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Kyle Beardsley at Duke
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the internationalization of civil conflicts, using
United Nations (UN) General Assembly speeches to help identify politically
interested countries and to measure their alignment around a given conflict. The
project advances both the study of diplomacy at the United Nations and the study
of third-party involvement in civil wars. Additionally, by focusing on the
content of UN speeches as a predictor of risk, it provides a scalable framework
for creating longer-term tracking and finer-grained forecasts as geopolitical
interests develop, change, and evolve. Finally, it helps build enhanced
infrastructure for future scholastic collaboration on data collection and
forecasting, as well as for providing future generations of researchers with
hands-on training in a large-scale research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Civil
wars often escalate to envelop an entire region or, in some cases, the entire
world. This process of internationalization involves both an assessment of
whether countries actually have a political interest in the ongoing conflict,
and also whether other countries have similar or conflicting interests. This
project zooms into these two questions by setting out to both identify
interested countries, and measure the alignment of interests across these
parties, using the text of UN General Assembly speeches as a data source for
both (in conjunction with other measures from the literature). Funding for this
project supports three primary tasks. The first task leverages machine learning
methods to match the content of individual UN General Assembly Speeches (from
1984-2014) to the discussion of a given civil war. The second task models the
risk of whether an individual country has an identifiable political interest in
this civil war, drawing on the content of the classified UN General Assembly
speeches and also drawing on a systematic review of prior literature on the
topic. Finally, given this political interest, the third task measures the
alignment of interested countries to determine whether they are likely to
cooperate or conflict surrounding that conflict. Output from this study are
relevant for both scholars and policymakers, with implications for understanding
diplomacy at the United Nations, and for modeling the intricate link between
civil wars, inter-state conflict, and international institutions like the UN. It
facilitates progress in both the scholarly understanding of conflict processes,
and in the efficient allocation of national security resources following the
outbreak of a politically relevant conflict with the potential for
internationalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.