* 2004801
* Twistronic and spatial modulation of spin orbit coupling for spintronic and topological devices
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Marc Bockrath, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;In addition to charge, electrons also possess
an intrinsic spin that produces a magnetic moment like a tiny bar magnet.
Spintronics, i.e. manipulation and control of electron spin for technological
applications, has led to technological breakthroughs such as the magnetic memory
that is widely used in hard drives today. Achieving yet greater ability to
harness spin-related phenomena in the nanoscale promises the development of
novel devices for data storage and information processing. This research project
aims at manipulating spin via controlling so-called spin-orbit coupling (SOC) of
charges, which couples the spatial motion of the electron to its spin. This is
achieved by taking advantage of atomically thin two-dimensional materials that
are stacked together, so as to create heterostructure materials with regions of
different SOC strengths. For example, while graphene has very low SOC, when
stacked onto transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) materials its SOC becomes
significant. The research team creates devices with tunable spatial
distribution, magnitude and direction of SOC, and realizes topological
superconductivity that could potentially form a basis for quantum information
processing. This research is integrated with a comprehensive course of education
and training of undergraduate and graduate students for the next generation of
the quantum workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;While SOC enables new ways to control spin in
nanostructures and produce new topological electronic ground states, it can also
reduce spin lifetimes. As two-dimensional materials allow tunable SOC, they
provide a promising platform to harness SOC for spin manipulation while enabling
long spin lifetime. This research project builds on the teamâ€™s prior works and
expertise in fabricating high mobility graphene/TMD heterostructures and aims to
develop new classes of spintronic and topological devices based on twistronic
and spatial engineering of SOC. Goals include (1). Using graphene/TMD interlayer
twist angle and Fermi level tuning to control the magnitude and type of SOC
(Rashba vs. Ising); (2). Spatial SOC manipulation to achieve spin-valley valves
and generation of pure spin currents; and (3). realizing topological
superconductivity by coupling graphene/TMD heterostructures to superconductors,
which is tunable in situ for example by varying the Fermi energy in graphene and
engineerable by varying the twist angle. Successful research project
implementation will lead to the manipulation of spins without magnetic materials
or magnetic fields and a major step towards developing building blocks for
fault-tolerant quantum computation. In addition to training graduate students,
the research team members will continue their established efforts at mentoring
undergraduate and high school students in addition to recruiting and mentoring
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.