* 2004520
* Laws, Judiciaries, and National Security Agencies: Advancing Theory and Concepts of Civil Society Laws
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Anthony DeMattee, DeMattee, Anthony James
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 143,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Law
and Science program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jeffrey K. Staton at Emory University, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating
how and why governments regulate civil society. The human rights community has
grown increasingly concerned with legal crackdowns or regulatory restrictions of
civil society organizations (CSOs) around the globe. The standard explanation is
that these civil society laws and enforcement actions are less likely in open,
democratic societies and more likely in undemocratic or authoritarian settings.
The data generally accord with this expectation but there is a non-trivial
number of exceptions, and data show many undemocratic regimes routinely enact
liberal laws. In explaining these cases, we give special attention to the
judiciary and national security agencies as actors that change and enforce these
legal institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research makes substantive
contributions to research topics in judicial politics, political economy,
democratization and development, law and political institutions, legal
processes, public policy, and comparative public administration. Its primary
research objectives are to examine how the judiciary affects the evolution of
civil society laws through court rulings. Depending on the context, courts have
the power to declare laws unconstitutional, identify statutes as appropriate but
enforcement actions unjust, or legitimize enforcement actions and legal
institutions. Two, analyze the role of security agencies in the enforcement of
civil society laws over a multi-decade period. Three, publish an original
dataset on the Qualitative Data Repository created by coding a legal corpus used
in the fellow's earlier research. These objectives are interconnected and rely
on a mixed-methods research design. Deskwork codes primary source materials
collected from [a country's] National Legislative Library, Commission on Laws
and Judicial Reporting, and the Ministry of Laws and Justice. Fieldwork conducts
in-depth interviews with instructors at [the country's] Centre for Training and
Developing Judges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.