* 2004932
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: funcX: A Function Execution Service for Portability and Performance
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Daniel Katz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2024
* USD 481,234.00

The funcX project is developing, deploying, and operating a new distributed
computing cyberinfrastructure platform to enable researchers to build
applications from programming functions that execute on different computing
resources, from laptops to supercomputers. This cloud-hosted service
democratizes access to advanced computing by providing intuitive interfaces for
both registering remote computers as function executors and executing functions
on these computers reliably, securely, and with high performance. Researchers
can thus decompose monolithic applications into collections of reusable
lightweight functions that can be run wherever makes the most sense, for example
where data reside or where excess capacity is available. By simplifying access
to specialized and high performance cyberinfrastructure and decreasing the time
to discovery, the project serves the national interest, as stated in NSF's
mission, by promoting the progress of science. A total of 33 diverse science,
cyberinfrastructure, and software institute partners working with cutting-edge
science applications and research cyberinfrastructure will directly benefit from
the funcX platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops funcX, a scalable
and high-performance federated platform for managing the remote execution of
(often short-duration) functions across diverse cyberinfrastructure systems,
from edge accelerators to clusters, supercomputers, and clouds. funcX allows
developers to decompose applications into collections of functions that can each
be executed in the best location, in terms of cost, execution time, data
movement costs, and/or energy consumption. It thus integrates the extreme
convenience of the function as a service (FaaS) model, developed in industry for
specific industry applications, with support for the specialized needs of
scientific research. funcX addresses important barriers to these new uses of
research cyberinfrastructure systems, by enabling the intuitive, flexible, and
scalable execution of functions without regard to physical location, scheduler
architecture, virtualization technology, administrative domain, or data
location. Flexible open-source funcX agent software makes it easy to expose
arbitrary computing systems as funcX computing platforms, thereby transforming
existing cyberinfrastructure systems into high-performance function serving
environments (endpoints). The cloud-hosted funcX service provides a REST
interface for registering functions, discovering available endpoints, and
managing the execution of functions on endpoints, all via a universal trust
fabric and standard web authentication and authorization mechanisms. It
dynamically creates and deploys containers that incorporate function
dependencies and provide a secure and isolated environment for safe function
execution. The project engages a diverse set of 11 science partners, 18 research
computing and cyberinfrastructure projects, and 4 NSF Software Institutes, each
supporting many NSF-funded researchers, to provide use cases for funcX, shape
its design, and evaluate its implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.