* 2004553
* NMR studies of quantum matter under stressed conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Stuart Brown, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 591,776.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Advancing the general understanding of quantum
materials is of fundamental interest and importance, as it gives the ability to
optimize materials properties for practical use. Since progress often turns on
manipulation and control of properties, central to the project is the
development and use of devices capable of imposing anisotropic pressure to
achieve those ends. The primary measurement tool is nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), applied in combination with the uniaxial pressure, in variable magnetic
fields and to very low temperatures (&lt;1 K). Sought after is evidence for
stabilization of otherwise inaccessible states of matter, and clarification of
research questions unresolved by other means. Our objectives include the
application of the uniaxial pressure method to layered materials where means
have been quite limited until now. NMR is used because it is a local probe of
the electronic environment, sensitive to both charge and spin degrees of
freedom. Graduate and undergraduate students are trained and gain expertise in
cryogenic, radiofrequency, and simulation technologies, with opportunities to
collaborate with research groups in the United States and abroad, such as the
National MagLab in Tallahassee. By way of the associated collaborations, the
students benefit from interactions with scientists of complementary expertise,
through remote conferencing or on-site visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives include the further development of,
and broadening the use of the stress/strain method while exploiting the
capabilities of magnetic resonance. The purpose is for observation, control, and
understanding of phenomena and phases in selected quantum materials. NMR is
well-suited for this task because it is a probe of the local charge and magnetic
environment, and its implementation is compatible with the other experimental
constraints. Tuning quantum matter by strain has potential for broad
application, since it can be varied continuously, in situ. Specifically targeted
in this project are materials exhibiting nearly degenerate topological
superconducting phases, unsolved problems in unconventional superconductivity,
and frustrated quantum magnets. The tunability is of a different origin in the
three model systems. In one, the proximity of the Fermi energy to a van Hove
singularity is key. In a second, the relative stability of nearly degenerate
ground states is important. In a third, the strength of frustrated interactions
are manipulated. Building on the demonstrated success in exploring the physics
of the normal and superconducting states of an archetypal Fermi Liquid, further
constraints on the superconducting state remains a top priority. In addition,
the method is extended to study in some detail the strain-induced breakdown of
the Fermi Liquid state and its influence over physical parameters and collective
fluctuations. The suitability of the method to Van der Waals materials are
advanced in layered chalcogenide systems, including a charge density wave
material, and a topological superconductor considered to support nearly
degenerate ground states. The frustrated interactions in a two-dimensional
quantum magnet are tuned using the strain device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.