* 2004257
* CAS: Recycling Sulfur Petroleum Waste to Fabricate Metal Capture and Adhesive Polysulfides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Courtney Jenkins, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 308,345.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on creating
functional materials from elemental sulfur and is jointly funded by the Division
of Materials Research (DMR) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR). Each year ~70 billion kilograms of sulfur are removed from
crude oil to prevent the release of small molecules that form acid rain. Inverse
vulcanization is an efficient, solvent-free synthetic method that repurposes
sulfur waste into functional polymers. This technique will be used to create a
series of water-soluble, electrically charged polymers that can selectively
capture heavy metal contaminants from water. Using petroleum waste to create
polymers to remediate industrial waste helps manage two waste streams with one
material. Straightforward, rapid synthesis and inexpensive reagents could make
these materials practical and cost-effective for large-scale water treatment
applications. The work will also combine reclaimed sulfur with renewable
monomers including essential oils from native Idaho plants and mussel-mimetic
components to develop adhesive polymers. These renewable adhesives would be
solvent-free from synthesis to application, thus limiting the release of
volatile organic compounds and reducing further waste production. The presence
of sulfur may likely impart solvent resistance, which would improve the
adhesive’s functionality and durability under harsh environmental conditions.
Incorporating mussel-mimetic chemistry into this system would improve adhesion
and enable mild cure conditions. Mussel-mimetic molecules have demonstrated
strong adhesion on a variety of surfaces even in wet conditions. However, they
are sensitive to oxygen, which can limit the material’s utility. Fundamental
analysis would determine the impact of sulfur on polymer stability over time.
These projects will also provide high-school, undergraduate and MS students with
training in polymer science, which is not available in many primarily
undergraduate departments. This hands-on experience helps students develop the
skills necessary to attend graduate school or obtain a career in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to create functional
polysulfides from elemental sulfur (S8). Each year ~70 billion kg of S8 are
removed from crude oil to prevent SO2 formation upon combustion, which produces
acid rain. Inverse vulcanization (IV) repurposes this waste into functional
materials. Ring opening of S8 at high temperatures forms thiyl radicals that
bind to olefins, forming polysulfides. Here, IV will be employed to produce
metal capture materials and renewable adhesives. Prior work has developed
sulfur-containing polymers to bind a variety of heavy metals, offering
substantial improvements by increasing the surface area. Charged polysulfides
will be synthesized by IV to create water-soluble polymers (Aim 1). The enhanced
water solubility will increase polymer-metal interactions and maximize metal
capture. The charged monomers, S content, and cross-linking will be varied to
examine the impacts on solubility and heavy metal binding. Copolymers will be
tailored to undergo a phase change upon metal binding, enabling precipitation of
metal-bound polymers and removal by simple filtration. Recycled S8 will also be
used to initiate polymerization with renewable monomers including essential oils
from native Idaho plants and mussel-mimetic components to develop adhesive
polysulfides (Aim 2). The low Tg allows these polymers to be spread onto
surfaces eliminating the need for solvents. Upon high temperature curing,
materials transition into flexible solids. The incorporation of catecholic
moieties should improve adhesive interactions and provide alternative curing
methods including cross-linking by oxidation and metal chelation. The
polysulfide composition will be systematically varied and subjected to both
adhesive and toughness analysis. To better mimic mussel-foot proteins,
controlled reduction will convert a subset of S-S bonds in polysulfides to
thiols to determine the impact on adhesion strength and polymer stability.
Successful adhesives will be exposed to various solvents to examine the
influence of polymer composition and cross-linking on solubility and swelling.
Creating swell-resistant materials would be useful in developing and maintaining
strong, durable adhesives that could be relevant for industrial
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.