* 2004808
* Collaborative Research: Modulating Single-Atom Catalytic Centers in Well-Defined Metal Oxide Nanocrystal Surfaces for Oxygen Evolution Reaction
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sen Zhang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 354,283.00

The development of renewable alternatives to fossil fuel-based energy is one of
the most critical scientific challenges of the United States. Electrocatalysis
is a cornerstone to bridging renewable electrical energy resources (solar,
hydro, and wind power, etc.) with chemical transformations central to energy
storage and conversion. The project will develop an emerging class of
electrocatalytic materials to maximize the efficiency of hydrogen fuel
production from water. The outcome of this project makes a major contribution to
hydrogen fuel technology development and supports the nation’s efforts to
diversify energy supply and reduce the dependence on non-renewable energy
sources. The knowledge generated from this project will advance general
understanding and research in catalysis and other technologies, including
batteries and sensors. The research is supplemented by a range of educational
and outreach activities primarily for K-12 and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups to increase their interest in careers as scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a cross-disciplinary and
cross-institute effort to develop well-defined single atom catalysts for the
oxygen evolution reaction (OER) - the key barrier reaction for water
electrolyzer and renewable hydrogen production. The project integrates the co-
investigators' respective expertise in experimental and computational catalysis
to address three questions paramount to OER catalysis: how to identify or
construct well-defined catalytic centers for OER; how to delineate unambiguously
the atomistic mechanism for OER at this center; and how to leverage the
mechanistic understanding and the synthetic technique to fine-tune catalytic
centers for optimal kinetics. The primary strategy is to computationally design
and precisely synthesize single-atom catalytic centers (e.g. cobalt) in the
surface of well-defined and chemically stable metal oxide nanocrystals, thereby
optimizing the OER performance through mechanistic understanding and synthetic
modulation. Three specific tasks are included: (1) synthesizing cobalt single-
atom catalytic centers with diverse and controllable metal oxide phase,
composition, and surface facets; (2) understanding dependence of the reaction
mechanism and kinetics on composition and atomic structure through a combination
of computational and experimental approaches; and (3) using this understanding
to conduct in silico scanning of reasonable compositions, combined with Machine
Learning based on the validated computational model, followed by experimental
synthesis of the predicted best candidates to identify the optimal single-atom
and metal oxide compositions. Educational outreach involves the participation of
undergraduate and K-12 students in summer research internships in the
investigators’ laboratories as well as visits by the investigators and graduate
students to the minority-serving partner institutions to deliver short courses
based on their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.