* 2004846
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Synergistic biopolymer co-assembly regulating the emergence of translation and replication in synthetic networks
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* David Lynn, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 524,961.00

Part 1. Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life has been broadly
conceptualized as a computation optimizing the storage and use of information to
enable evolution. On Earth, life exploits polymer cooperativity, coupling
“digital” information storage in DNA with an environmentally responsive “analog”
function of proteins. Such cooperativity is achieved through the digital-to-
analog converter (DAC) of molecular information flow known as the ribosome.
Based on current synthetic capabilities for preparing and modifying polymers,
the goal of this proposal is to extend life’s mutualistic polymer networks to
achieve alternative replication and synthetic translation, extending the
computations beyond existing biopolymers. Conceptually, achieving this goal
would change our understanding of life in the Universe by moving evolvable
materials beyond biopolymers, generating functional materials both orthogonal to
and compatible with current biological networks, and revealing new opportunities
for identifying life beyond Earth. Achieving these goals have the potential to
train a new generation of material scientists, scholars who naturally bridge the
worlds of synthetic, alternative, and natural biomaterials, capturing the
imagination of scholars and the lay public with the potential applications for
chemical evolution outside of extant biology on this planet and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2. Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the practical success of block
copolymers and polymer blends, the emerging energetic codes for self- and co-
assembly of biopolymers, and the synthetic and analytical tools allowing for the
characterization of mixtures of complex polymers, it now becomes possible to
explore reaction-diffusion polymerization networks that cooperatively drive
physical phase changes. Such oligomerization networks can reach critical Flory-
Huggins thresholds to drive liquid-liquid phase separation. The resulting solute
rich phases create new reaction environments that change reaction kinetics. This
progressive tension, coupling dynamic physical phases with altered reaction
networks, will be used to create self-organizing networks. As the solute-rich
phases grow via Ostwald’s rule of stages, seeding diverse ordered populations of
nuclei that access liquid-solid phase changes at specific particle sizes, the
new phase becomes capable of autocatalytic propagation of a paracrystalline
surface able to template new polymer growth. An autocatalytic feedback loop will
appear if the new polymer is engineered to template the initial assembly. This
proposal will compare two systems to exploit this dynamic physical/chemical
tension -- a covalently connected peptide-nucleic acid chimera and separate
peptide/nucleic acid co-assemblies, specifically under conditions where each
templates the other’s oligomerization intermolecularly. These two complementary
approaches to translation are designed to model a minimal ribosome. The work
will take advantage of the synergistic and complementary strengths in the
collaborating laboratories, the necessary structural and kinetic analyses of
these catalytic assemblies. Nature’s ribosome achieves unidirectional polymer
translation, nucleic acid to protein. The proposed minimal synthetic system will
be a coacervate catalyzing dynamic reaction cycles of cross-templating oligomers
and provide a critical proof-of-principle for defining the general rules
limiting polymer to polymer translation. This minimal system approach has the
potential ultimately to extend to other materials for evolving desired function
as controlled by environmental inputs. If successful, this approach will add a
critical new strategy for molecular computing and discovering novel functional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.