* 2004868
* Conductive Dithiolene-Based Metal Organic Frameworks (MOFs)  with Tunable Transport Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Smaranda Marinescu, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2024
* USD 505,001.00

Non-technical abstract: Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are crystalline
nanoporous materials composed of metal ions or clusters linked by organic
molecules. Due to their precisely controlled nano-enviroments and synthetic
tunability, MOFs have emerged as a promising class of materials with adjustable
properties However, the insulating nature of MOFs has limited their use in
technologies that require charge transport, such as electronics. This project,
which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the
Division of Materials Research at NSF, builds on previous research in the
Marinescu group that has shown that some two-dimensional extended frameworks
display high electrical conductivity. With this award, the understanding of the
factors that govern the transport properties of these frameworks is advanced by
characterizing and changing the electronic environment, as well as studying the
bulk properties of these MOFs. The synthetic tunability of these frameworks
allows for excellent control of their coordination environment, which
facilitates structure-activity studies. The educational components of this award
integrate aspects of chemistry related to energy and materials applications
researched in the laboratory and reach middle/high school students and teachers,
as well as postdoctoral scholars, graduate, and undergraduate students, with a
focus on women, an underrepresented group in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: With this project, which is
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research at NSF, the use of redox active ligands, such as dithiolenes,
is investigated as a means to facilitate charge transport through MOFs. Previous
research in the Marinescu group has demonstrated that two-dimensional cobalt-
containing MOFs based on benzenehexathiolate and
2,3,6,7,10,11-triphenylenehexathiolate ligands can be produced with high degree
of crystallinity. These MOFs that contain extensive delocalization of the metal
and ligand orbitals exhibit high electrical conductivity, and this project tests
the PIâ€™s fundamental hypothesis that the transport properties of MOFs can be
modulated through a synthetic, bottom-up approach with an emphasis on tuning the
coordination sphere effects and incorporation of guest-species and dopants into
these porous architectures. Several structurally analogous frameworks are
investigated to understand the underlying structural features and mechanisms,
which promote and control the conductivity of these MOFs. The electronic
environment of these proposed MOFs are modulated by changing the identity of the
metal center, its oxidation state, and charge compensating cations. The studies
provide information on how the local environment and the bulk properties of the
metal dithiolene frameworks affect their conductivity, which is instrumental in
the development of design principles to generate conductive MOFs. The
educational activities associated with this award are multifaceted and involve
Los Angeles middle/high-school students and teachers, as well as graduate and
undergraduate students from USC: the PI (1) leads a mentoring program for women
at the undergraduate level to increase the participation of women in science;
and (2) develops a summer workshop for teachers from local schools where hands-
on experiments are performed. Most importantly, students involved in these
efforts develop a long-lasting culture of contributing to their scientific and
non-scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.