* 2004250
* Rational design of self-assembled, three-dimensional DNA crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Nature uses self-assembly in order to organize
multiple nonliving components into living systems. Information-coding polymers
such as DNA, RNA, and proteins have been used as ideal building blocks in the
assembly of designer nano-architectures, with the goal of engineering biomimetic
and bioinspired materials and devices. DNA based nanotechnology exploits the
programmability of DNA molecules to accurately position functional molecules for
applications including directed material assembly, structural biology,
biocatalysis, artificial photosynthesis, molecular computing, nanorobotics,
disease diagnosis, and drug delivery. An important goal of DNA nanotechnology is
to rationally design, construct, and characterize self-assembling 3D DNA
lattices as hosts to organize other guest molecules with atomic precision. This
project aims to reveal the scientific principles and rules for designing novel
DNA crystals with prescribed geometries, and with defined cavity and channel
sizes. It will also elucidate the pathway for 3D crystal assembly and create a
computational model that can be used broadly to design novel, user-specified
crystals. These crystals are especially well suited for hosting other species
(like proteins, small molecules, or nanoparticles) in a repeating lattice, for
applications that include structural determination, purification, delivery, or
materials with novel optical or catalytic properties. In this way, this project
will enable both fundamental discoveries on self-assembly, and help address
practical applications that rely on arranging other materials in 3D with high
precision. The project will have significant societal and educational impact by
developing an online curriculum for K-12 education and virtual lab research.
This program will engage undergraduate, graduate, and underrepresented minority
students to gain knowledge and pursue research in the science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) fields, and help develop a new paradigm for online
and distance education in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine the design rules for
self-assembled, 3D DNA crystals in order to engineer porous, addressable
scaffolds with well-defined cavities at the nanometer scale. The molecular
control and tunable symmetries attainable with these materials will enable the
arrangement of guest species, such as proteins, small molecules, or
nanoparticles with atomic resolution. This project will systematically probe and
test the parameters that affect rationally designed DNA crystals, including DNA
Holliday junction sequence, duplex and sticky end length and sequence, and
experimental assembly pathway. The structures of the resulting crystals will be
solved by X-ray crystallography to determine their symmetry, and the size of
their channels and cavity size. The pathway of self-assembly (e.g. nucleation-
growth vs. hierarchical nanostructure assembly) will also be probed
experimentally and used to inform a computational model of crystal self-assembly
for predictive simulation of novel crystal designs. The effect of sequence in
DNA duplexes and junctions will be modeled, as well as the multi-scale assembly
of the crystals. Fully atomistic simulations will be used to parameterize
coarse-grained models to probe the kinetic assembly pathway and symmetry of the
crystals, and the model predictions will help optimize sequences for the lattice
assembly. Finally, the above results will be used to design crystals with very
large cavities (~40 nm) in order to accommodate guest species such as
nanoparticles or mid-sized proteins. DNA-binding proteins (and fusions thereof)
will be immobilized in these void spaces to create functional materials with a
regular presentation of the guests in 3D space. Taken together, the work will
provide: (1) a better scientific understanding of DNA crystal design; (2) a
toolkit for understanding DNA structural parameters for the nanotechnology
community at large; and (3) a library of 3D lattices with tunable symmetries and
cavity sizes for the 3D arrangement of guest species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.