* 2004915
* Optically-pumped NMR Enhancements Enable Studies of Semiconductor Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sophia Hayes, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The basis of all modern electronics relies
on multilayered materials composed of semiconductors. Here, the investigators
are developing instrumentation to determine the specialized chemical structures
and the 3-dimensional forms in interface regions where different semiconductor
layers are in contact with one another. These methods combine laser excitation
with nuclear magnetic resonance detection to provide atomic-level information
critical to improving the performance of these modern electronic devices. This
project includes collaboration with the National High Magnetic Field Lab and
will impact semiconductor device fabrication industries. The research
innovations are integrated with multidisciplinary courses offered at Washington
University for educating and training students. The collaboration also provides
new research networks for team members, enhancing the professional development
of students and postdoctoral researchers. Informal science education activities
for high school teachers are offered through the Institute for School
Partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;This
research interrogates the structure of semiconductor interfaces by using
enhanced signals that are created through optical pumping of conduction
electrons. Optical pumping in the optically pumped nuclear magnetic resonance
(OPNMR) localizes the detected signal to interfacial regions and greatly
enhances the sensitivity, transforming NMR from a bulk to a surface technique.
In collaboration with the National High Magnetic Field Lab, laser access and NMR
sensitivity are improved by utilizing a new coil design based on high-
temperature superconductors that permits unimpeded laser access and higher
performance than conventional solenoids. Such spectroscopy can enable
engineering of devices by revealing the underlying makeup of the interface, and
examining strain induced by defects, lattice mismatch, and dopants. Model
structures of GaAs coated with deposited metal oxide thin films, such as alumina
and hafnium dioxide are probed. The OPNMR is developed to adapt these methods
for studying other metal-oxide semiconductor devices to examine the role of
defects in Fermi-level pinning at this interface. This information is critical
to improving performance of metal-oxide semiconductor devices. The high
polarization achieved is utilized to measure the magneto-optical penetration
depth and ultimately the nuclear polarization. To date, these values have only
been estimates but are crucial for understanding the observed spins and the
effectiveness of the optical pumping, explicitly using nuclear spin
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.