* 2004455
* Pushing the Boundaries of Kinetic Stability in Metastable Perovskite Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Paul Maggard, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Part 1. Non-Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major limitations
in the discovery and design of new materials is the capability of predicting
which compounds can potentially be synthesized. The underlying fundamental
principles are not well understood and have historically required extensive
trial and error. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, investigates and
pushes the boundaries of synthesizability of crystalline solids, enabling the
development of new strategies for preparing future technological materials.
Discoveries stemming from the research efforts can provide new methods to
prepare, for example, less toxic or more energy-efficient compounds that are
critically important to the nationâ€™s semiconductor and electronic ceramics
industries. More generally, the advancement of strategies to synthesize
materials over a wider attainable range of compositions and structures enables
the rapid acceleration of their technological development. An in-depth
characterization of the local and long-range structural features is aimed at
understanding the impacts on the local structure and/or disorder of materials
that occur at the edges of synthesizability. The inspiration and training of the
next generation of scientists is facilitated within these technologically
relevant basic research activities, including professional experiences at
national laboratories and the development of research experiences for high
school and community college teachers. The educational activities also emphasize
the recruitment and participation of research students from underrepresented
groups in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2. Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metastable crystalline solids are ubiquitous and
can be commonly found as a result of either synthetic or naturally occurring
processes, such as in the formation of crystalline diamond or in the synthesis
of austenite stainless steel. The synthesis of metastable solids with
technologically relevant properties, but that are extremely difficult or
impossible to prepare, is a growing limitation in many research fields. The
central objective of the research project is to elucidate and exploit the
underlying factors that can govern the kinetic stabilization of metastable
phases. Research thrusts specifically focus on metastable Sn(II)-containing
perovskites that have potential applications as new lead-free ferroelectrics and
as small bandgap semiconductors. The synthetic component is directed toward the
discovery of new pathways to increase the range of synthesizability that can be
experimentally achieved with the use of reaction conditions that can, for
example, drive product formation while controlling ion diffusion and phase
segregation in order to inhibit decomposition. Structural characterization by
X-ray and neutron scattering techniques is aimed at answering key questions
regarding the formation and decomposition pathways of these compounds. The
extent and distribution of local and long-range structural disorder is probed at
the precipices of energetically downhill decomposition pathways and the
resulting new insights can help to push the limits of kinetic stabilization.
Experimental efforts are complemented with quantification of thermodynamic
relationships using open materials databases and density functional theory.
Educational initiatives within this project, which is supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
include research training of undergraduate and graduate students, involvement of
high school and community college teachers in research, and offering of an
annual workshop on Rietveld methods for learners at a range of stages in their
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.