* 2004339
* Enhance Exciton Transport in Perovskite Quantum Dot Solids through Coherent Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Libai Huang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 10/31/2023
* USD 541,521.00

This project uses ultrafast lasers to make “movies” of light energy traveling
between tiny semiconductor nanoparticles known as quantum dots. These quantum
dots are efficient light absorbers and potentially useful for devices such as
solar cells or light emitting diodes. In a device, quantum dots must be closely
packed together in order to facilitate energy transfer from one quantum dot to
the next. As a result, the distance between quantum dots and the speed at which
energy migrates has a strong effect on device efficiency. By imaging how energy
moves in quantum dot solids with different packings, this research aims to
provide guidelines for designing structures for efficient light energy
harvesting through control of energy migration rates. To achieve these goals,
synthetic strategies are developed to control the size of the quantum dots and
the chemical linkers used to connect them. Then, these quantum dots are used as
“artificial atoms” and assembled into well-ordered structures known as
superlattices. The research team also develops microscopy techniques to record
fast energy transfer events with a resolution of 10 femtoseconds (a femtosecond
is one quadrillionth of a second) and to image energy migration distances with a
resolution of 50 nanometers (a nanometer is one billionth of a meter). The
research and educational activities are integrated to educate the next
generation of solar energy researchers through K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
science education. The PIs partner with Science Express and AP Fridays at Purdue
to involve K-12 students in a cutting-edge laboratory environment. Results from
this project are utilized to educate the general public on new solar energy
technologies using podcast and video media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-range
exciton transport and coherence in colloidal quantum dot solids are highly
desirable for their optoelectronic and quantum information applications.
However, exciton transport in colloidal quantum dot solids thus far has been
almost exclusively realized in the incoherent regime with excitons localized in
individual quantum dots due to the relatively large energetic disorder compared
to the electronic coupling strength in these systems. Incoherent transport of
localized excitons presents a major limitation in obtaining long-range coherence
and transport. In this project, strong dipole-dipole interactions between
perovskite quantum dots are leveraged to enhance transport by promoting coherent
motion of delocalized excitons. The team elucidates transport mechanisms by
employing ultrafast coherent microscopy with ~10 fs time resolution and better
than 50 nm spatial resolution. Exciton propagation distance, delocalization
length, and coherent transport contributions are measured as a function of
temperature. The extent of exciton delocalization is systematically controlled
by varying inter-particle distance, electronic coupling, and dimensionality
using ligand chemistry. The project provides guidelines for designing excitonic
materials using perovskite quantum dots as building
blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.