* 2004796
* Collaborative Research: Designing biomaterials through computational simulation and manipulation of phase behavior in a class of intrinsically disordered proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Jeetain Mittal, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 12/31/2021
* USD 252,956.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Proteins that lack defined structures play many
important roles in biology and in materials, mediating functions from the
organization of molecules in the interior of cells to the production of
elastomeric materials that can stretch multiple times their original length
without permanent deformation. Despite the widespread utility of these types of
proteins, detailed understanding of the molecular features that define their
properties is still just emerging, which has limited their application in high-
performance biomaterials. This proposal addresses this gap by developing
computational and experimental methods that will describe how the composition of
the proteins and the properties of their solutions can provide handles for
making patterned elastomeric matrices, which in the long term will address
critical societal challenges such as engineering living materials, controlling
placement of biomolecules to conduct chemical functions, and/or more efficient
energy storage. The research in this program will also impact educational
activities for students of a variety of ages and experience. A series of
student-initiated activities and podcasts, in which the PIs will participate,
will help transfer concepts of this program into secondary school curricula and
hands-on experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Liquid-
liquid phase separation (LLPS) of two dissimilar solutions is a fundamental
thermodynamic process with significant importance in the development of advanced
materials and for the assembly of membraneless organelles such as the nucleolus.
The use of protein LLPS to purposefully design new materials could be
significantly advanced if finer details were known about how select features of
the polypeptide chain and its solutions drive the thermodynamics and kinetics of
phase separation in the IDPs. The overarching goal of this proposal,
accordingly, is to leverage unique capabilities of the investigators in computer
modeling and recombinant design of resilin-like IDPs (RLPs) to design protein
coacervates that display tunable material properties at the mesoscale. The
project will leverage a closed-loop format, combining state-of-the-art
simulations of protein LLPS alongside extensive experimental characterization of
RLPs to provide iterative feedback about the role of amino acid composition,
sequence, and co-solutes (salt or PEG) in LLPS. Variations in the experimentally
determined second virial coefficients for selected RLPs, and their match (or
deviation) from computation will enable fine-tuning of computational methods.
Detailed spectroscopy and scattering characterization will enable correlation
with computational prediction and further serve to establish the roles of
coacervate concentration and composition in hydrogel morphology and properties.
Taken together, these studies will deepen fundamental understanding of
thermodynamics and kinetics of the LLPS of IDPs and will allow for unprecedented
control over the design of condensates with controlled microstructure and
composition as elements in biomaterials design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.