* 2004167
* CAS: Lewis Pair Catalyst Platform for Functional Polyether Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nathaniel Lynd, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 397,812.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Nathaniel Lynd of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Texas at Austin to develop new polymerization
techniques for the controlled synthesis of polyethers. Polyethers are a class of
large molecules in which every repeating unit contains a carbon-oxygen bond.
They are typically prepared from small cyclic carbon-oxygen containing compounds
called epoxides. This class of polymers is becoming increasingly important in
today’s society because they are easier to degrade pathways than widely used
plastics that contain mostly carbon-carbon bonds along the main polymer chains.
Hence, polyethers might provide a viable solution to the recyclability problem
which is of vital importance from an environmental perspective. In this
research, catalysts based on aluminum are systematically designed to speed up
the synthesis. The new chemical reactions are simple and can be transferred to
laboratories around the world, which could greatly expand access to these types
of polymers. This research is having a broader impact by providing education and
research training to a diverse population of undergraduate and graduate
students. Additional outreach efforts are focused on interactions with students
from the Austin School for the Deaf and K-8 students through on-campus
introductions to polymer chemistry at the Introduce a Girl to Engineering Day at
the University of Texas-Austin. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is focused
on development of Lewis pair catalyst systems for functional polyether
synthesis. There is currently no consensus polymerization technique available
for polyethers that provides access to polymers with controlled molecular
weights, chain-end functionality, good tolerance to monomer functionality, and
availability to the non-specialist. This research seeks to further the
development of such a tool by exploring the kinetics and mechanisms of the N-Al
Lewis pair catalysts. Steric and electronic factors that govern Lewis-pair
catalyst activity for epoxide polymerization are systematically explored.
Detailed studies associated with Lewis pair formation and structure are also
conducted. Special emphasis is placed on the investigation and elimination of
parasitic initiation/termination through decomposition of a zwitterionic
intermediate resulting in alkyl, or hydride terminal polymers, and/or
undesirable cyclization. The methodology associated with this work introduces a
readily available polymerization platform requiring only mixing of two
commercially available chemicals. As such, it opens doors to new chemists with
limited technical or infrastructural means to convert structurally diverse
epoxides into functional and useful polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.