* 2004445
* Pin down the mechanism of Fermi-level pinning in metal/2D-semiconductor contacts
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Zhixian Zhou, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 359,450.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Atomically thin semiconductors, referred to
as two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors, have recently emerged as potential
candidate materials for next-generation low-power and high-performance
electronics. 2D semiconductorsâ€™ atomic flatness, surface-smoothness and
thickness-uniformity allow electronic devices, including transistors, to be made
smaller and more densely-packed than is currently possible with silicon
technology. Furthermore, the excellent mechanical strength and stretchability of
2D materials also open up new opportunities for next-generation flexible
electronics. A critical component of transistors is the metal-semiconductor
electrical contacts because charge carriers are injected and extracted through
these contacts. In spite of the superb electronic and mechanical properties of
2D semiconductors, the performance of current prototype 2D-semiconductor-based
electronic devices is still severely limited by the non-ideal metal-
semiconductor contacts. Isolating and understanding which factors limit
electrical contacts between metal-electrodes and 2D semiconductors remains a
major materials challenge and prevents practical electronic application of 2D
semiconductors. To address this knowledge gap, this research uses new methods to
controllably modify and characterize the properties of 2D semiconductor
interfaces with metals. This project tightly integrates research, education, and
community outreach efforts through a series of activities such as summer
research for high school students, coaching Science Olympiad teams and lab
tours. The emphasis of the education component of this project is placed on
promoting diversity through actively recruiting graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors with a suitable
bandgap, a reasonably high mobility, excellent mechanical strength and high
flexibility are promising channel materials for next generation flexible
electronics beyond the scaling limit of silicon-based field-effect transistors.
However, a major bottleneck in electronic applications of 2D semiconductors such
as transition metal dichalcogenides is their tendency to form a substantial
Schottky barrier with most metals at their contacts largely due to Fermi-level
pinning effects. This is a strong disadvantage because low-resistance ohmic
contacts are needed for realistic devices. The goal of this project is to
establish a fundamental understanding of the Fermi-level pinning mechanism at
metal/2D-semiconductor interfaces and subsequently develop comprehensive
contact-engineering strategies to eliminate the Schottky barrier. This project
uses 2D van der Waals contacts with negligible Fermi-level pinning as the
baseline and controllably introduce various possible pinning factors to
quantitatively understand their roles in Fermi-level pinning. A variety of
materials characterization techniques such as photoelectron spectroscopy, atomic
force microscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy will be
performed in conjunction with electrical transport measurements to correlate the
materials properties with the Schottky barrier height. The knowledge gained from
this study is expected to help design effective contact-engineering strategies
to achieve ultralow-resistance ohmic contacts to 2D semiconductors, and open up
new avenues for basic research on 2D electronic and optoelectronic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.