* 2004501
* Designing Highly Stretchable Resilient Hydrogels
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Santanu Kundu, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 368,562.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogels are being used in
many applications including in the biomedical field, pharmaceutical
formulations, and food materials. Developing highly stretchable and resilient
hydrogels could open up additional applications of these materials, for example
in artificial muscles, in prosthetic devices towards assisting individuals with
restricted mobility, energy harvesting, and enabling power amplification process
in soft-robots. Biological elastomeric proteins such as resilin display high
stretchability and resilience, but water-containing polymer networks prepared
from synthetic monomers typically do not display such properties. High
stretchability and resilience in biological elastomeric proteins have been
attributed to the balanced combination of entropic and enthalpic elasticity
originating from the presence of hydrophilic and hydrophobic segments. In the
proposed research, taking inspiration from these biopolymers, hydrogels with
hydrophilic and hydrophobic contents will be synthesized using a facile chemical
synthesis route. The synthesis strategy and characterization techniques that
would be developed and implemented in this project will be applicable to other
soft materials. Because of the cross-disciplinary nature of the project, the
proposed research will impact many disciplines viz., polymer science, physics,
robotics, and biology. In addition to the direct involvement of undergraduate
and graduate students in the proposed research activities, the educational and
outreach component will also include laboratory demonstrations and active
involvement of K-12 students in research activities with the goal of introducing
them to polymer science and engineering and encouraging interest in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the origin and nature of
elasticity in hydrogels consisting of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic
components will be investigated. Particularly, the hydrogel considered for this
project will be obtained by using free-radical polymerization of acrylic acid
(AAc), methacrylamide (MAAm), and polypropylene glycol diacrylate (PPGDA). PPGDA
is sparsely soluble in water at room temperature and will act as a hydrophobic
block. Multiples of those blocks can associate to form hydrophobic domains in
these gels. The resultant hydrogel is highly stretchable, resilient, and can
achieve very high retraction velocity when released from a stretched state. It
has been hypothesized that during stretching, the hydrophilic blocks display
entropic elasticity, whereas dissociation of the hydrophobic domains, unwinding
and stretching of the collapsed polypropylene glycol blocks in the aqueous media
will have a significant enthalpic penalty. Similar to that observed in protein
elastomers, a balance in enthalpic and entropic elasticity will render a
hydrogel stiff, stretchable, and resilient. However, a fundamental understanding
linking the structure and properties of these hydrogels is not clearly
available. In the planned research, such will be addressed by systematically
varying the monomer concentrations, hydrophobic content, hydrophobic block
molecular weight, and solvent quality or temperature. Variation of these
conditions will likely lead to the change in gel structure, which will then be
linked to gel properties, particularly stretchability and resilience. A
systematic understanding will lead to establishing design principles for
synthesizing stretchable and resilient hydrogels from synthetic
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.