* 2004118
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards Secure, Privacy-Preserving, Verifiable Cyberphysical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/25/2019,09/30/2020
* Kelly Shaw, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2020
* USD 28,508.00

Cyber-physical and Internet-of-Things (CPS/IoT) systems offer dramatic potential
for revolutionizing many aspects of modern life by facilitating collection,
analysis, and action on fine-grained sensor data. In both consumer-facing
systems (e.g. smart locks, cameras, and thermostats) as well as infrastructure
and industrial settings (e.g. devices to monitor factories or electricity
distribution systems), CPS/IoT systems are already responsible for a wide range
of safety-critical functions with significant security implications. CPS/IoT
systems' correctness and security shortcomings have implications both for device
users themselves, and more broadly across the Internet, due to malware attacks
hosted by these devices. This project attacks the problem of verifying the
correctness and security of CPS/IoT systems by developing design-time
verification techniques to be used prior to deployment, as well as run-time
verification techniques for systems in use. The project includes components to
engage undergraduate students in research, and to improve the diversity of the
computing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has two main
thrusts. The first develops efficient, formal verification techniques for
CPS/IoT Systems. These can be employed statically at design time or compile-time
to comprehensively assess that state updates will occur in correct orderings
based on design specifications provided by the designer or gleaned automatically
from hardware design languages and software. The second explores hardware
support for formal, dynamic IoT system verification. In particular, so-called
``lifeguard'' techniques can be employed to watch state updates in real-time and
react to them with hardware or software error handlers as needed. This allows
systems to maintain oversight over arbitrary CPS/IoT applications and help
ensure their appropriate operation. A set of CPS/IoT verification tools to
support design-time and compile-time verification and all hardware support
designs and techniques developed will be released for broad open-source use.