* 2004618
* Facility Support: The WiscSIMS National Ion Microprobe
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* John Valley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,279,988.00

This grant provides support of the WiscSIMS Laboratory at the University of
Wisconsin - Madison. WiscSIMS is a National Facility for Stable Isotope
Geochemistry and provides unique analytical capabilities for 20-30 guest
scientists each year from outside of the University of Wisconsin System. A wide
range of Earth Science research is conducted at WiscSIMS. Thus far, over 380
scientists have worked with WiscSIMS from 65 different universities and research
institutes. The ability to analyze small spots (1-10 micron) in situ from
microscope mounts allows data to be put in context with imaging and other forms
of analysis. WiscSIMS will continue to make 50% of total beam-time available
each year to researchers from outside of the University of Wisconsin. The
broader impacts of this project include new applications of stable isotope
geochemistry to problems of societal concern; public education; and
SIMS/geochemistry training at undergraduate to post-doc level, including under-
represented groups. Since 2008, 115 students, including 55 women and 5
minorities, used WiscSIMS in their thesis
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WiscSIMS has optimized an IMS-1280 large-radius,
multi-collector ion microprobe for analysis of stable isotopes (including Li, C,
N, O, Mg, Si, S, Ca, and Fe). The three most common areas of research are
Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology &amp; Geochemistry; Cosmochemistry &amp;
Astrobiology; and Low Temperature Geochemistry &amp; Paleoclimatology.
Applications of the new in situ capabilities are potentially transformative in
many areas of geochemistry. The range and pattern of isotope variation can
finally be determined from small objects that were formerly homogenized by
analysis of bulk or powdered samples such as zircons, microfossils, quartz
overgrowths, and carbonates. New and surprising information of fundamental
importance has been found in a large number of studies. For instance, high-
resolution carbonate studies of continental paleoclimate were formerly limited
to resolution at decade-to century-scale by conventional sampling techniques and
yet ice-core records show that extreme shifts in deglaciation can occur in less
than 10 years. Ion microprobe analysis of stalagmites has resolved changes in
oxygen isotope ratio for one month or less, providing a proxy record of
seasonality and annual-scale climate. WiscSIMS has published studies of many
proxies of paleoclimate including speleothems, foraminifera, fish otoliths,
mollusks, and calcretes. During the next three-year funding cycle, increased
emphasis will build on these achievements to help resolve long-standing
paleoclimate questions, especially in proxy records of rapid climate change
where conventional techniques cannot resolve short time
periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.