* 2004878
* Collaborative Research: Guiding synthesis of nanoparticles with nanometric phase diagram and in situ X-ray diffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Hailong Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2023
* USD 344,501.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallic nanostructures are widely
used in many important applications, such as catalysts, energy storage and
biomedical engineering. The synthesis of metallic nanostructures is more
difficult than that of bulk metals and alloys. Conventional phase diagrams are
used as road maps to guide the synthesis and processing of bulk metals and
alloys, but they are not suitable for nanoparticles, which have drastically
increased surface area and surface energy. Nanometric phase diagrams as the
counterpart of conventional phase diagram is highly desired. This project aims
to establish nanometric phase diagrams for guiding synthesis of nanoparticles
using advanced experimental characterizations and atomistic modeling.
Experiments are conducted to observe the formation and growth of metal/alloy
nanoparticles in real time, and atomistic modeling provides theoretical
understanding of these processes. The synthesis of new forms of metal and alloy
nanoparticles is guided by the novel nanometric phase diagrams. This project
adds to the fundamental knowledge about the formation process of nanoparticles,
and provides a new avenue of synthesizing novel nanoparticles for a range of
applications. The scientific findings from this project are integrated as
education components into undergraduate and graduate courses. Students at
different stages of education participate through a variety of research,
education, and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many metallic nanostructures show unique physical
and chemical properties that are different from their bulk forms. Previous
researches have demonstrated that these metallic nanomaterials often form phases
that are not stable in conventional phase diagram. However, it is not yet fully
understood why this can happen and in what condition this would happen. This
project aims to answer these fundamental questions via a novel approach
combining computational and experimental research efforts. State-of-the-art in
situ X-ray characterization techniques are developed and employed to monitor the
nucleation and growth processes of metallic nanoparticles in solutions, both
qualitatively and quantitatively. First principles computations are used to
evaluate the bulk, surface and total energies of nanoparticles in different
synthesis conditions and at different length scales. By coupling computational
and experimental investigations, the formation mechanisms of metallic
nanostructures are revealed and the nanometric phase diagrams are established to
predict and guide the syntheses of metallic nanomaterials. The findings and
outcome of this project have impacts and implications in multiple fields, such
as solid state chemistry, metallurgy, and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.