* 2004899
* Peptide Brush Polymers: Theory and Synthesis for Functional Design
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Monica Olvera, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 525,000.00

Nontechnical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials
program in the Division of Materials Research to Northwestern University is for
the development of an approach to make peptide biomaterials into therapeutics
and tools for discovery in biology. Peptides are typically small biomolecules
discovered as fragments of proteins or coming from natural sources such as
hormones. They are a class of molecule used to treat diseases such as diabetes.
However, widespread use across diverse diseases has been severely limited
compared to how many peptides are known. The promise of peptide biomaterials has
also been limited because of several conspiring attributes. One is that, in
using these molecules we are trying to make functional therapeutics out of that
which we normally regard as food. Natural digestion processes break down
peptides to amino acids before they can function. In addition, cells and tissues
have physical barriers that prevent most foreign peptides from entering; an
evolutionary feature that usually serves us well. These processes mean that
peptides are short lived when given intravenously or orally as medicines. In
addition, unlike large proteins such as antibodies, individual peptides lack the
ability to make multiple contacts with target receptors that may be present on
cells or invading pathogens. This is analogous to the difference between picking
up a pen with one finger versus using an entire hand. We term this multivalency
in target binding. This award focuses on the experimental and theoretical
development of a new kind of peptide biomaterial formulation. These formulations
display peptides at exceptionally high-density, enabling resistance to
degradation, while maintaining and enhancing cell uptake and receptor binding,
or gripping strength by multivalency. Through this effort to impact scientific
problems of urgency and relevance to society, the award will establish a
research internship for underrepresented post-baccalaureate students in science,
to recruit them to STEM fields. The award will also enable outreach programs
including one focused on clinicians interested in learning about future
technologies of potential translational relevance arising from the fields of
polymer chemistry and nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peptides show tremendous potential as
therapeutics and as tools in chemical biology. However, this promise has been
consistently compromised by natural digestion processes and by chemical and
physical barriers in cells and tissues. These processes mean that peptides
suffer from short half-lives upon systemic (intravenous or oral) administration
and are degraded or excluded entirely from cells and organs. In addition, they
can be low molecular weight as individual strands, a feature contributing to
rapid clearance when administered systemically and to a lack of multivalency in
target binding. This award focuses on the experimental and theoretical
development of polymer scaffolds that are capable of displaying peptides at
exceptionally high density enabling resistance to degradation, while maintaining
and enhancing cell uptake and bioactivity. Furthermore, the project offers
opportunities for broader societal impact. This is based on the fact that
peptides are exciting targets, ripe for development with new delivery methods
for longstanding, and for emerging diseases alike. To fuel these scientific
thrusts, the program has established a research internship for underrepresented
post-baccalaureate students in science to prepare them to apply for graduate
school. The multidisciplinary research program seeks to broaden the base of
students coming into STEM fields by recruiting them to work on scientific
problems of urgency and relevance to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.