* 2004616
* Tuning Nanostructured Morphology in Superhard Metal Borides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Richard Kaner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical hardness is an important
property used to determine the applications of materials in the machining and
manufacturing industries. Due to the extensive use of hard materials as cutting
tools and abrasives, the demand for superhard materials has been steadily
increasing. The best-known superhard material – diamond – is not effective at
cutting and drilling steel due to its poor thermal stability in air and its
tendency to react with the iron in the steel it is trying to cut. Therefore,
there is great interest in finding alternatives to traditional superhard
materials. These are needed in the construction, automotive, and other
industries to replace costly and low performing traditional hard materials like
tungsten carbide. To address these issues, the Principal Investigators (PIs) are
designing a new generation of superhard materials that will provide greatly
increased hardness and the ability to cut steels and other materials at lower
cost. Inspired by the unique properties of natural diamond, the Principal
Investigators have focused on creating networks with similar properties in other
compounds, focusing on mixtures of electron-rich metals and boron. The novel
superhard materials are synthesized at ambient pressure and characterization
will be conducted to understand the correlation between material structure and
hardness. The educational efforts of the PIs, which address the needs of
students ranging from elementary school to college undergraduates, include
course development, teacher workshops for elementary, middle, and high schools
in the greater Los Angeles area, and school outreach visits. Workforce
development occurs through the training of graduate students, who also assist
with outreach programs and mentor UCLA undergraduate students through research.
This project is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
within the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hardness is a physical phenomenon dependent on
both the chemical bond strength and grain structure of a material. An
understanding of how to design new superhard materials thus requires sufficient
mechanistic insight and control of both bonding and grain morphology. To address
this challenge, the Principal Investigators (PIs) are combining the synthesis of
a wide range of transition metal boride systems with high-pressure studies to
obtain lattice-specific information about plastic deformations in a broad range
of bulk and nanoscale materials. These metal boride structures consist of high
valence electron density metals, combined with multiple short boron-boron bonds,
providing a highly covalent bonding network that is resistant to slip and
dislocations, combined with high electrostatic repulsion that resists bond
compression. The goal of the proposed work, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, is to
synthetically control both grain size and morphology. In bulk materials, this is
being accomplished through the decomposition of metastable dodecaboride phases
in the WB4 system and through precipitation of secondary phases in the ReB2
system. Additionally, molten salt methods are being used to develop nano grain-
sized metal borides such as nano-ReB2 and nano-WB4. These synthetic approaches
thus aim to enhance extrinsic hardness in both bulk and nano-sized materials.
Materials are being analyzed through Vickers hardness testing and high-pressure
experiments in diamond anvil cells. With an understanding of the coupled effects
of bonding and grain morphology, the research team aims to systematically tune
nanostructured materials and advance the next generation of superhard metal
borides. The broader impacts of the work lie in workforce development through
the training of graduate students, in the extensive outreach efforts of the PIs,
which address the needs of students ranging from elementary school to college
undergraduates, and in the significant potential for impact on the commercial
cutting, drilling and machining industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.