* 2004090
* Catalytic Selectivity Control in Electrochemical Systems using Self-Assembled Monolayers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 742,974.00

A major limitation of many chemical processes for synthesis of fuels and
chemicals is the formation of unwanted byproducts. Catalysts are often used to
direct chemical reactions towards desirable products. Combining electrochemistry
with catalysis (i.e., electrocatalysis) opens the door not only to improved
process selectivity, but also to improved energy efficiency and reduced
environmental impact via sustainable and/or renewable energy from power sources
such as wind and solar energy, and biomass. The study investigates modifications
to electrocatalyst composition by surface coatings known as organic self-
assembled monolayers (SAMS). The SAMS can be used in conjunction with
electrocatalysts to convert renewable materials such as biomass to higher-value
fuels and chemicals. The project will include training of postdoctoral
researchers, graduate students, and community college instructors and students.
Faculty and students on the project will prepare online instructional materials
on electrochemistry that will be broadly disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop new tools for selectivity control that employ an applied
voltage to manipulate the structure of the catalyst, and thus its catalytic
properties. Although “passive” SAMs have been used previously to improve
catalyst performance, here the focus will be on the use of “active” SAMs that
change their structure in response to the electric charge on the surface.
Catalysts will be modified with ligands that undergo reversible coupling
reactions or form bonds to the surface as a result of changes in electric
potential. Such SAM-modified catalysts will then be evaluated for reactions
where selectivity is a major challenge, using applied voltage as a new control
for enhancing performance. The project will advance knowledge of how the organic
near-surface environment can be designed to control selectivity on
electrocatalysts and identify methods to design switchable surfaces that can
hypothetically turn particular catalyst functions “on” or “off” using an
electrical signal. To develop catalysts with electrically responsive coatings,
the project will focus on the deposition of organothiolate SAMs on late
transition metal surfaces such as Pd, Pt, and Au, and on SAM structures that
have been shown to undergo potential-dependent changes in oxidation state,
shape, and/or chemical bonding. The objectives of the project are to (i) conduct
initial investigations of the use of SAM-modified catalysts under
electrochemical conditions for a reaction system that has been thoroughly
investigated in thermal catalysis to identify how the electrochemical
environment affects the SAM; (ii) develop new methods to control cross-linking
and surface density in SAMs that will provide fundamental information on design
rules for potential-responsive systems; and (iii) modify catalysts with
electroactive SAMs that enable potential-driven switching of catalyst
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.