* 2004251
* RUI: Multiscale Analysis of Adhesion and Friction Coupling Enabled by Bio-Inspired Anisotropic Fibrillar Adhesives
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 304,140.00

&lt;p&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Many organisms in nature have adapted
microscopic hairs and fibrils as robust adhesives for locomotion purposes and/or
securing a strong attachment. Geckos are among the most studied species for
developing bio-inspired dry adhesives due to their fairly large body size and
sophisticated toe pad structure. Despite great improvements on adhesion
strength, the durability and reusability of many lab-scale 'proof-of-principle'
artificial adhesives still lag behind their natural counterparts, even being
tested on smoother and cleaner substrates. In this project, adhesive arrays with
controlled contact shapes and geometries will be fabricated using template-
assisted cast molding and advanced micro-fabrication techniques. Adhesive
behavior will be characterized to simultaneously measure adhesion and friction
under non-idealized conditions (e.g., on non-dust-free surfaces, and at
different temperatures and humidity). Computer simulation will be performed to
explain the experimental results. Overall, the proposed work provides an
alternative approach to study surface and interfacial phenomena of advanced
smart superstructures mimicking nature. Students will examine problems at the
crossroads of engineering, materials science, physics, chemistry, and other
related disciplines. Exploring a broad range of applications by building up
state-of-the-art versatile mechanical system and simulation tools will
substantially enhance research productivity, and provide essential research
training to undergraduate and graduate students at Cal State LA and in the
Southern California region. The educational plan contributes to Cal State LA's
long tradition of educating local minority and underrepresented students to
become the next generation of engineers, scientists, and educators whose vision
is to link science priorities to the solving of societal
problems.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;p&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to mimic gecko toe pad structure and function seek to
develop a new class of advanced adhesives that are not only sticky and easy to
unstick, but also non-fouling. Current synthetic dry adhesives suffer from large
required preloading and intolerance of dusty environments, which significantly
limit their use for sticking to or manipulating fragile and non-dust-free
objects. This project focuses on understanding the engaging and disengaging
mechanisms of anisotropic fibrillar adhesive units featuring a variety of
contact shapes/geometries and structural/materials gradient across multiple
lengths and temporal scales. The proposed dry adhesive design incorporates both
the geometrical anisotropy seen at the setal level and the special contact shape
of the setal branches at the spatula level. The ultimate goal is to elucidate
how adhesion and friction are coupled and may be better controlled by rationally
designing the geometry dependent dry adhesive units. Adhesive performance will
be evaluated under cyclic loadings and non-dust-free environments, as well as
different temperatures and relative humidity, using a custom-designed surface
force apparatus. Multiscale anisotropic finite-element cohesive-zone modeling
will be implemented to parameterize the contact shape dependent interfacial
behaviors, and to analyze the adhesive mechanisms, fracture and failures. This
project will yield both basic and applied advances in biomimetic research, e.g.,
development of switchable and self-cleaning surfaces; micro-/nanomanipulations;
and high tolerance dry adhesives and drug delivery systems for robotics, energy
and biomedical applications.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;p&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;/p&gt;