* 2004279
* Adapting to unsystematic variation in foreign-accented speech
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Janet van Hell, Pelzl                   Eric
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 143,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Linguistics program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Janet van Hell, Dr. Carrie Jackson, and Dr.
Matthew Carlson at Penn State University, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating how people adapt to foreign-
accented pronunciation. Adaptation is the process by which listeners adjust to
unfamiliar spoken sounds produced by an accented speaker. Existing research has
shown that adaptation to accented speech often happens quickly and
automatically. This project will extend such research to Mandarin Chinese.
Mandarin is a lexical tone language that can use pitch patterns to differentiate
syllables and words. Adult second language learners of Mandarin typically
struggle to control and remember tones, leading them to make frequent tone
errors. For listeners, these errors might affect adaptation to other aspects of
foreign-accented Mandarin, either slowing their accommodation of accented
pronunciation, or causing them to ignore all tones. This research may help us to
understand why adaptation to accented speech sometimes fails to occur. By
focusing on ways that second language pronunciation impacts listeners, this
research also has the potential to inform language teachers and program
administrators on how best to prioritize pronunciation in language
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the occurrence of
unsystematic tone errors within a foreign-accented speaker's Mandarin speech.
Unsystematic tone errors are unpredictable for listeners in terms of both when
and how they will occur. The focus on unsystematic pronunciation errors adds a
critical dimension that must be accounted for in models of listener adaptation.
Specifically, this project examines word recognition in native Mandarin
listeners, by contrasting listener responses when a foreign-accented speaker
produces frequent unsystematic tone errors compared to when a speaker produces
few tone errors. Using a forced-choice word recognition paradigm, and measuring
eye-movements during word recognition, two sets of experiments will test whether
Mandarin listeners can ignore (i.e., down-weight) tones, and whether this down-
weighting impacts the speed and outcome of word recognition. A further set of
experiments will examine how previous experience teaching foreign language
impacts listenersâ€™ adaptive processes. Together, these experiments will shed
light on accent adaption in tonal languages, and provide new insight into the
importance of tonal accuracy in second language Mandarin speech. By involving
language teachers directly in the research, the project has the potential to
build bridges between laboratory science and classroom settings, which will lead
to better informed language instructors, and may provide future opportunities to
move scientific investigations into classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.