* 2004880
* Molten Inorganic Salts as Solvents and Reactive Media for Colloidal and Solid-State Chemistry of Low-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Dmitri Talapin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2023
* USD 495,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanometer-sized two-
dimensional materials are widely used for lighting and display applications,
catalysis, and healthcare. Such materials are often made by chemical reactions
in liquid solutions. As a result, the properties of a solvent used for the
reactions become an important factor that determines the ability to make novel
materials and give them specific functional abilities. This project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division of
Materials Research, explores the use of molten salts, such as liquid sodium
chloride (cooking salt), as solvents for making new types of two-dimensional
materials. Specifically, unique properties of molten inorganic salts are used to
develop unprecedented surface chemistry for two-dimensional nanomaterials known
as MXenes. The synthetic methods, which researchers at the University of Chicago
develop, are directly relevant to the preparation of novel, technologically
important materials with eventual applications in display technologies and for
energy storage. A comprehensive education and outreach program accompanies the
research and focus on education enrichment for the local underrepresented
African American and Hispanic K-12 populations on Chicago's South Side. The
major components of the broader impact activities include training undergraduate
and high school students in research, curriculum development, and public
outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, develops
molten inorganic salts as versatile media for unprecedented colloidal and solid-
state chemistry of two-dimensional materials. The observed colloidal stability
in molten salts cannot be explained by traditional electrostatic and steric
stabilization mechanisms. Materials in molten salts likely form through a novel
mechanism related to the long-range ion correlations in the molten salt induced
by the crystal surface. The approach provides unmatched thermal stability and
chemical inertness during reaction conditions, and this study uses the unique
properties of molten inorganic salts to develop unprecedented surface chemistry
for two-dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes). Thereby the
research program expands the boundaries for solution synthesis of covalent
surface functionalization of extended inorganic materials. A comprehensive
education and outreach program accompanies the research and focus on education
enrichment for the local underrepresented African American and Hispanic K-12
populations on Chicago's South Side. The major components of the broader impact
activities include training undergraduate and high school students in research,
curriculum development, and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.