* 2005773
* Museums and Inclusion: Understanding Visitors' Sense of Belonging in Science and Natural History Museums
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Amy Grack Nelson, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

While museums strive to be as inclusive and welcoming as possible to all
visitors, data from many institutions shows that audiences are still
disproportionately white, well-educated, and more affluent than the average
local population. One contributing factor to the lack of progress is that staff
often create programs that work to create inclusivity from their own
perspective, rather than grounding the work in a broader vision of the museum
experience. This project will allow for a deeper exploration of how visitors,
particularly those from groups that visit less frequently, experience a museum
visit, and how their sense of belonging is supported or eroded during their
visit. The team believes this sense is built up or taken away through specific
moments of engagement or alienation and will explore these moments that matter
through the work. Through intensive work at one museum, and additional work at
three other museums, the project will look for themes and insights that can help
all museums to create more positive moments that matter for all audiences.
Specifically, the project will result in a) insights for museums in supporting a
visitor-based sense of belonging, b) shared methods for working with visitors
that could be applied by other researchers to explore specifics in a particular
setting, and c) grounding work to develop survey questions for use across the
field. This award is funded by the Advanced Informal STEM Learning program which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Building on existing work around exclusion and inclusion in everyday
science learning, this project aims to formally define what a sense of belonging
means in the science and natural history museum context as a construct for
understanding inclusivity. The research team hypothesizes that the majority of
experiences in an entire museum visit have a relatively neutral effect on
visitor sense of belonging; however, at times, visitors may experience positive
or negative moments, and these moments that matter may influence a visitor’s
STEM engagement, interest, and/or identity. This exploratory work will help to
develop and ground the construct of sense of belonging within the museum
visitor’s experiences, to identify visitor moments that matter using an equity
approach that intentionally centers the experiences of visitors from
underrepresented groups, and to form the basis for future research that would
support the development of a fieldwide measure of sense of belonging. The
research study will focus on defining the construct of sense of belonging so it
1) aligns with the research literature and 2) is grounded in the experiences of
science/natural history museum visitors. Photovoice data collection method and
interviews will be used with visitors ages six and above to identify moments
that matter for them during a visit to a science/natural history museum. This
project will create new understanding of this construct for not only
science/natural history museums and the larger informal science education (ISE)
field, but fill a gap in the overall literature around the construct of sense of
belonging. The project will also provide new learnings for the ISE field on how
to adapt and use the photovoice method to study complex constructs, such as
sense of belonging, in science/natural history
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.