* 2005246
* Consequences of language modality on language processing, regulation, and cognitive control
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Anne Therese Frederiksen, Frederiksen, Anne Therese
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Linguistics program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Judith Kroll at the University of
California, Irvine, this research will investigate language regulation and
cognitive control among unimodal and bimodal bilinguals versus monolinguals. An
increasing number of children in the US grow up in a home in which a language
other than English is spoken. Most of these children become dominant in English
as the majority language of the community once they transition to school, but
maintain their bilingualism, as heritage speakers of the home language. With
support from the NSF, PI Frederiksen’s postdoctoral research at UC Irvine will
investigate the consequence of this early language experience for young adult
bilinguals whose active language use takes different forms. For those who are
hearing but whose parents are deaf, there is the experience of growing up with a
sign language as the heritage language and becoming a bilingual in two
modalities, sign and speech. For those exposed to a spoken language in the home,
there is the experience of being a bilingual in two languages that use the same
spoken modality. In each case, the home language potentially imposes different
linguistic and cognitive demands on learners that shape their use of English as
the dominant language in young adulthood. The planned research will examine
bilinguals who differ in terms of language proficiency, contexts of language
use, and the sensory-motor modality of their languages, and asks whether
discourse processing in English differs in bilinguals as a result of these
factors. There is a growing understanding that a bilinguals’ two languages
influence each other and create language systems that are different from those
of monolinguals. For this reason, it is crucial to better understand how
variation in language experience shapes the linguistic system of a bilingual’s
stronger language in order to promote academic and economic success of an
increasingly diverse segment of the population. UC Irvine is both an Asian-
serving and Hispanic-serving institution, providing an ideal context for the
planned research. The planned research also contributes to the training of a
diverse group of language and cognitive neuroscientists by the inclusion of
undergraduate research students, most of whom are themselves
bilingual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although bilinguals tend to have stronger
cognitive control abilities than monolinguals, it has been reported that
bilinguals who know a signed and a spoken language look more like monolinguals
than other bilinguals in these abilities. Because sign languages use the hands
and eyes while spoken languages use the mouth and ears, sign-speech bilinguals
do not need to suppress one of their languages but can use both at the same
time. On the other hand, recent research has shown that cognitive control
abilities are gradient more than categorical. For example, in bilinguals,
cognitive control is highly variable depending on the contexts in which they use
and regulate their languages, and in monolinguals, language processing
efficiency receives a boost from explicit, online engagement of cognitive
control. PI Frederiksen will use behavioral and electrophysiological methods to
test how sign-speech bilinguals process discourse in their dominant language
compared to monolinguals and speech-speech bilinguals. The bilingual groups will
vary in proficiency and in linguistic circumstances so as to enable examination
of how processing of the dominant language is affected by bilingualism-induced
changes to general executive control and by the interactions between different
cognitive control abilities. In particular, the project investigates how
language processing and cognitive control may interact differently as a function
of sensory-motor language modality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.