* 2005286
* Geometric Aspects of Field Theories and Lattice Models
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Daniel Freed, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2024
* USD 428,963.00

These research projects form part of an ongoing vigorous interaction between
geometry and theoretical physics. The engagement of mathematics with other
sciences, and of science with mathematics, is a continual source of fruitful
ideas with long-term beneficial consequences for society. We can measure these
consequences by looking backwards: our current technology and economy rely on
the foundation of basic research from past decades and centuries. The mixing of
different disciplines is mutually beneficial. As a mathematician the PI has a
particular goal to bring structures and intuitions from physics into
mathematics. The research has many facets designed to do just that.
Specifically, we will work on foundational issues in geometric formulations of
quantum field theory. The projects are a mix of specific problems and general
structural investigations. The techniques are mathematical, often with
inspiration from physics. This work has ramifications for pure geometry as well
as applications to questions in physics, such as classification of phases of
matter. This award supports graduate students working with the PI participate in
some of these projects, and they also carry out their own separate projects
within this broad field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We work within the Axiom System
for field theories initiated by Segal and Atiyah in the 1980s. These geometric
axioms have been refined and extended in many directions since, and we seek to
continue this process. For example, the usual axioms evaluate a theory on a
single manifold or bordism, whereas many computations involve evaluation on a
family of manifolds, the axiomatics of which we will investigate further. In
some ways a field theory is akin to a representation of a Lie group. In Lie
theory unitary structures play a prominent role, and so too does unitarity in
ordinary quantum field theory. While the geometric axioms, especially for
topological field theories, include locality in a strong form, there is no
corresponding extended notion of unitarity. This is an area we will investigate
further. Other aspects of general theory to pursue relate to non-topological
invertible field theories and theories which are topological modulo invertible
theories. This project also has several lines of inquiry related to specific
theories. For example, we have a plan to construct three-dimensional topological
Chern-Simons theory as a fully extended theory. We also aim to investigate
dynamics in a geometric incarnation of the two-dimensional Ising model. Finally,
we aim to construct lattice models which correspond to invertible field
theories, part of a larger effort to develop a geometric theory of discrete
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.