* 2005632
* Category I: Anvil - A National Composable Advanced Computational Resource for the Future of Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2026
* Xiaohui Carol Song, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2026
* USD 24,478,773.00

As computing permeates nearly all fields of science and engineering, there is an
exponential growth of computing needs from both the traditional computing-
intensive domains and the emerging new and more diverse fields of research. The
rise of machine learning and artificial intelligence applications has
accelerated and broadened the use of computational resources from research in
creating new and more environmentally friendly materials to improving medicine
in our fight against deadly diseases. There are three main challenges to meeting
this rapidly evolving landscape of national computational needs: a shortage of
capacity, increasingly diverse applications, and computational literacy and
training. This project aims to meet these challenges and transform the way
computing is delivered by developing and deploying a composable advanced
computing resource, Anvil, to the national research community to significantly
increase both the computing capacity and accessibility. Anvil integrates a
large-capacity high-performance computing (HPC) cluster with a comprehensive
ecosystem of software, access interfaces, programming environments, and
composable services to form a seamless environment able to support a broad range
of current and future science and engineering applications. Through a carefully
designed student training program and partnerships with regional and other
universities, XSEDE, and Women in HPC programs, this project will develop
computing competency in the next-generation workforce, and engage and train a
broader audience including underrepresented students at minority-serving and
EPSCoR (Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research)
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Built with a forward-looking architecture
with a high core count, and improved memory bandwidth and I/O, Anvil can
effectively support traditional HPC with fast turnaround for high throughput,
mid-scale computation jobs. Anvil consists of 1000 128-core computing nodes
based on the next-generation AMD Epyc “Milan" architecture that can deliver a
total peak performance of 5.3 Petaflops. Each node has 256 GB of memory, and a
100 gigabits/second bandwidth from the Mellanox HDR InfiniBand interconnect,
allowing multiple jobs of up to 1024 cores to be run at full speed over the
interconnect fabric. These nodes are complemented by 32 large-memory nodes with
1 TB of RAM each, and 16 Nvidia GPU nodes with 4 “Volta Next” GPUs per node. The
GPU nodes are capable of 1.57 petaflops of single-precision performance to
support machine learning and a wide range of current and future science and
engineering applications. Anvil’s multiple tiers of storage systems include a
long-term archive, persistent file and campaign storage, a 10 PB scratch file
system, a 3 PB flash burst buffer, and object storage to support a variety of
workflows and storage needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anvil will lower the barrier
to entry to advanced computing CI by providing interactive computing and desktop
environments that ease the transition for users from diverse domains new to HPC.
By providing feature-rich interactive environments such as Open OnDemand and
ThinLinc, users can rapidly become productive on Anvil through Linux and Windows
desktops, or familiar tools through their browser (e.g., Jupyter, RStudio).
Complex scientific software environments and application stacks will be
supported via containers orchestrated within a powerful composable subsystem.
Anvil supports cloud-bursting of computational workloads as well as use of
public cloud machine learning platforms including GPU and FPGA accelerators and
software tools to automate hyperparameter tuning and algorithm selection for
exploratory ML research. An existing production-quality science gateway at
Purdue will support XSEDE researchers to share their data and tools online and
facilitate easy access to Anvil and other XSEDE resources in classroom
instruction and training activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.