* 2005747
* Scalable Production of Radiative Cooling Paint for Thermal Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Nanfang Yu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2023
* USD 366,459.00

This grant supports research that will contribute new knowledge related to
large-scale manufacturing of radiative cooling paints, promoting both the
progress of science and advancing national prosperity and sustainability.
Radiative cooling is a strategy to provide electricity-free cooling by fully
reflecting sunlight and effectively emitting heat to the cold sky: a net cooling
effect can be realized without using any electricity. It has the potential to
reduce electricity consumption and CO2 generation for air conditioning in
buildings and vehicles. Conventional approaches for manufacturing radiative
cooling coatings demand complex and high-cost thin-film deposition processes,
which hinder large-scale applications. This award supports fundamental research
to provide needed knowledge for the development of a room temperature solution-
based technique to produce radiative cooling porous polymer paints. The new
process will enable fast, large-scale, and low-cost manufacturing of polymeric
radiative cooling paints without using organic solvents. The paints will have
potential applications in building, automotive, food, chemical, and
pharmaceutical industries, which benefits the US economy and society. This
research involves several disciplines including manufacturing, optics, polymer
science, and material science. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively impact
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radiative cooling can alleviate
several disadvantages in existing cooling techniques, such as high consumption
of electricity, and usage of ozone-depleting and greenhouse gases. The research
team will conduct fundamental studies to bridge the knowledge gap between
scientific concept of radiative cooling and scalable manufacturing of high-
performance and low-cost cooling coatings. Specifically, the team will: 1)
conduct full-wave simulations to understand the interactions between solar and
thermal radiations and porous polymeric materials; 2) develop scalable solution-
based manufacturing methods to produce porous polymer radiative cooling neutral-
colored and colorful paints, understanding effects of various parameters, such
as solution concentration, vapor pressure, and temperature, on the morphology
and performance of the porous paints; and 3) conduct field tests to quantify the
radiative cooling capabilities of the paints under various environmental and
meteorological conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.