* 2005443
* Integrating networked large datasets into undergraduate teaching and research through a collaborative workshop with EREN, NEON and Project EDDIE
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Laurel Anderson, Belmont University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2024
* USD 99,998.00

Large-scale ecological questions are best answered using networked research
approaches. Networked research promotes cooperative data collection with
standard methods by multiple research teams working at different sites across
large areas. Networked research and the large, complex datasets that emerge
present new research and teaching opportunities for faculty at smaller,
teaching-focused institutions. However, faculty at primarily undergraduate
institutions (PUIs) face challenges to engaging independently due to a lack of
time, personnel, and financial resources. It is vital that we overcome these
barriers so that faculty can provide students with access to networked research
experiences that will prepare them for scientific careers. This project brings
together faculty from undergraduate teaching-focused institutions, including
members of the well-established Ecological Research as Education Network (EREN).
EREN will collaborate with experts on the open data provided by the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and researchers and educational material
creators from Project EDDIE (Environmental Data-Driven Inquiry &amp;
Exploration). Intentional, focused EREN-NEON-EDDIE partnerships will allow these
organizations to better meet their shared goal of increased understanding of
large-scale ecological phenomena, and will create new teaching materials to
improve student data literacy and launch networked research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty participants from PUIs will gather for a
3-day/3-night workshop at Belmont University in Nashville, TN, in June 2020 that
is focused on three themes: (1) Expand the NEON user community by increasing
participation of PUI faculty and students, (2) Develop new teaching modules in
collaboration with Project EDDIE leaders based on NEON and EREN datasets that
enhance data literacy of undergraduate students, and (3) Identify new
complementary research projects using data from both EREN and NEON to address
large-scale research questions. The workshop outcomes include open access papers
on best practices for improving PUI faculty large dataset skills, meeting
generalized student learning goals, and assessment strategies for data literacy
in large-scale ecology. At least three new teaching modules centered on NEON or
EREN datasets will be developed, tested, and made available. Also, at least
three novel EREN networked research project ideas will be developed to use of
NEON data and/or collect supplementary data in partnership with NEON to address
environmental and ecological questions. Faculty leaders of the teaching modules
and research projects will meet again in June 2021 to ensure development,
publication, and dissemination of these resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.