* 2005368
* Intrinsic rigid structure in groups and surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Spencer Dowdall, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2024
* USD 239,596.00

Award: DMS 2005368, Principal Investigator: Spencer D.
Dowdall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns two foundational branches of
mathematics: group theory, and low-dimensional topology/geometry. A group is an
algebraic framework that encodes symmetries of objects, such as the rigid
motions of space, the configurations of a Rubik's cube, or the symmetries of a
molecule. Low-dimensional topology and geometry concern the structure of space
itself, like the surface of the earth or the universe we live in, together with
inherent geometric features like curvature, distance, and volume. One way in
which these topics are linked is through the concept of a parameter space (such
as the geometric structures supported on a given object, or the configurations
of points in that object) and its symmetry group. This project will focus on two
important classes of examples in these contexts: group extensions, which are
ways of building new groups out of old, and mapping class groups of surfaces,
which are the symmetry groups for parameter spaces of hyperbolic structures on a
surface. The purpose of the project is to identify and study key structural
features, particularly rigid features that are invariant under perturbation or
reparametrization, as well as general features that emerge from random
constructions. This project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will
investigate geometric and dynamical aspects of free group and surface
automorphisms and explore how these interact with associated group extensions
and moduli spaces of geometric structures. Firstly, the project will study
cyclic extensions of surface groups and free groups. This entails the use of
veering triangulations to study low-dilatation pseudo-Anosov surface
homeomorphims, and the development of a parallel theory of veering
triangulations for free-by-cyclic groups that will illuminate features of free
group automorphisms. The project will also introduce a new universal attracting
tree for free-by-cyclic groups that will be used to encode important algebraic
and dynamical invariants. Secondly, the project will study hyperbolicity for
extensions of free groups and surface groups. Building on past results, the PI
will characterize when free group extensions are hyperbolic, and will study
algebraic features of randomly constructed free group extensions. By means of
analogy with Kleinian groups, the project will also develop a new theory of
geometrically finite subgroups of mapping class groups and connect this to the
budding theory of hierarchical hyperbolicity. Thirdly, the project will
investigate the moduli space of hyperbolic structures on a surface by
quantifying the prevalence of certain types of elements of the mapping class
group and by studying shrinking target properties of the geodesic and horocycle
flow. Finally, in a view towards more general surfaces, the project will explore
aspects of algebraic rigidity in mapping class groups of infinite-type surface
and dynamical rigidity for length spectra of billiard-style dynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.