* 2005244
* Design and Development:  Understanding the Contextual Factors that Impact Academic Change Through a Practice-Research Collaboration Supporting the NSF RED Projects
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Elizabeth Litzler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2023
* USD 376,535.00

Within the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education
community, we have seen repeated calls for changing the way we educate
undergraduate students. And yet, despite many years of funding and development,
change in STEM education is not pervasive. The purpose of this project is to
prepare faculty engaged in Revolutionizing Engineering Departments (RED)
projects to make academic change on their campuses, to build and support a
consortium of RED teams, and to study the process of academic change. The
project team, Revolutionizing Engineering Departments Participatory Action
Research (REDPAR), represents a unique practice-research partnership that links
practical, applied faculty development focused on making academic change with
research on the impact of contextual factors on academic change projects and the
diffusion of change tactics. The project will provide a practical changemaking
curriculum deployed through monthly RED Consortium calls, the annual RED
Consortium Meeting, individualized consulting, and the publication of REDPAR Tip
Sheets. In addition, the project includes the development of a new RED Start Up
Session, a full-day introduction to academic changemaking for RED teams in their
first year of funding. With the addition of the Adaptation track to the RED
Program, there is an opportunity to provide specific development support to
teams that are adapting existing academic change programs to their own contexts.
The research will use abductive qualitative analysis through the theoretical
frameworks of political opportunity theory, social movement schools, and social
network theory. These findings will improve our understanding of the role of
contextual factors, a key to improving change agents’ ability to predict which
change tactics are likely to be most effective within their local institutional
environment. The practice-research collaboration will enable both Rose-Hulman
Institute of Technology and the University of Washington to contribute to the
national conversation on how to make academic change
happen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the need for systemic change in STEM higher
education is clear, it has also proven difficult to achieve in a sustainable
manner. Even when one department or institution has success with a change
project, these changes might not be adopted by other institutions, resulting in
small-scale rather than systemic changes. In order to address this problem, this
research will examine how contextual factors influence the adaptation of change
strategies. This research will examine how the RED teams learn from both the
practice side of REDPAR as well as each other, to gain insight into how
contextual factors influence the diffusion of change tactics. With regard to
research, the project team will tackle new research areas that focus on the role
of contextual factors on academic change projects, including 1) contextual
factors that may explain variations in strategy and outcomes across the RED
teams; 2) contextual factors that influence the adoption of change tactics
taught by a social movement school (i.e., the Making Academic Change Happen
curriculum); 3) the types of academic change tactics that are highly
transferable between higher education institutions; and 4) the contextual
factors that impact the transfer of academic change tactics between
institutions. Our research will increase our understanding of how to leverage
social networks to propagate change projects effectively. This project will
share results from the research conducted with RED teams to the higher education
community. By broadly sharing these results, as well as the change curriculum,
we see high potential for replication by non-RED
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.