* 2005829
* Working Toward Equitable Organizations: Building Capacity for Leadership of Color in Outdoor and Environmental Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jedda Foreman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,999,323.00

Implicit bias and inequities limit the quality, effectiveness, and widespread
acceptance of the outdoor and environmental science education field. The field
continues to struggle to find resonance with the most tenacious concerns and
challenges of communities of color, especially with regards to environmental
issues that disproportionately impact the health and economies of these
communities. In a time of calls to action to dismantle systemic racism and bias,
there is a renewed interest in solution driven approaches to address matters of
equity, inclusion, and cultural relevance in education and within organizational
change frameworks. This Innovations in Development project will develop and test
a model to build individual and organizational capacities to create and sustain
equitable, inclusive, culturally relevant workplaces and learning environments,
and support professionals of color currently in positions in outdoor science
programs and may be at risk of leaving the field. With capacity building support
for systems change, the model will help organizations to lead with equity as
they plan for the future. The need for this work could not be timelier. If
successful, the knowledge gleaned from the Working Toward Equitable
Organizations model could inform future efforts to transform the field through
institutional changes that result in a more diverse STEM workforce at all levels
of leadership and inclusive programs and practices that support STEM learning
and engagement in outdoor and environmental science education programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the three-year project duration, the project will be
centered on two strands: (1) Support for Organizational Systems and (2)
Professionals of Color Engagement. For the first strand, two cohorts of outdoor
science program leaders will engage in intensive reflection, professional
learning, and development. They will consider all aspects of their work through
an equity lens, develop action plans, and make necessary adjustments to
curricula, guiding documents, and practices. For the second strand, a cohort
model will be used to create professional learning and engagement communities
for professionals of color in outdoor science programs as they navigate the
challenges associated with being in the minority in a predominately white-
dominated field. In addition, a rigorous research study will be conducted to
examine how the professional learning model contributes to changes in
organizations to create more inclusive and equitable career paths for
professionals of color and will describe under what conditions outdoor science
programs are able to make institutional change. A culturally responsive
evaluation will inform the design and development of the model and assess its
effectiveness. Together, the evaluation and research will identify promising
aspects of the work and directions for future scaling. The project will develop
and document a scalable model for program leaders and professionals of color
that builds the capacity of organizations to promote equity, inclusion, and
cultural relevance. It is poised to impact twenty organizations nationwide, 60
professionals of color and ultimately, 200,000 students
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is funded
by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance
new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.