* 2005090
* Folding, crumpling and entangling of sheets and filaments
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Arshad Kudrolli, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 487,800.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to study large shape
transformations of thin sheets and filaments when twisted while being held under
tension, using noninvasive 3D laser and x-ray scanning techniques. The study
will relate the evolution of the structure to its strength in terms of its
torsional response far above the onset of initial buckling and after they come
in self-contact. The study will focus on complementary hyperelastic materials
which can stretch significantly compared to their size, and inextensible
materials which bend and deform plastically. The element-level measurements of
the internal structure will be analyzed in terms of physical models which
incorporate their geometry and elasticity response. Fundamental understanding of
the shape and strength of elastomers under large deformations will impact the
development of a wide range of materials, including functional yarns and
synthetic tissues. The results will be published in peer reviewed journals and
will increase scientific knowledge in the field of condensed matter physics and
will be disseminated freely via the internet. The project work will support
undergraduate student internships and the research work of graduate students
towards their dissertations. The research and mentoring activity will result in
educating undergraduate and graduate students pursuing careers in STEM related
disciplines, and outreach activities to K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is
to study topological transformations of thin sheets and filaments as they are
driven to collapse and self-packing under extreme boundary loading. The geometry
as a function of applied boundary loading will be obtained using noninvasive 3D
laser and x-ray scanning techniques and characterizing the surface curvatures
and energetics. The study will focus on complementary reversible and
irreversible strain-transformed materials in the nonperturbative deformation
regime beyond the reach of classical elasticity theories. A filament model based
on the origami kinematics will be developed to explain the emergence of self-
folds, twist localization and helical wrapping. Damage networks will be analyzed
with random and spatially correlated fold algorithms to identify the processes
that shape sheet singularities, and their compliance under repeated quenching
using torque measurements. The relative contribution of the elasticity of the
elements and the contact mechanics will be probed to understand the shaping of
yarns and tissues. The results will be published in peer reviewed journals and
will increase scientific knowledge in the field of condensed matter physics,
biomaterials, and rapid prototyping. The research and mentoring activity will
result in educating multi-generational groups of students pursuing careers in
STEM related disciplines. The project work will support undergraduate student
internships and the research work of graduate students towards their
dissertations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DMR grant supports research on
topological transformation of sheets and filaments under extreme stress with
funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in the Division of
Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.