* 2005353
* Geometry of Subgroups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Genevieve Walsh, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 264,794.00

A group is an algebraic object that is the collection symmetries of a
geometrical object. For instance, for a square the set of successive rotations
by 90 degrees in the plane is a collection of symmetries and yields a group of
size 4. One useful way of describing a group is via what is known as a
presentation, with generators and relations between the generators completely
describing the group. For example, the collection of all integers is an infinite
group that is generated by a single element, namely the integer 1. If a group
has a finite presentation (with a finite number of generators and a finite
number of relations) then it is easier to understand, and easier to solve
problems about that group. In addition, a group is called coherent if it enjoys
the stronger property that every finitely generated subgroup is finitely
presented. Many of the best understood groups are coherent: free groups, surface
groups, and 3-manifold groups are all coherent. This project aims to understand
when groups are coherent and to find geometric indicators of subgroups that are
witnesses to incoherence. This project advances the field by investigating
geometrically wild subgroups of seemingly well-behaved groups, which can be
difficult to find. The project includes work in education, and the PI is helping
to organize conferences and schools that enhance the training of the next
generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to investigate the coherence of
several interesting classes of groups, including groups that are expected to be
coherent and groups which are expected to be incoherent. This project addresses
fundamental and difficult problems about incoherence and the geometry of
subgroups. One of the projects is a key step to a well-known conjecture that
hyperbolic groups with Sierpinski carpet boundary are virtually Kleinian.
Another is a newer conjecture, that groups which act geometrically on the
product of two trees are incoherent. Solving these conjectures will shed
substantial light on understanding when a group is the fundamental group of a
3-manifold, and also on the intricate subgroup structure of important classes of
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.