* 2005327
* Geometry and topology of 4-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* R. Inanc Baykur, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 284,129.00

The overarching goal of this project is to develop a deeper understanding of the
structure of four dimensional manifolds, which are geometric objects locally
modeled on the four-dimensional space-time we live in. Smooth, symplectic and
complex structures on these objects are broadly featured in theoretical physics:
for example, in classical mechanics, particle physics, string theory, and
quantum field theory. This project combines modern mathematical tools to explore
similarities and differences of four dimensional manifolds equipped with such
structures. The research program will invoke various new ideas and techniques
that create leverage to address a number of important problems through a study
of algebraic relations between curves on surfaces, which is fairly accessible to
graduate and advanced undergraduate students. The broader impacts of this
endeavor are through mentoring and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
research project in low dimensional geometry and topology, aiming to provide new
insight to a variety of profound questions on smooth and symplectic four-
manifolds, contact three-manifolds and their fillings. A central goal of the
project is to explore the existence of exotic smooth and symplectic structures
in dimension four, with an eye towards deriving sensible classification schemes.
Some of the projects are contriving novel constructions of exotic rational and
ruled surfaces, fake symplectic projective planes, ball quotients and Calabi-Yau
surfaces, an in-depth study of the geography of surface bundles over surfaces,
and investigations of various stable classification schemes in dimension four.
The research program will draw from the fields of topology, geometry, analysis
and algebra, where gauge theory, new mapping class group techniques and
symplectic surgeries recently discovered by the PI and his collaborators will
play vital roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.