* 2005108
* Chiral Spin Textures in Magnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kai Liu, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 519,782.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic moments in magnets can form various
configurations known as spin textures, such as domain walls where the moments
form a winding configuration connecting adjacent domains with different
magnetization directions. Usually, the rotational sense of the moments in spin
textures is expected to be achiral, where the left- and right-handed rotations
are equally possible. In certain magnetic thin films, the broken inversion
symmetry of atomic structure at the interface between magnetic and heavy metal
layers leads to an interfacial effect which lifts the chiral degeneracy and
stabilizes chiral spin structures such as spin spirals, chiral domain walls or
magnetic skyrmions. These chiral spin textures exhibit a preferred handedness
and fascinating topological characteristics. Their extraordinary properties
provide new insights into fundamental problems of magnetism and exciting
potentials for novel magnetic technologies. This project aims at significantly
advancing the field by unlocking a number of degrees of freedom for a better
understanding and control of such spin textures. Several novel spin textures are
investigated, including exotic types of skyrmions and chiral domain walls in
2-dimensional thin films and topological spin textures such as Mobius bands in
3-dimensional magnetic structures. They have the potential to fundamentally
transform the energy landscape for future information storage. This project
provides valuable training opportunities for students in university as well as
national laboratory and other facilities. The principal investigator actively
engages in a variety of efforts to broaden participation from underrepresented
groups through course offering, public lectures, exchange visits, and
professional conference organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Chiral spin textures are investigated to demonstrate a
number of new degrees of freedom to better control them, including antiskyrmion
Hall angle, topological number, chemisorbed species, and 3-dimensional
topological configuration. Anisotropic Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction is
utilized to stabilize antiskyrmions in magnetic thin films. The antiskyrmion
Hall angle is explored for controlling skyrmion trajectory or topological
sorting, which can be potentially used for designing complex skyrmionics
devices. High winding number skyrmions are demonstrated, which unlocks the
topological number as a new degree of freedom that may support novel topological
functionalities in logic devices. Effects of chemisorbed species under vacuum
onto ferromagnet films are studied to induce chiral domain walls and enable
direct writing of skyrmions without magnetic or electric fields. Chemisorptions
of low atomic number atoms and organic molecules are studied to induce
reversible switching of magnetic chirality and tuning of perpendicular magnetic
anisotropy. Novel types of 3-dimensional topological spin textures such as
Mobius bands are fabricated and their topological characters are investigated.
These novel spin textures offer new mechanisms for robust and low dissipation
information storage, which is well aligned with grand challenges for future
nanoelectronics. This project includes a wide variety of efforts to broaden
participation from underrepresented groups. Students involved receive excellent
exposure to research experience in academia, government laboratory and other
research facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DMR grant supports research on
chiral spin structure in magnetic nanoparticles with funding from the Condensed
Matter Physics (CMP) and the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Programs in
the Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.