* 2005343
* Nonlinear Wave Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Mark Ablowitz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 260,000.00

Nonlinear wave motion relates to the study of how high-power signals are
transmitted and occur widely in applications. Some of the applications include
surface water waves, rogue waves in the ocean, tsunamis, optical waves such as
those that occur in waveguides and lasers, acoustic waves, and associated shock
waves. This research effort focuses on solving a number of open problems that
will substantially extend the ability of mathematicians to explain the behavior
of large power wave phenomena that arise widely in applications while developing
a deeper understanding of this behavior. A postdoctoral associate and
undergraduate students will be trained through active participation in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical analysis of nonlinear wave
motion presents difficulties because the underlying equations are nonlinear for
which there is far less mathematical understanding than small power linear
waves. One of the methods that can be used to analyze a class of nonlinear wave
equations discussed in this proposal is termed the inverse scattering transform
(IST). The PI has experience with this method and has found new classes of
physically significant equations with interesting underlying symmetries to which
IST can be applied. The method also applies to multidimensional equations and
associated solutions which decay in all directions. Key properties of these
latter solutions will be understood, and they can be connected to fundamental
equations in quantum mechanics and optics. Research will also be conducted on a
class of waves called dispersive shock waves (DSWs). DSWs are shock waves that
are dispersive in nature; the underlying equations are dispersive not
dissipative. Consequently, DSWs are not like atmospheric shock waves which are
are strongly affected by dissipation. DSWs arise in many applications including
water waves, nonlinear optics, plasma physics, and Bose-Einstein condensation
amongst many others. The theory of DSWs will be extended in order to obtain
improved approximations to the underlying equations in one dimension and a
detailed multidimensional analysis will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.