* 2005731
* Tinkering and Making Strategies to Engage Children and Families in Creating with Code
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mike Petrich, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2024
* USD 766,255.00

There is a national need to expand opportunities to learn coding and
computational thinking in informal science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education. These skills are increasingly needed in STEM
disciplines. As young people learn to code, they engage in computational
thinking concepts and practices which are problem solving strategies that
include repeated process (iterative) design skills. This project promotes
innovation by designing and developing activities for tinkering spaces (a space
filled with materials for hands-on exploration of STEM) combined with coding in
informal learning organizations such as museums, and community centers. The
project supports both tinkering and making as methods to meaningfully
incorporate computational thinking in STEM learning experiences. The tinkering
approach to learning is characterized by hands-on, trial and error engagement.
Making is similar to tinkering with additional attention to learning with peer
groups. The long-term goal of the project is to enable informal educators to
engage in STEM programming with youth and families from underrepresented groups.
The project brings together interdisciplinary teams from the Department of
Information Science at the University of Colorado Boulder (CU Boulder), the
Tinkering Studio at the Exploratorium, and the Lifelong Kindergarten research
group at the Massachusetts Institution of Technology. In collaboration with
local partner sites, the project team will design and disseminate a collection
of six computational tinkering activity areas that engage learners in creative
explorations using a combination of physical objects and computational code. The
team will develop visual coding "microworlds" for each of the activity areas,
specialized sets of coding blocks designed to provide scaffolding. Additionally,
the project team will design and develop facilitation guides to document these
activities and facilitation strategies, as well as workshops to better support
facilitators in making and tinkering spaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
enhances knowledge building through investigations of what instructional
supports informal educators need to develop effective facilitation practices
that engage underrepresented youth and families in STEM computational learning
experiences. Study participants will include informal educators in museum,
library, and community-based settings with varying backgrounds and experiences
facilitating computing activities. The project team will also engage youth and
families from underrepresented groups through collaborative efforts with
community-based partners. Research questions include: 1) What challenges and
barriers do informal learning educator, face to engage their learners in design-
based activities with computing? 2) What supports informal learning educators to
take on key facilitation practices that support children and families in
computational tinkering activities? 3) In jointly engaging in these
computational tinkering activities, how do the activities and informal learning
educators’ facilitation of these activities impact children’s and families’
development of computational tinkering and identities as creators and learners
with computing? To answer these research questions the project will use
qualitative ethnographic methods to study the developing interactions between
learners and facilitators at three local sites. Comparative case studies of
facilitators across the local partner sites will also be used to examine what
supports facilitators to take on key facilitation practices. Data sources will
include participant observation of facilitators and families, documentation in
the form of photos, videos, and audio recordings, project artifacts, bi-monthly
short surveys with reflective prompts, and interviews with facilitators and
families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.