* 2005518
* Interactions of 3- and 4-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Alexander Zupan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,346.00

Topology is the study of abstract spaces with properties that are unchanged by
deformations such as bending, stretching, and twisting, but not breaking, and
low-dimensional topology involves spaces (called manifolds) that locally look
like 2-, 3-, or 4-dimensional Euclidean space. Low-dimensional topology has a
wide range of real-world applications, including deep connections to theoretical
physics and quantum computing. In addition, topology has applications to data
science; researchers understand how to interpret a large data set as a
topological space in order to gain insights by studying the topological shape of
that data. While our world is 3-dimensional in nature, the evolution of a
3-dimensional object over a period of time gives rise to a 4-dimensional space,
in which time constitutes a fourth degree of freedom. Topology in dimension
three has seen an explosion of activity over the last several decades, reaching
a peak with Grigory Perelman's proof of the Poincaré conjecture in 2003, the
only resolved problem of the seven Millennium Problems posed by the Clay
Mathematics Institute. In contrast, the topology of 4-dimensional manifolds has
become an increasingly active area of research, with many fundamental problems
still open. This research project involves adapting ideas from dimension three
to discover novel approaches to these 4-dimensional problems. The award provides
funds to support research by graduate students. The award will also support the
Great Plains Alliance, a program initiated by the PI to connect graduate
students with speaking opportunities at nearby
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two foundational open problems in 4-manifold
topology are the smooth 4-dimensional Poincaré Conjecture, which asserts that
every closed 4-manifold homotopy equivalent to the standard 4-sphere is
diffeomorphic to the standard 4-sphere, and the slice-ribbon conjecture, which
posits that any knot bounding an embedded disk in the 4-ball also bounds an
immersed ribbon disk in the 3-sphere. This project describes a varied set of
problems interweaving ideas from knot theory, 3-manifolds, and smooth 4-manifold
topology. The PI’s prior work includes two major collaborative contributions in
this area, demonstrating that a large family of homotopy 4-spheres is
diffeomorphic to the standard smooth 4-sphere, and developing far-reaching
connections between 3-dimensional structures and 4-manifold trisections. The
current work involves four main problems. First, the PI will characterize a
family of knots satisfying an intermediate condition between being slice and
being ribbon. Second, the PI will pursue a new approach to the Powell
conjecture, concerning the generation of the group of diffeomorphisms of the
3-sphere leaving a Heegaard surface invariant. Third, the PI will use bridge
trisections to address a Kirby problem related to representing second homology
classes of 4-manifolds with smoothly embedded 2-spheres, and finally, the PI
will adapt ideas from Heegaard splittings of 3-manifolds to trisections of
4-manifolds in order to better understand handle decompositions of exotic
4-manifolds. The underlying theme of this work is an approach that
simultaneously integrates 3- and 4-dimensional techniques in order to obtain new
insights into long-standing open problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.