* 2005790
* Baltimore Online Algebra for High School Students in Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Michael Falk, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,360,998.00

Research shows that algebra is a major barrier to student success, enthusiasm
and participation in STEM for under-represented students, particularly African-
American students in under-resourced high schools. Programs that develop ways to
help students master algebra concepts and a belief that they can perform algebra
may lead to more students entering engineering careers. This project will
provide an online engineering program to support 9th and 10th grade Baltimore
City Public Schools students, a predominantly low-income African-American
cohort, to develop concrete goals of becoming engineers. The goals of the
program are to help students with a growing interest in engineering to maintain
that interest throughout high school. The project will also support students
aspire to an engineering career. The project will develop in students an
appreciation of requisite courses and skills, and increase self-efficacy in
mathematics. The project will also develop a replicable model of informal
education capable of reinforcing the mathematical foundations that students
learn during the school day. Additionally, the project will broaden
participation in engineering by being available to students during out-of-school
time and by having relaxed entrance criteria compared to existing opportunities
in supplemental engineering curricula. The project is a collaboration between
the Baltimore City Public Schools, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics
Laboratory, Northrop Grumman Corporation, and Expanded School-Based Mental
Health programs to support students both during and after participation. The
project will benefit society by providing skills that will allow high school
students to become members of tomorrow's highly trained STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will test whether an informal, scaffolded
online algebra-for-engineering program increases students' mastery and self-
efficacy in mathematics. The research will advance knowledge regarding informal
education by applying Social Cognitive Career Theory as a framework for
measuring program impact. The theoretical framework will aid in identifying
mechanisms through which students with interest in engineering might persist in
maintaining this interest through high school via algebra skill mastery and
increased self-efficacy. The project will recruit 200 youth from the Baltimore
City Public Schools to participate in the project over three years. Qualitative
data will be collected to assess how student and school socioeconomic factors
impact implementation, student engagement, and outcomes. The research will
answer the following questions: 1) What effect does program participation have
on math mastery? 2) What direct and indirect effects do program completion and
supports have on students' mathematics self-efficacy? 3) What direct and
indirect effects do program components have on engineering career goals by the
end of the program? 4) What direct and indirect effects does math self-efficacy
have on career goals? 5) To what extent are the effects of program participation
on engineering career goals mediated by math self-efficacy and engineering
interest? 6) How do school factors relate to the implementation of the program?
7) What socioeconomic-related factors relate to the regularity and continuation
of student participation in the program? The quantitative methods of data
analysis will employ descriptive and multivariate statistical methods.
Qualitative data from interviews will be analyzed using an emergent approach and
a coding scheme guided by theoretical constructs. Project results will be
communicated to scholars and practitioners. The team will also share information
through school newsletters and parent communication through Baltimore City
Public Schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.