* 2005189
* Ion and ligand interactions of hyaluronic acid
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Omar Saleh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 477,496.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Hyaluronic acid is a biological molecule with a
range of functions. It is an integral component of cartilage, where it plays a
biomechanical role in promoting healthy joint function. Further, since it can be
obtained in large quantities, and can be chemically modified, it has become
widely studied for biomedical and biomaterial applications. These biological and
technological roles rely on hyaluronic acid’s physical features: it is a long,
linear polymer that is highly charged and water soluble, and it has a variety of
interactions, both with salt ions and with biomolecular binding partners, that
modify its structure and behavior. However, compared to other biopolymers (such
as DNA or cytoskeletal components), the basic physical behavior of hyaluronic
acid has not been extensively studied.&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the present
project is to perform precision measurements of the physical behavior of
hyaluronic acid, and its modification by ions and other molecules. The
researchers will carry out such experiments using modern biophysical approaches,
and interpret them using advanced theoretical methods. Experiments will be
focused on two areas: first, researchers will quantify electrostatic effects of
salt on hyaluronic acid behavior, and particularly pursue understanding of
physiologically-relevant mixed-salt conditions on molecular shape. Second,
researchers will investigate the hypothesis that dramatic shape-changes can be
induced in hyaluronic acid upon binding to specific biomolecular partners.
&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the scientific work in this project will result in direct,
quantitative estimates of the role of salt and biomolecular-binding in affecting
hyaluronic acid behavior; in turn, this will lead to better understanding of the
molecule’s various biological roles, and will permit rational engineering of
hyaluronic acid in biomaterials environments. These scientific impacts are
complemented by a range of other benefits, notably including a major effort to
broaden graduate-student training through an exchange program with a German
university, focused on teaching modern computational methods to bioengineers and
biophysicists. Other benefits will accrue from collaboration with a national
lab, and enhancing STEM human resources through undergraduate student
training.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Hyaluronic acid, HA, is a long, linear, negatively-charged
polysaccharide with moderate conformational flexibility. It plays broad
biological roles, particularly in defining the mechanical and viscoelastic
properties of extracellular spaces. HA’s properties have also led to broad
investigation of its use as a synthetic biomaterial, e.g. forming injectables or
cell/tissue growth substrates. The polymeric properties of HA underlie these
biological and biotechnological roles, but are understudied. The overarching
goal of this proposal is to fill that gap in knowledge by performing high-
resolution physical measurements, supported by advanced theoretical
interpretation methods, of ion- and ligand-induced HA conformational behaviors.
The researchers will apply a unique single-molecule mechanics instrument to
carry out precision measurements of HA’s solution-mediated conformational and
mechanical properties. Specific goals include 1) exploiting machine-learning
methods to improve instrument capabilities in screening biomolecular elasticity;
2) validating and exploring a recent finding that HA conformation in mixed-ionic
conditions is dominated by an ‘ion jacket’ that screens the effect of bulk salt
concentration; and 3) studying the effects of specific biological ligands on HA
conformation, with a focus on ligands posited to induce a helix/coil transition
in the chain, and those that cause global chain swelling. Experimental results
will be interpreted with reference to analytical theories of solution
electrostatics and polymer bottle-brush behavior, as well as coarse-grained
molecular dynamics simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.