* 2005143
* Quantum Magnetism in Rare-Earth Honeycomb Lattices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* James Neilson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 333,433.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;“Quantum materials” are those which have
unusual properties arising from the quantum mechanical nature of electrons in
solids. In quantum magnets, it is the spin of the electrons which are engaged in
this quantum behavior. Quantum magnets often host wildly dynamic spins at very
low temperatures, and can be manipulated to form new quantum phases of matter
under various conditions, such as in a strong applied magnetic field. Through
this project, new quantum magnetic materials are synthesized and studied in such
extreme environments, with the goal of finding new quantum magnetic phenomena,
like a quantum spin liquid. The materials studied here are based on rare-earth
elements, which have traditionally been overlooked as key ingredients for
quantum magnets, but in reality give a much wider range of possibilities for
quantum behavior compared to traditional materials design approaches. This work
focuses on rare-earth based materials in which the spins are arranged into a
graphene-like geometry called the honeycomb lattice. The magnetic behavior of
these materials is explored in detail using a wide range of advanced techniques,
such as neutron scattering. This project advances the understanding of quantum
many-body systems and highlights new ways in which they can be realized in
nature. It also contributes to the training of highly qualified personnel in the
methods of materials synthesis and characterization. The training of the future
generation of materials scientists, particularly those well-versed in quantum
phenomena, is essential for future paradigm-shifting advances in materials
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Rare-earth based
honeycomb lattice materials are an unconventional class of quantum magnets. Due
to the presence of strongly quantum fluctuating spins, in combination with
anisotropic interactions arising from strong spin-orbit coupling, these
materials can host a different set of quantum phases than can be achieved in
traditional (3d transition-metal based) quantum magnets. This project will
investigate a range of phenomena which have been found to manifest in rare-earth
based honeycomb lattice materials, including quantum dimer magnetism leading to
field-induced Bose Einstein condensation, Ising-like quantum criticality, and
promising avenues to realize the highly entangled Kitaev quantum spin liquid.
The project involves the synthesis of bulk samples of rare-earth honeycomb
materials, with particular emphasis on single-crystal growth. These materials
are characterized by thermodynamic probes and inelastic neutron scattering.
Thermodynamics gives a road map of the phase diagrams, while inelastic neutron
scattering enables the understanding of the emergent quasi-particle excitations
and their evolution with varying applied magnetic field. The relatively weak
interaction energies of rare-earth materials enables the use of a powerful
method of determining the interaction parameters in these materials, via
theoretical modeling of field-polarized inelastic neutron scattering spectra.
This work has relevance to a broad range of other areas of physics research,
such as superfluid helium in porous media, superconductivity, and ultra-cold
atomic gases. The impacts of this work also extend beyond many-body quantum
physics; through this project, students who are part of underrepresented
minority groups in physics, are encouraged to explore the concept of magnetism
and phase transitions in materials and to gain hands-on research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant
supports research to understand a range of phenomena which have been found to
manifest in rare-earth based honeycomb lattice materials with funding from the
Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in DMR of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.