* 2005772
* Collaborative Research: Promoting Engagement in Informal STEM Learning as a Path to Employment for Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kristen Gillespie, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 945,539.00

Many people with autism are unemployed and isolated because they do not have
access to educational opportunities that support them in finding jobs that match
their potential. This research seeks to empower adolescents with autism to seek
out careers that are well-matched with their strengths and interests. Many
people with autism are interested in computing, a marketable skill. This project
builds from this interest by developing strategies to effectively engage
teenagers with autism. Although people with autism share a diagnosis, each
person is unique and has the capacity to become a visionary and transformer in
society in their own way. Teenagers with autism will be invited to participate
in a game design workshop hosted by an award-winning, not-for-profit Tech Kids
Unlimited. Teenagers often enjoy learning how to design games and can learn many
useful skills through design. During each workshop, teenagers will rate
different teaching strategies using a picture-based survey developed in
collaboration with people with autism. It is expected that teenagers with autism
who have difficulty focusing to be most engaged by strategies that include
multiple types of information (for example, pictures, text, and speech). The
team also expects those who are more focused to be most engaged by strategies
with fewer sources of information. By developing clear guidelines to help
educators match their teaching styles to how different students learn, the
project will help them engage youth more effectively. Through an iterative
process, the team will revise the game design workshop to make it more engaging
for people with different types of autism. New groups of teenagers with autism
will participate in improved game design workshops that include an internship in
a technology company. An important outcome is to understand which strategies are
engaging for young people with autism that help them develop the belief in their
skills needed to seek out fulfilling careers. This award is funded by the
Advanced Informal STEM Learning program which seeks to advance new approaches
to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM
learning in informal environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in
Service to Practice project has the following aims: 1) Identify evidence-based
strategies to engage youth with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in informal STEM
learning opportunities that are well matched to their attentional profiles, 2)
Determine if engaging youth with ASD in informal STEM learning opportunities
increases their STEM self-efficacy, and 3) Determine if engagement with STEM
internship activities is associated with increased interest in STEM careers and
career decision-making self-efficacy. Principles of Universal Design (UD) and
Mayer’s principles of effective multimedia instruction are frameworks employed
to identify instructional strategies that are emotionally engaging for youth
with diverse attentional profiles. The degree to which attentional differences
contribute to different patterns of emotional engagement with informal STEM
learning will be investigated. Guided by assessments of youth’s engagement with
different learning opportunities, “diversity blueprints” or specific
instructional strategies that help youth with diverse attentional profiles
engage will be developed. After identifying strategies to engage neurodivergent
(neurologically diverse) youth in informal STEM learning opportunities, the
extent to which these strategies generalize to STEM internship sites will be
explored. The team will study potential specificity of the types of contexts
that promote different types of self-efficacy, with engagement with
extracurricular STEM learning opportunities expected to preferentially target
STEM self-efficacy while engagement with internships targets career decision-
making self-efficacy. Although UD is often endorsed to promote STEM learning
among students with disabilities, the proposed research would be the first
iterative adaptation of instructional strategies designed to engage
neurodivergent teens in informal STEM learning guided by a systematic analysis
of how they engage with and feel about instructional strategies. Project
deliverables include workshops for local after-school program providers,
publications, a project website, and a multimodal guide of the process of
developing “diversity blueprints” and how to apply them for informal STEM
educators and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.