* 2005676
* AAVSO Workshop for Spectroscopic Observations: Empowering Amateur Astronomers
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Stella Kafka, American Association of Variable Star Observrs
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 01/31/2022
* USD 49,620.00

The primary goal of the workshop is to train up to 100 amateur astronomers in
how to use spectroscopy as a tool for astronomy, collect spectroscopic data, and
reduce and share them with the international variable star research community
through a well-established database organized by the American Association of
Variable Star Observers. Professional and experienced amateur astronomers will
organize and run the workshop and provide presentations and hands-on experience
with instrumentation and data reduction software, making recommendations for
best practices in spectroscopy. The workshop will increase the active engagement
of amateur observers in scientific projects, and will benefit the professional
community by developing a network of amateur astronomers trained in
spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop targets citizen astronomers,
providing training to enable their active participation in scientific projects.
The organizers will ask attendees to share educational resources from the
workshop within their local communities and to serve as a local resource to help
others become more skilled in spectroscopy. In addition, five high school
teachers from underserved communities will be recruited to participate in the
workshop. These educators will bring spectroscopic science into the classroom,
enhancing the scientific curriculum with technical knowledge and connections to
authentic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.