* 2005627
* Picard Groups and Duality in Chromatic Homotopy Theory at the Prime 2.
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Irina Bobkova, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2024
* USD 166,014.00

Algebraic topology studies shapes of objects and aims to answer the question:
how can we tell whether two objects are similar? In this field two objects are
considered to be similar if one of them can be continuously deformed into the
other. There are many examples which can be approached from the geometric point
of view: famously, a mug can be continuously deformed into a donut. But we are
only able to explicitly visualize objects which lie in spaces of small
dimension, up to 3 dimensions. In order to study objects lying in spaces of
larger dimension we need to approach the problem through the lens of algebra.
Algebraic topology assigns various algebraic invariants to geometric objects and
shapes in such a way that similar objects will have the same invariant. Then,
given two objects, we only need to compute their invariants in order to be able
to distinguish them. Algebraic topology itself is a theoretical subject which
develops new such invariants for understanding shapes, and studies their
properties. But the tools of algebraic topology work equally well regardless of
the dimension of the ambient space, or the size of the objects. Due to this,
they have numerous applications in physics, since problems in quantum physics
and relativity deal with objects in spaces of high dimension. These algebraic
invariants can also be applied to problems in the analysis of large data. A
large data set is an object in a space of very many dimensions, and since tools
of algebraic topology are insensitive to dimension, they are well suited to
exhibit useful properties of large data sets which might be difficult to see
with classical statistical tools. Broader impacts under this award include
seminar organization and events promoting the participation of women in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research projects concern chromatic
homotopy theory, which is a framework for identifying and explaining periodic
phenomena in stable homotopy groups of spheres. It introduces a filtration on
the stable homotopy category, and proposes to study the problem one chromatic
level and one prime at a time. Most of the current work in this field is focused
on chromatic level 2, with prime 2 being the hardest case. A collaborative
project will compute the Picard group of the K(2)-local category at the prime 2
and use this information to find the dualizing object for the K(2)-local
BrownComenetz duality. Another project plans to use SpanierWhitehead duality in
the K(2)-local category to prove a decomposition result for the K(2)-local
sphere spectrum. An additional collaborative effort aims to compute the Picard
groups of categories of modules over certain ring spectra in chromatic homotopy
theory, computing the homotopy groups of K(2)-local spectra of interest and
studying the transchromatic phenomena in GrossHopkins
duality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.