* 2005106
* ICASSP 2020 Student Travel Grant. To Be Held in Barcelona Spain, May 4-8, 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Pau Closas, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2021
* USD 25,000.00

The IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP) is an annual flagship conference of the IEEE Signal Processing Society
and is the world's largest and most comprehensive technical conference on signal
processing and its application, covering broad fields of signal processing. The
45th edition of this well-established international conference will be held in
Barcelona, Spain from May 4 to May 8, 2020. More than 3000 participants are
expected to attend this conference. The 2020 conference will feature world-class
presentations by internationally renowned speakers on cutting-edge topics and
provide a great opportunity for attendees to network with other researchers. In
addition, the conference will also feature several industry sessions and create
a forum to foster innovation and entrepreneurship by academia and industry.
Therefore, the conference will serve as a valuable event for U.S. graduate
students to connect with international experts in signal processing research and
to gain new knowledge for their future career development. To support training
of the next generation scientists and engineers working on signal processing for
various applications, this NSF grant will provide travel support for at least 25
students from U.S. institutions to attend the conference. The travel grants will
be awarded competitively to graduate students from U.S. institutions who will
present their accepted papers at the conference. The awardees will be selected
by a committee of the conference and the paper quality will be considered in the
selection process. Priority will be given to students from underrepresented
groups. The proposed graduate student travel support will have long-term and
broad impacts on signal processing research in U.S. institutions, with wide
range of applications covering communications, security, imaging, computer
vision, speech recognition, radar, sonar, etc.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.