* 2005314
* I-Corps:  Quantifiable Service Quality Firmware System
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Paul Ranky, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 49,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
technology to provide an in-depth downtime reduction analysis of computer-
numerical controlled machines (CNCs), Additive Manufacturing (AM)/3D printing
machines, computer-controlled appliances and complex engineered systems. The
results of this project will affect a very large number of US CNC manufacturing
facilities (over 19,000 CNC shops) as well as thousands of computer-controlled
appliance repair companies, saving millions of dollars annually for the
industry. The commercial potential of the project is is to minimize system
downtime using service quality improvements. These groups of methods are
analyzed and quantified using mathematical equations, algorithms, as well as
visualization methods and tools. The results also will have an impact on
manufacturing facilities and other complex engineered systems, such as robots,
and cobots (collaborative robots), that have several complex computer-
controlled, networked devices/instruments that need professional quality service
to avoid downtime and failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project based
on the development of technology for quantitative, predictive methods and tools
that utilize quality-related key performance indicators (KPIs), that can be
measured, calibrated, and enforced during service operations in computer-
numerical controlled machines (CNCs), additive manufacturing (AM)/3D printing
machines, and complex engineered systems. Currently, there is no method or tool
available for predicting the effectiveness or the level of success or risk of
the services provided. The methods utilized are not systems engineering-focused,
but rather financial accounting, and may or may not include reports of
historical data to indicate the status of engineering-focused services provided.
The technology under development is based on quantifiable service quality-
focused key process/performance indicators (KPIs), using mathematical models,
algorithms, and multimedia software visualization methods. This enables users to
quantify levels of product/process quality service. In addition, the platform
may be used to quantify and predict the product quality service as an
index.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.