* 2005226
* Regulatory compliance of marine protected areas
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Anastasia Quintana, Quintana, Anastasia C
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 143,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Steven Gaines
at University of California Santa Barbara, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating regulatory compliance in
natural resource management. Noncompliance and rule breaking can threaten the
effectiveness of resource governance and the sustainability of their associated
resource systems. In the world’s oceans for example, illegal fishing is
considered one of the greatest threats to marine ecosystems. Political science
theory predicts that self-governance (regulations devised and enacted by
resource users themselves) leads to high levels of compliance compared to “top-
down” regulations imposed by governments. However, this has never been
empirically examined at a large scale. This project tests whether self-
governance increases regulatory compliance with marine protected areas, a
widespread tool for fisheries management, through the analysis of a large
dataset collected by a partner organization, Rare. In addition to the training
of an early-career scientist, this award advances the fundamental behavioral and
political science of compliance, and has the potential to advance global
fisheries equity and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a
multidimensional model of regulatory compliance to compare compliance types and
extent under different governance arrangements, and contributes primarily to
common-pool resource theory, a theory of collective action for natural resource
management. Predictions based on either legitimacy or rational-choice models
have not been able to explain or predict compliance in natural resource
management, such as in the case of fisheries. A new multidimensional model of
compliance (“motivational postures model”) from social-ecological theory has
recently been proposed to understand compliance with state-implemented
regulations, which we use to compare the extent and type of compliance under
self-governance and top-down governance arrangements. This project uses a large
dataset collected by Rare for their Fish Forever program, with quantitative and
qualitative data on noncompliance in hundreds of sites where no-take marine
protected areas (areas where fishing is banned) have been implemented, along
with gear restrictions and other fishing regulations. Analysis of this large
dataset will be complemented by original mini-ethnographic case studies of
several select sites. This project challenges binary conceptualizations of
compliance, instead using a framework that engages with resistance, power, and
equity. This project contributes to fundamental research on human behavior
around co-managed resources, with broader implications for resource
sustainability and legitimacy of institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.