* 2005328
* Deformation, topology and geometry in low dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yair Minsky, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 444,795.00

The theory of surfaces interacts deeply with all parts of mathematics. The
confluence of topology, geometry, group theory, complex analysis and dynamics in
dimension two is a constant source of rich structure and influences many fields
both directly and by analogy. Because surfaces are simple and flexible, they
admit large parameter spaces of shapes. The study of these spaces is useful
directly in topology and geometry in all dimensions. The PI will explore the
geometry of the space of shapes of a surface, and the relationships between
flows within this more abstract space and the ways in which three-dimensional
structures are built out of families of two-dimensional structures. By way of
analogy, ideas in two and three dimensions have also inspired powerful
techniques in allied fields such as geometric group theory and dynamics. Part of
the PI's work will explore some of these connections. Graduate students funded
by the grant will, in addition to their research work, be trained in mathematics
education and outreach, preparing them for contributions to society through
higher education and other leadership roles. Additional activities of the PI and
his students and collaborators will include public educational activities for
local school children and their families, bringing cutting-edge mathematical
knowledge to the greater New Haven community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans
to study a number of aspects of the Weil-Petersson geometry of the Teichmuller
space of a surface, and its connections to the theory of 3-manifolds and more
broadly to group actions in other settings. Recent work of the PI and coauthors
has shed some new light on the study of the geodesic flow of the Weil-Petersson
metric on Teichmuller space, and its connection to the structure of fibered
3-manifolds. With these results in mind, the PI plans a more detailed study of
the coarse structure of the Teichmuller space as made visible by the cubical and
metric structure of its asymptotic cone. This point of view suggests interesting
questions about minimal surfaces in the Teichmuller space, and avenues toward
resolving the visibility problem for the WP geodesic flow. New connections of
Weil-Petersson geometry to the structure of fibered 3-manifolds and Thurston's
norm on homology hint at deeper structure which the PI plans to investigate. In
the theory of 3-manifolds, the deep interaction between decompositions along
surfaces, structure of curve complexes and mapping class groups, and hyperbolic
geometry continues to provide challenging questions. The PI will work on
developing a more complete theory for canonical decompositions of 3-manifolds,
focusing on the interactions of Heegaard splittings, fibrations and subsurface
projections. He will study the problem of finding uniform models for hyperbolic
manifolds and obtaining a priori bounds on skinning maps. The setting of
Heegaard splittings and handlebodies connects to a new approach on character
varieties of free groups, via a technique of graph folding in hyperbolic space.
Additional projects (some with students) include the study of hierarchically
hyperbolic spaces, mapping class groups of infinite-type surfaces, and relations
between hyperbolic earthquakes and the Teichmuller horocyclic
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.