* 2005815
* Creating a Teen Science Cafe Movement
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Michelle Hall, Science Education Solutions Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,567,674.00

In the 1990s, Science Cafes emerged that brought together people from all walks
of life with scientists in conversation over science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) topics. The cafes were popular as conversations were
informal in casual settings and engendered deep discussions. In 2007, Science
Education Solutions received a grant from NSF and began an experiment to see if
the adult science café model could be adapted to appeal to high school teens.
The program, Café Scientifique New Mexico, became very popular with teens in
towns across northern New Mexico. The blend of conversing with scientists about
interesting science topics in an out-of-school social setting and digging deeper
with hands on activities proved successful. The teen model was refined through
trial and error and formal evaluation over several years. Today it continues to
provide teens with a new perspective on the nature of science and a picture of
scientists as real people leading interesting lives. The Teen Science Café
Network (TSCN) was formed in 2012 with NSF funding to allow other individuals
and organizations to start their own versions of the Teen Science Café, adapted
to their local institutions and demographics. Five founding member organizations
around the United States formed the initial Network and each began creating
their own Teen Science Café programs. Today the TSCN is a dynamic, growing
community of practice spread across the country with the mission of connecting
high school teenagers with STEM and STEM experts via the science café model. The
network currently has approximately 133 member organizations in 46 states and
Canada. This project will move the network to a much larger scale by creating
organization and professional support structures to create a strategically
growing social movement with distributed leadership, organizational
infrastructure, and robust professional development for long-term stability with
a goal to increase the number of member organizations to 500 over five years.
Building on the literature on professional development for informal science
educators and the literature on network capacity building, network
sustainability, and scale, the project will also conduct research that will
inform the field about successful model diffusion. This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understanding of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project has
five objectives. The first is to re-structure the Teen Science Café Network
(TSCN) to a more distributed leadership model that will move the network to
long-term sustainability. The PI team will identify five experienced individuals
already leading strong café programs to become Guides for new sites. These
Guides will provide training, support, and mentorship to new network members.
Each Guide will have responsibility over a given year for mentoring two cohorts
of nine sites, allowing the network to increase in size over the next five
years. The second objective is to implement an interactive program of
professional development for new network members. The training will involve
approximately 15 hours of adult leader training focused on building skills
around teen engagement and café management. The third objective will be to
strategically engage all members in the network community of practice through
opportunities to participate in and lead ongoing learning with their peers.
Through webinars, Birds of a Feather groups and annual workshops and a Science
Events Summit, café leaders will actively hone professional skills and broaden
their personal network. Objective four is to broaden the involvement of
organizations and communities not currently in the network through strategic
recruitment of STEM professional societies, military youth programs, library
networks, and youth-serving organizations, among other organizations. Finally,
objective five is to implement a research agenda to contribute to the informal
learning knowledge base. The research will focus on how the project’s approach
to network growth and distributed leadership leads to effective scaling and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.