* 2005608
* Data Literacy with, for, and by Youth: Exploring How Teens Co-Design After-School Programs as Sites of Critical Data Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Mark Rosin, Pratt Institute
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,995.00

Youth generate data in the form of social media posts, and they are likely to
understand that these data can be used by others for multiple purposes. However,
they may be less likely to know that other personal data, such as records
related to shopping patterns or medical visits, can also be tracked, analyzed,
and used. Consequently, today's young people have a personal stake in their
ability to understand and critically question multiple types of data practices.
This project will advance knowledge regarding how informal educational
organizations can empower young people in a data-centric world. In partnership
with public libraries in New York City, Pratt Institute will develop a model for
supporting critical data literacy in informal settings. Critical data literacy
includes the ability to critique data practices throughout the data life cycle;
to situate data within broader contexts such as cyberinfrastructures and
societal trends; and to use data to answer questions and to achieve purposes
that are personally meaningful and important. To develop a model of informal
education that supports critical data literacy, the project team will co-design
data literacy sessions with teenagers in libraries. These data literacy sessions
will provide teens with opportunities to engage in critical data practices and
inquiry in the context of issues they identify as being important to them. The
project team will conduct research on the methods that support youths' co-design
of critical data literacy programs. This project will result in a model of a
youth-driven educational program that can be scaled and enacted in libraries and
informal settings nationwide, with the ultimate purpose of fostering a more
empowered, data-literate citizenry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
recruit 25 teenagers ages 13-17, including those from underrepresented groups,
to co-design and implement four to six 90-minute critical data literacy sessions
in a public library. The research team will use design-based participatory
research to study the process of co-design, and they will improve this co-design
process with three additional cohorts of 25 teenagers each. This study will
answer the following three research questions: (1) How can critical data
literacy be supported within the sociohistorical context of the public library
in ways that speak to young people? (2) How can the affordances of co-design
scaffold meaningful informal learning about critical data literacy? (3) What do
the designs and artifacts created by young people say about sustained engagement
and learning with regard to facets of critical data literacy? To answer these
questions, the research team will use thematic and descriptive coding to analyze
data sources such as interviews and focus groups with teens and library staff,
observations of critical data literacy sessions, youth-generated artifacts, and
surveys with youth participants. Empirical findings will be disseminated widely
through professional networks, conferences, and journals for informal educators,
educational researchers, and information scientists, and the co-design model
will be disseminated widely to practitioners of informal science education. This
project is funded by the Advanced Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program. As part
of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments, the AISL
program seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.