* 2005030
* LSAMP BD: Clemson University, LS SCAMP
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Cindy Lee, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,074,910.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce for the nation through their efforts at
significantly increasing the competitiveness and numbers of students from
historically underrepresented minority (URM) populations to successfully
complete high quality degree programs in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clemson
University proposes to establish a Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program to
significantly increase the recruitment, retention, and graduation of
underrepresented students in engineering and science with a focus on advanced
materials. Clemson University is a member of the Louis Stokes South Carolina
Alliance for Minority Participation (LS-SCAMP). The Clemson University BD (CUBD)
program will recruit a single cohort of twelve doctoral students. Twelve
departments in two colleges have committed to participate in this program. A
unique feature of this program is that the research and scholarly focus of the
students in this program will be advanced materials, which are key to advanced
manufacturing and economic development within South Carolina and the United
States. As a result, the CUBD scholars will be part of an interdisciplinary
cohort group. The CUBD program will initiate a program to prepare
underrepresented minority graduate STEM students to secure and thrive in
research-based careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As research, industry and
technology warrant the advancement of the materials genome for multi-functional,
adaptive and advanced materials, the Clemson University Bridge to the Doctorate
(CUBD) Program addresses the need to support, train and integrate a diverse body
of researchers and research experiences the CUBD program will focus on
developing a diverse cohort of scientific leaders with expertise in leading
advanced materials research. This effort will drive fundamental advances in
inorganic and organic materials to inform and define future research directions
for the development of advanced materials and systems across a spectrum of
applications. The topic was selected and refined based on (1) South Carolina’s
(SC)’s strategic educational and economic priorities; (2) broad subject
expertise across many departments at Clemson; (3) significant presence of
materials-based manufacturing in SC; (4) alignment of the project with the
large, statewide, NSF-funded EPSCoR Track 1 RII award entitled Materials
Assembly and Design Excellence (MADE) in SC; and (4) national strategic
priorities (i.e., the Materials Genome Initiative [MGI]). The PhD scholars
participating in the CUBD program will conduct research in advanced materials,
which is well aligned with national, state, and institutional research
priorities. Individual projects will integrate experimental/theory, simulation,
and data science approaches to accelerate the development and deployment of
advanced materials. The innovation of the CUBD Program lies in the
interpretation and delivery of a culturally sustaining pedagogical model of
graduate student socialization. This project will explore the potential of
leveraging existing university resources to enhance the experience of
underrepresented minority graduate students. This will expand our awareness of
how universities can identify and position their resources to support a
sustainable model that is appropriately responsive to the needs of their
underrepresented minority STEM graduate students. Additionally, this project
will provide an understanding of how underrepresented minority graduate STEM
students can be socialized to become thriving researchers in the academy,
private industry, non-governmental organizations, and government agencies. This
approach will specifically contribute to our understanding of how cultural
values related to racial and ethnic identity can be utilized to positively
influence this process to develop graduates committed to their role as
researchers. Individually and collectively, the CUBD scholars will advance
research on the processing, characterization, and properties of a broad class of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is jointly funded by the Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.