* 2005413
* Understanding the Effects of Sheet Size and Salt Addition on Aqueous MXene Dispersions:  Phase Behavior, Rheological Properties, and Printability
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Virginia Davis, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 348,420.00

MXenes are a family of two-dimensional (2D) crystalline nanomaterials composed
of transition metal carbides, nitrides, or carbonitrides. They are very
promising for applications in electronics and energy storage devices such as
better batteries. One advantage of MXenes is that they can be dispersed in water
and processed into devices and structures using fluid phase processing
techniques such as direct ink writing (DIW). So far, advances in MXene
processing have required time consuming and expensive trial and error
approaches. A fundamental understanding of MXene dispersions is needed to
consistently achieve functional MXene devices via fluid-based manufacturing
methods. This project will address this need by developing a fundamental
understanding of the connections between MXene dispersion properties, DIW
printing, and the microstructure and electrical conductivity of printed devices.
In addition, by considering MXenes as an example of a charged 2D colloidal
platelet, this research will also extend the current scientific understanding of
dispersions of 2D materials. The research team will collaborate with other
researchers on advancing the experimental and theoretical methods to study
colloidal dispersions of 2D materials. Undergraduate researchers will be an
integral part of the research team, and the PIs will mentor high school students
on related research. To further engage K-12 students, the team will develop
activities on printing and electrical devices for several programs at Auburn
University, including Engineering Day, Promoting Engineering for Kids (PEAK),
Women in Engineering Camp, and a Summer Bridge Program for incoming minority
engineering students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is motivated
by the hypothesis that MXene dispersions exhibit a rich phase behavior similar
to that of other charged colloidal 2D platelets (also termed disks or plates).
The proposed research seeks to answer three questions about MXene dispersions:
1) What are the effects of sheet size distribution on phase behavior and
rheology; 2) What are the effects of sodium chloride (NaCl) addition on phase
behavior and rheology; and 3) How do dispersion properties affect printability
and the electrical conductivity of test structures? This research will advance
understanding of MXene phase behavior and the composition and microstructure
dependent rheological properties that affect printability. Collaborations with
an expert in combining rheology and small angle neutron scattering (Rheo-SANS)
and a leader in the development of theories for understanding dispersions of
charged 2D materials will increase the depth of scientific understanding.
Together these contributions will advance understanding of structure-process-
property relationships and how to formulate MXene inks for
DIW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.