* 2005181
* Extraordinary Polaritonic Heat Conduction
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Renkun Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 405,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Heat transfer is ubiquitous and plays an
important role in our daily lives and industrial processes, such as cooling of
computer chips and heating of buildings. In classical textbooks of thermal
physics, it is well known that the dominant mode of heat transfer in solids is
heat conduction, which is known to be slow (travels at around the speed of
sound) and diffusive (non-directional). This project studies a new heat
conduction mechanism that combines the light in vacuum and sound in solids to
conduct heat at high speed (on the order of speed of light) and with a high
degree of directionality. The study is important as it may contribute to diverse
applications such as more efficient thermal management of computer chips, light
emitting diodes, and buildings. By integrating photonics, thermal science, and
nanotechnologies, the project provides an excellent interdisciplinary platform
to educate and train female graduate students in physics and engineering and
offers attractive hands-on laboratory experience for undergraduate and local
high-school students from underrepresented minority groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Heat conduction in solids
is normally described as a diffusion process with short mean free path (MFP &lt;
10 microns) associated with the main heat carriers, such as phonons and
electrons. The goal of this project is to theoretically and experimentally
investigate extraordinary thermal transport phenomena in a new regime of heat
conduction mediated by surface phonon polariton (SPhP), which originates from
the coupling between optical phonon and photon. SPhP is highly confined along
the interface between a polar dielectric material and its surroundings and thus
can carry high energy flux, comparable to or even higher than that of phonons in
a solid. Under suitable conditions, SPhP can have extremely long propagation
lengths (mm or longer) even at room and high temperature, and therefore, can
exhibit extraordinary behaviors over a much longer distance. The project
utilizes novel experimental techniques in nanoscale device fabrication and high-
resolution nano-watt calorimetry, combined with rigorous theoretical modeling
and numeric simulation, to explore extraordinary SPhP heat conduction phenomena
in polar dielectric nanostructures, including low-dimensional heat conduction,
non-diffusive and quantum thermal transport, and dynamically tunable thermal
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant
supports research to investigate extraordinary thermal transport phenomena in a
new regime of heat conduction mediated by surface phonon polariton with funding
from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in the DMR of the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.