* 2005201
* Designing New Methods to Exploit Intercrystalline Transformations in Zeolite Synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Jeffrey Rimer, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 446,364.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zeolites are porous crystals
comprised of alumina and silica that are heavily used as catalysts and
adsorbents in commercial applications owing to their unique properties. Despite
their widespread use in processes spanning from energy to medicine, the
complexity of zeolite synthesis makes it difficult to understand how these
materials form and what methods can be developed to control and tailor their
properties. This project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, employs a combination
of experimental and computational techniques to investigate a topic of growing
interest, seed-assisted synthesis, where crystal seeds are introduced into
growth solutions to promote the formation of zeolite crystals with desirable
size, shape, and composition. Mechanisms of seeding, that is starting a
synthesis from a small crystal, are largely unexplored in zeolite synthesis, yet
limited studies reveal that these processes are capable of achieving material
properties that are otherwise inaccessible by conventional routes. The research
group at the University of Houston studies this to improve the fundamental
understanding of crystal-to-crystal transformations with the aim of establishing
guidelines for rational design. As part of this project, they investigate
mechanisms of seed-assisted synthesis, the development of new methods to prepare
novel materials, and the use of unique equipment that permit direct
visualization of crystal surface growth at a molecular level. The intellectual
merit of this project is an improved fundamental knowledge of crystal
engineering that enables discovery of new routes to tailor the properties of
zeolites, and an improved understanding of complex processes underlying zeolite
crystallization. The broader impacts of this project are the advancement of
techniques with transformative outcomes for large-scale zeolite production and
applications. Considering the large use of zeolites in commercial processes, a
significant socioeconomic benefit can be derived from these investigations.
Additionally, this award expands a program with NASA and local high schools,
coordinated through outreach liaisons at the University of Houston. The
principle investigator also offers opportunities for research at all levels
(K-12, undergraduate, and graduate) and promotes research and education with an
emphasis on increased matriculation and retention of under-represented minority
students, at risk students, and women in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zeolites are crystalline microporous
aluminosilicates with exceptional hydrothermal stability and tunable acidity for
commercial applications ranging from energy to medicine. An emerging approach in
zeolite synthesis is the use of crystal seeding or interzeolite transformations
where an initial (parent) structure is converted into a product (daughter), yet
the mechanisms of seeding in complex, nonclassical pathways of crystallization
are largely unexplored. With this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, researchers
aim to advance the fundamental understanding of crystal-to-crystal
transformations with the goal of finding empirical rules, guided by machine
learning, to predict and control the conversion of a parent zeolite into a
product of identical or different crystal structure. Specifically, they study
(1) the use of seeds in crystal engineering through the careful selection of
parent-daughter combinations to elucidate factors governing nonclassical seeding
mechanisms; (2) new protocols to produce self-pillared zeolites via an organic-
free, seed-assisted synthesis; and (3) analyzing crystal-crystal transformations
using a unique liquid cell for scanning probe microscopy to capture time-
resolved images of zeolite surfaces undergoing interzeolite conversion. The
intellectual merit of this project is the focus on addressing knowledge gaps in
zeolite crystallization where more fundamental studies are required to provide
deeper insight into methods capable of selectively controlling nucleation and
growth through facile, efficient processes. Controlling the physicochemical
properties of zeolites is nontrivial, but can be accomplished through seed-
assisted techniques. This research has the potential to establish an improved
understanding of intercrystalline transitions to advance understanding of
complex zeolite growth pathways and establish design principles for crystal
engineering as a foundation for applied studies that extend beyond the scope of
this project. The broader impacts of this project are the potential to
synthesize zeolites with optimal properties that cannot be achieved by
conventional methods. Considering the widespread use of zeolites in commercial
processes, a significant socioeconomic benefit can be derived from these
investigations. This project also facilitates programs at the K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate levels to promote research and education with an
emphasis on increased matriculation and retention of under-represented minority
students, at risk students, and women in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.