* 2005578
* IRES Track I: Exploring New Horizons in the Observable Universe at the Cosmic Dawn Center of Excellence in Copenhagen
* O/D,OISE
* 08/23/2019,01/31/2023
* Katherine Whitaker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 01/31/2023
* USD 250,419.00

The first stars, galaxies and black holes burst into existence only a few
hundred million years after the Big Bang, bringing light to the cosmos and
setting in motion processes that built the Universe as we see it today. Many
mysteries remain about these early epochs, but not for too much longer: new and
upcoming facilities such as the Atacama Large Millimeter Array and the James
Webb Space Telescope are optimized to revolutionize our understanding of this
time period, known as "Cosmic Dawn." The Cosmic Dawn Center of Excellence (DAWN,
established 2018), an international research center in Copenhagen, Denmark,
brings together scholars whose interests span a broad range of observational and
theoretical inquiries into Cosmic Dawn. Their expertise, together with
Copenhagen's beautiful and enriching setting, make DAWN an ideal host for
budding US scholars. We will create the DAWN-IRES Scholars Program to empower
future generations of US scientists through a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity of
visiting Copenhagen to immerse themselves into this vibrant international
research center. The DAWN-IRES scholars will join a cohort of 7 student
researchers in a stimulating 10-week science program that merges research using
next-generation telescopes with life in a thousand-year-old city. The program's
structure will encourage students to build learning communities within their
cohorts, equipping them with practical research and communication skills. At the
same time, the international exposure and access to cutting-edge resources will
help maintain US leadership within the global astronomical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will lead observational and/or
theoretical projects that contribute towards understanding some of the most
fundamental questions in astrophysics today: What caused the reionization of the
Universe? How do the first, massive galaxies form? What is the origin of galaxy
scaling relations? What quenches star formation in massive galaxies? Over the
next decade, the center's mission is to develop and test a physical model
explaining the key processes responsible for the assembly of the earliest
galaxies through to the present day. The DAWN-IRES Scholars will join this
thriving international research network, bridging the world class research
performed by the US-based associate faculty coordinating this program with the
DAWN permanent faculty and the local program coordinator. The key learning goals
of this international research experience include: (1) building a learning
community to stimulate personal and academic growth, (2) developing effective
scientific communication skills, and (3) performing globally competitive
research addressing an open question in astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
DAWN-IRES program is primarily designed to enhance the progress of science
through a unique global educational training experience for a diverse cohort of
US students. The themes defining the broader impact of the program include
diversity, training, dissemination, and community. Through extensive proactive
recruitment strategies (direct contact with faculty at minority-serving
institutions, leveraging social media, widely circulating flyers, local
announcements in STEM courses, and more), the PI will assemble diverse groups of
scholars to stimulate excellence and innovation. The program incorporates a wide
range of professional development activities that are focused on advancing
scientific communication skills (e.g., weekly seminars, hack days, oral
presentations abroad and stateside). The students will also build professional
research toolkits, including learning programming, data analysis and
presentation techniques. Dissemination of research will occur through the DAWN-
IRES Scholars Symposium at the end of each summer in Copenhagen, together with a
presentation at the students' local institutions and the national American
Astronomical Society meeting. Working with the Center for Excellence in Teaching
at UConn, the assessment strategy of DAWN-IRES will be tailored to the learning
goals of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.