* 2005212
* Liquid Crystals of Nanonucleic Acids: Hierarchical Self-Assembly as a Route to Prebiotic Selection, Templating, and Autocatalysis
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Noel Clark, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 11/30/2023
* USD 550,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The memory and transfer of genetic information
in life is based on the self-assembly of nucleic acid (NA) polymers in solution
into duplex columns of selectively paired and stacked aromatic hydrocarbon
nanosheet bases. One of the great mysteries of evolution is how such a
spectacular scenario first appeared in the universe. In the accepted view of a
prebiotic RNA world, oligomers which enable molecular selection, catalysis, and
information transfer are structured by a similar duplex pairing and stacking
scheme which is already robust, appearing to have come from some earlier mode of
molecular selection and evolution. The team’s observations of the LC phase
behavior of NA monomers and ultra-short oligomers in solution show that
polymerization is actually not needed for the stabilization of the duplex base-
paired columnar structure of DNA. Motivated by this they have developed a model
of a pre-RNA world era, a “liquid crystal world,” in which the duplex pairing
and stacking evolves as the primary “purpose” of autocatalytic molecular
selection and oligomerization. Selection is achieved by the molecular
gatekeeping of phase separated NA liquid crystal droplets, which also serve as
promoters of their own stability, templating the ligation of selected short
oligomers into longer ones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;In liquid crystal (LC) phases of ultrashort DNA oligomers, coupled
steps of duplexing, end-to-end stacking of duplexes, LC ordering, and phase
separation create a structural gatekeeper that preferentially selects duplexable
nanoDNA to enter the LC. Molecules that enter are organized into a fluid
structure that can strongly promote ligation of the nanoDNA into longer duplexes
which, in turn, stabilize the LC ordering, creating an autocatalytic cycle (LC
autocatalysis). The proposed research themes include: Obtaining LC columnar
phases of duplex stacks of NA monomers (selection); demonstration of LC assisted
ligation of monomers in these phases (templating), combined with study of the
effect of ligation on LC ordering; Study of the effects of sequence, oligomer
length and polydispersity, degree of complementarity on LC autocatalysis in
nanoNAs, including those (i) with adhesive ends and (ii) with random sequences,
which, remarkably, exhibit the emergence of complimentarity in the form of LC
ordering; Employ batch synthesis to prepare polymorphic solutions of base
homologs for molecular selection experiments on NA monomers; Advance
condensation mechanisms for nanoNA LC phases and study of the effects of
condensation on LC autocatalysis; Development of ligation chemistries applicable
to LC autocatalysis; Enhanced assessment of the ligation products of LC
autocatalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.