* 2005571
* Intrinsic Motivation in Science Museums: Learning from and Broadening Participation of Visitors with Learning Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Gabrielle Rappolt-Schlichtmann, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 09/30/2023
* USD 978,430.00

Very little is known about the experiences of people with learning disabilities
in informal learning environments such as science centers and museums. This
project will describe the ways in which engagement and intrinsic motivation for
learning are and are not supported for visitors with learning disabilities, and
build capacity for informal STEM education practitioners to apply this learning
for the benefit of those with learning disabilities as well as any visitor who
needs more support in the context of self-directed learning. Broadening
participation science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) is a core goal of
the National Science Foundation and its Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program. This project pursues this goal with a focus on young people with
learning disabilities. As the largest group of individuals with disabilities in
the United States, people with learning disabilities make up an estimated 20% of
the U.S. population. Science professions offer many life- and work-related
opportunities for individuals with learning disabilities, and the flexible
experiences of informal learning spaces offer important opportunities to promote
participation, engagement in and motivation for science. This work represents
the next generation of accessible design to broaden participation in, and
impacts of, informal STEM learning opportunities. This project will generate
guidelines and resources to support inclusive design for this group of visitors.
Resources will include a Toolkit of Visual Assets that can be shared digitally
and in print with youth with learning disabilities, informal STEM practitioners,
and the learning disability research and practice
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop empirical knowledge to
support informal STEM practitioners to better facilitate the inclusion of youth
with learning disabilities. Using the lens of Self-Determination Theory as an
explanatory framework, this research will be pursued in three phases. Self-
Determination Theory describes the psychological needs that must be met, such as
autonomy and feelings of efficacy, to create an environment that supports
individuals’ engagement in self-motivated behaviors. Phase 1 will be an
exploratory study describing the engagement and motivation of adolescents (ages
10-17) with learning disabilities when experiencing varied STEM exhibits. This
first phase will adapt validated scales, employ an existing observation
protocol, and conduct stimulated recall interviews with youth. Phase 2 will
explore, develop and investigate design strategies to improve the intrinsic
motivation of youth with learning disabilities at educational STEM exhibits.
This second phase will involve a set of experimental studies in which design
strategies related to intrinsic motivation are manipulated to inform principles
of inclusive design for visitors with learning disabilities. As in the previous
phase, Phase 2 will adapt validated scales and employ an existing observation
protocol. Phase 3 will focus on design charrettes in which researchers and
practitioners work with high school students with learning disabilities in a co-
design process. The charrettes will generate guidelines and case examples of
exhibit components using Universal Design for Learning to balance varying design
priorities and effectively, inclusively design exhibits for this population.
This third phase will rely on qualitative coding of co-design charette
artifacts, field notes and researcher reflections; member checking will play an
important role in the coding process. Dissemination efforts for this project
will target youth with learning disabilities, informal STEM education
practitioners, and the broader field of learning disability researchers and
practitioners. In addition to the exhibit design guidelines and Toolkit
described above, the project will publish peer reviewed articles and develop
manuscripts aimed at educational research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.