* 2005498
* Weil-Petersson Geometry, Renormalized Volume and Higher Teichmuller Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Martin Bridgeman, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 344,443.00

A topological surface is a space which is allowed to change its shape by
stretching or bending but without tearing or performing any discontinuous
actions. One can study the properties of the surface by considering the space of
all shapes it can have. This space of shapes is called the moduli space of the
surface. One example would be if a circle is allowed to change its shape but
remain an ellipse, then the moduli space would be described by two numbers, the
length of the short axis and the length of the long axis and therefore be two
dimensional. Topological surfaces (and higher dimensional objects) can be
studied by considering the shape or geometry of its moduli space. One such
geometry is the Weil-Petersson geometry which plays an important role in
mathematics and physics. This NSF award supports a project with a focus on the
Weil-Petersson geometry of a moduli space. In prior work, the PI and
collaborators introduced a flow on the moduli space of a surface, called the
Weil-Petersson renormalized volume gradient flow. This flow reveals much of the
structure of the moduli space of three-dimensional spaces. For a large class of
three-dimensional spaces this is a uniformizing flow, flowing any shape to make
it as symmetric as possible: in the circle analogy, making the ellipse become a
round circle. One of the major directions is to show that this flow is
uniformizing for all spaces of a certain type. This work is at the intersection
of mathematics and physics and is expected to lead to new connections between
the two fields. The project will support a graduate student and allow the PI to
disseminate the work through conferences and seminars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on two main areas of research, 1) renormalized volume and its
Weil-Petersson gradient flow and 2) the Weil-Petersson geometry of higher
Teichmuller spaces. These two areas are relatively new, having developed over
the last fifteen years. In 1) the PI plans to use renormalized volume to study
the structure of hyperbolic three-manifolds. The renormalized volume of a
hyperbolic manifold is closely related to its convex core volume but has nicer
analytic properties such as being a smooth function on moduli space. In prior
work, the PI and collaborators introduced the Weil-Petersson gradient flow of
renormalized volume to study the geometry of the deformation space of convex
cocompact hyperbolic structures on a three dimensional manifold. In particular
this work showed that when the space is acylindrical then the flowlines are
Weil-Petersson quasigeodesics and that the renormalized volume is minimized at
the unique structure which has convex core boundary totally geodesic.
Furthermore, a surgered version of the flow is a uniformizing flow, flowing
every point to the unique structure which has convex core boundary totally
geodesic. A major project is to show that in the boundary incompressible case,
the flow limits to the conjectured decomposition along its windows and
acylindrical pieces. In higher Teichmuller theory the PI and collaborators
consider extending the analytic and metric structure of classical Teichmuller
theory to geometric representations into higher rank Lie groups. In earlier
work, the PI and collaborators introduced a natural extension of the Weil-
Petersson metric to higher Teichmuller theory. More recently they have
generalized the construction to define extensions based on the simple roots of
the associated Lie algebra. The PI will investigate these Weil-Petersson
extensions and study their geometric structure. This has already led to a number
of rigidity results, related to simple spectral length and the Liouville volume
for Hitchin representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.