* 2005793
* STEM, growth mindset, and sports: Investigating STEM program design features that impact youth engagement
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Erin Turner, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,898,740.00

Well-designed out-of-school time experiences can provide youth with rich
opportunities to learn. However, to design effective out-of-school time
experiences, it is critical to have a research basis that clarifies the features
of programs that support increased youth engagement that then leads to better
outcomes for youth. This project explores the features of programming that
integrates sports, mathematics and science concepts, and growth mindset for 4th
through 8th grade aged Latinx and African American youth. To accomplish this,
the investigators refine curricular resources for out-of-school time programs
and develop a model for professional learning experiences for informal educators
and facilitators to support their implementation of integrated sports and STEM
programming. To identify critical features of the programming, the researchers
explore the ways that the program activities are implemented in two different
contexts as well as the impact of the programming on youth participants’
mindset, understanding of science and mathematics concepts, STEM interests, and
self-perceived science and mathematics abilities. Additionally, researchers will
explore the ways that the sports-themed programming supports (or could better
support) girls’ engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the
University of Arizona researchers’ existing partnerships with Major League
Baseball (MLB) and Boys/Girls Club programs and an existing school-based MLB
program for schools to (a) expand and refine Science of Baseball activities to
enhance engagement among girls and incorporate growth mindset experiences that
focus on the value of effort, determination, and learning from mistakes in both
athletics and STEM; (b) study the enactment and outcomes of the program with
4th-8th grade aged youth in the two distinct informal learning settings; and (c)
develop and refine a model for professional learning that includes in-person and
on-line components for training informal STEM learning facilitators. The work
will focus on two study contexts: afterschool programs of Boys and Girls Clubs
in AZ, CA, and MO and summer programs of MLB in CA and MO. Participants will
include 300 youth and up to 28 informal STEM learning facilitators split across
the two contexts. Design-Based Implementation Research (DBIR) will be used to a)
iteratively refine the activities and professional development model, and b)
study the enactment and outcomes of the program. Research questions focus on
outcomes for youth participants (i.e., impact on growth mindset, STEM
dispositions, and understanding of science/math concepts), and the elements of
effective professional development for informal STEM educators. Outcomes of the
project include empirical evidence of what works and what doesn’t work in the
design, implementation, and professional development for STEM learning programs
that integrate sports and growth mindset principles. In addition, outcomes of
the project will advance knowledge of how different out-of-school program
structures with similar sports-focused STEM programming can similarly (or
differentially) support youth learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.