* 2005506
* Category I: Jetstream 2: Accelerating Science and Engineering On-Demand
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Nirav Merchant, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2025
* USD 24,499,999.00

The frontiers of science are rapidly evolving in regard to availability of data
to be analyzed and the breadth and variety of analytical tools that researchers
use. To effectively analyze and make sense of this ever-growing cache of
information, and to make it possible to leverage new artificial intelligence
tools for research, researchers need on-demand, interactive, and programmatic
cyberinfrastructure (CI) delivered via the cloud. Jetstream 2 is a system that
will be easy to expand and reconfigure, and capable of supporting diverse modes
of on-demand access and use, The system will also revolutionize the national
cyberinfrastructure (CI) ecosystem by enabling “AI for Everyone” with virtual
GPU capabilities and widespread outreach through the five partners, led by
Indiana University. The project promises to enable the research community to use
a greater variety of computational resources and to expand its reach into
student populations, drawn from a broad range of disciplines, thus contributing
to building the future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jetstream 2 will be
an 8 PetaFLOPS (PFLOPS) cloud computing system using next-generation AMD “Milan”
CPUs and the latest NVIDIA Tensor Core GPUs with 18.5 petabytes (PB) of storage.
Consisting of five computational systems, Jetstream 2’s primary system will be
located at Indiana University, with four modest regional systems deployed
nationwide at Arizona State University (ASU), Cornell University, the University
of Hawaiʻi (UH), and the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC). Additional
partnerships with the University of Arizona, Johns Hopkins University, and
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) will contribute to
Jetstream 2’s unparalleled usability and support for a broad range of scientific
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jetstream team has been at the forefront of
training the research community to transition from batch computing methods to
adopt cloud-style usage. Jetstream 2 will continue this path and will ease the
transition between academic and commercial cloud computing. Some of the advanced
features include push-button virtual clusters, advanced high-availability
science gateways services (including commercial cloud integration), federated
authentication for JupyterHubs, bare metal and virtualization within the same
system through programmable CI, support for on-demand data intensive workloads
in addition to on-demand computation, high-performance software-defined storage,
and advanced multi-platform orchestration
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jetstream 2 will have far-reaching societal
benefits. As enhanced educational infrastructure, it will serve more students,
from traditional undergraduates to domain-science experts desiring training in
computational techniques, than any other NSF-funded CI resource. These students
will be better equipped to fully participate in the evolving STEM workforce. In
addition to enabling new research, discovery, and innovation across many
disciplines, Jetstream 2 will advance the national CI ecosystem and extend the
broader impacts of existing NSF investments. Jetstream 2’s “Core Services” will
demonstrate a practical model of distributed cloud computing that will give
academic institutions an incentive to invest their own funds in new advanced CI
facilities. Although modest in scale, these facilities will represent the state
of the art in reconfigurable computing. The implementation of Jetstream 2 will
also demonstrate that colleges and universities can invest sustainable amounts
of their own funds in highly-effective, flexible CI resources that generate a
significant return on investment. In sum, Jetstream 2 will transform the
national CI landscape and greatly benefit the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.