* 2005129
* Imaging of Electronic Correlations and Symmetry Breaking Effects in Twisted Van der Waals Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Stevan Nadj-Perge, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Non Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore the electronic properties
of engineered materials that are assembled one atomic layer at a time, starting
from individual sheets of graphene and certain semiconductors, so-called
transition metal dichalcogenides. For precise well-defined rotational
misalignment angle between the layers, electrons in these materials strongly
interact which leads to the emergence of correlated quantum electronic phases.
The research team will image these emerging phases using scanning tunneling
microscopy and spectroscopy techniques in various geometries. This approach will
allow the team to gain insights into how the microscopic properties of
correlated phases relate to their overall transport signatures. This information
can be used to develop novel electronic quantum devices. The team will
disseminate the project results through international conferences, journal
articles, invited talks, publicly available blog posts, and educational videos
targeting a broad audience. Besides the research component, this project aims to
provide ample opportunities for integrating undergraduate education and
increasing diversity through summer internships and programs for
underrepresented minorities and outreach activities targeting high-school
students and teachers from the Pasadena School District.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of layered quasi-two-
dimensional crystals enabled a new way of designing tunable electronic systems
in which electron-electron interactions are controlled through the rotational
alignment (twist) of the stacked layers. The focus of this project is to explore
properties of emerging correlated quantum electronic phases, including
superconductivity and orbital ferromagnetism, in twisted multi-layer graphene
and transition metal dichalcogenides heterostructures. One of the main goals is
to establish a basic understanding of underlying symmetries and symmetry
breaking phenomena that occur in these emerging phases using scanning tunneling
microscopy and spectroscopy and by studying heterostructures in gate-tunable
multi-terminal geometries. This research project is accompanied by an extensive
mentoring and outreach plan aimed to prepare graduate and undergraduate students
for successful careers in science and industry and help educate the public about
quantum science and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.