* 2005512
* Geometry and Randomness: Counting, Partitions, Stochastics, Shape
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Moon Duchin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 196,349.00

This project supports a research program that bridges mathematics to data
science. The techniques developed in this project center on randomized
constructions that illuminate geometry at large scale, and which can be useful
in the study of networks. Example applications include epidemiology, social
networks, and geospatial networks. Many ideas for these applications can be
mined from the study of infinite groups; however, most of the technology
developed in geometric group theory is asymptotic, and requires passing to an
infinite limit. In practical applications, it is essential to have medium-scale
techniques that are neither infinitesimal nor
asymptotic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will focus on 4 areas,
(1) Counting and statistical geometry: methods for studying the precise geometry
of geodesics open up applications like rational growth, statistical
hyperbolicity, and macro Ricci curvature. (2) Nilpotent geometry: nilpotent
groups such as the 3D Heisenberg group are of central interest in geometric
analysis, Lie theory, and even the part of control theory that centers on sub-
Riemannian geometry. In the 1980s, they also opened up a new vista on geometric
group theory, through Gromov's remarkable polynomial growth theorem, which is
still being explored for insights. New directions of inquiry explored here bring
the geometric analysis together with the combinatorial group theory. (3)
Teichmuller geometry and billiards: From the geometry of random triangles to
rigidity theorems in symbolic dynamics, the proposal describes an active
research program built from an interplay of flat and hyperbolic geometry. (4)
Markov chains on graph partitions: How can we efficiently sample from the
balanced, connected k-partitions of a graph? And how about preferentially
sampling from partitions with a short boundary? This is a question of
fundamental interest across many application domains, and it lends itself well
to exploration on large datasets. The PI and his/her collaborators have
implemented a recombination ("ReCom") Markov chain and research program for
understanding its dynamics and geometry. This provides a rich application for
ideas from ergodic theory, isoperimetry, and combinatorial models for moduli
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.