* 2005052
* A Contextual Examination of Ethnic-Racial Identity and Critical Consciousness among Diverse College Students
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Margarita Azmitia, Moffitt, Ursula E
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 129,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Leoandra
Onnie Rogers at Northwestern and Dr. Margarita Azmitia at University of
California Santa Cruz, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist examining the role of the sociopolitical context in the
development of ethnic-racial identity and critical consciousness among college-
going young adults. The current sociopolitical climate is fraught and can be
psychologically taxing for everyone, though its implications are more dire for
some individuals than others. Since 2016, the number of reported hate crimes has
risen sharply (FBI, 2018). On university campuses, violence against marginalized
groups has also increased (Watt, Costa, &amp; Quiason, 2018). In the wake of the
coronavirus pandemic, racism against Asian Americans has spiked (Coates, 2020)
and Black, indigenous, and other minoritized individuals are getting sick and
dying at disproportionate rates (Dyer, 2020). A better understanding is needed
of how young adults from diverse ethnic-racial and political backgrounds
alternately endorse, accept, or resist such events in both the local and
national contexts. How are their responses situated within their sense of
identity and their views on the world? If young people engage with
sociopolitical events online or in person, what does this look like and what
meaning do they draw from it? This project investigates these questions, linking
the micro-level of daily life with the macro-level of the sociopolitical
climate, examining the development of college-going young adults’ identities,
beliefs, and behaviors in context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
specifically on critical consciousness (CC), a construct originally developed by
Paolo Freire (1970), which includes an awareness of and resistance to societal
inequity. Both CC and clarity about one’s ethnic-racial identity (ERI) can
buffer the negative effects of discrimination (Diemer, Rapa, Park, &amp; Perry,
2016; Yip, Wang, Mootoo, &amp; Mirpuri, 2019) and link to myriad positive
outcomes, including academic achievement and wellbeing (El-Amin et al., 2017;
Rivas‐Drake et al., 2014). ERI and CC have rarely been investigated in tandem,
however, and their development remains understudied among college students
(Mathews et al., 2019). This project addresses this empirical gap using a
longitudinal, mixed-methods approach, with data collection occurring at four
time points across the 2020-2021 academic year. Survey data will be analyzed
using person-centered longitudinal transition analysis (LTA), first creating
clusters based on responses to ERI and CC measures, then examining who is likely
to be in which cluster, who changes, and how these changes relate to additional
variables such as political conservatism and sense of belonging. Additionally,
open-response prompts will be gathered for ten day periods, asking participants
to describe their engagement with and make meaning about real-time events.
Responses will be analyzed using narrative methods, illuminating within- and
between-person differences. This mix of methods and analyses allows for a rich
investigation of ERI and CC development in context, advancing theory and
promoting equity-oriented outcomes among young people with diverse identities
and experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.