* 2005594
* Investigating the Impact of Head Start Family Interactions on Childrens STEM Process Skills during Family Events at Two Science Centers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Schwade, Sciencenter
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 297,336.00

Parents and adult caregivers play a significant role in young children’s
understanding of—and participation in—science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). Research suggests that early engagement with STEM can have a
profound impact on children’s use of STEM process skills such as exploration,
observation, and problem-solving, as well as future academic success. An
immediate yet ongoing challenge facing informal STEM learning providers is to
understand how limited resources can be used to support effective STEM learning
opportunities and experiences for all children and families. Through a
collaboration between researchers, Head Start, two science centers (one rural,
one urban), and educators, this project aims to foster STEM access and
engagement with specific attention to young children and their caregivers. This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pilot and Feasibility study will apply
an experimental, mixed-methods design to examine parent/caregiver and child
(ages 4-5) interactions before, during, and after informal STEM experiences to
identify which factors influence children's transfer of learning STEM process
skills across multiple informal contexts. Research results will lay the
foundation for a future longitudinal study. The project team will ask: (1) What
types of parent/caregiver-child engagement at the science center are most
predictive of children’s application of STEM process skills in subsequent
problem-solving tasks and school readiness? (2) How do variations in
parent/caregiver-child conversational strategies during the science center visit
influence children’s memory and learning? and (3) How can informal educators
best support Head Start family engagement and children’s emerging STEM
knowledge? This study will collect data on 240, 4-5-year-old children, with
their caregivers, in two different science centers that serve a largely rural
and largely urban population. Data sources will include video/audio of
caregiver-child interactions at the science centers and at home, as well as
children’s recall, engagement with a problem-solving task, and school readiness
scores. Coding and analysis of the tasks during and after the science center
visit will detail mechanisms underlying children’s memory, learning, and
application of STEM process skills that transfer to the problem-solving task.
The project will be implemented by a research-practice partnership, leveraging
the expertise of project partners and communities to ensure the use of
culturally responsive research practices. This research has the potential to
strategically impact how science centers and Head Start grantees work together
on Family Engagement programming to achieve equitable STEM learning
opportunities, broadening participation for low-income young children and their
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.