* 2005574
* Collaborative Research: The coordinated structural and physiological responses of trees to water stress: an organismal approach
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Xi Yang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2024
* USD 714,863.00

Drought is a global and increasingly frequent problem that threatens the
vitality of forests and the many benefits they provide to society (including
carbon sequestration, timber provisioning, and water cycle regulation). Whether
trees thrive or falter during drought depends on how they respond to these
stressful conditions. Despite many studies of leaf-level changes to
photosynthesis and water use during drought, it is still unclear how trees make
integrated and coordinated changes at the scale of the entire plant. For
example, trees that change the angles of their leaves can reduce the radiation
load at different levels of the canopy, reducing heat stress and water loss.
This study investigates the coordinated adjustments of tree canopy structure and
physiology under water stress using drought experiments in both growth chambers
and in a forest that has a rainfall removal experiment. The investigators bring
together traditional measurements of leaf and canopy gas exchange with novel
remote sensing techniques that measure canopy structure and physiology. This
project will provide interdisciplinary teaching, training, and learning
experiences by collaborating with a non-profit organization (Math4Science) that
promotes STEM, creating videos of 3D forests, mentoring undergraduate students,
and exposing K-12 students from under-represented groups to STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The degree to which forests will continue to
serve as carbon sinks and mitigate climate change hinges on whether trees can
make physiological and structural adjustments to cope with changing
environmental stressors. Most research to date on tree responses to drought has
focused on how trees alter leaf-level physiology, phenology, and carbon
mobilization and allocation. However, trees also make structural adjustments in
response to drought (e.g., by changing leaf angles) to reduce radiation load and
leaf temperature. The work extends current research on plant water use
strategies, which is mostly focused on physiological responses at the leaf or
ecosystem scales, to a new dimension - canopy structure (leaf angles). The
investigators aim to answer the question "To what extent do trees respond to
water stress through coordinated adjustments of canopy structure and leaf
physiology, and by what mechanisms?" combining measurements of leaf and canopy
gas exchange with novel remote sensing techniques that measure canopy structure
and leaf physiology, including the Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) and the
Unmanned Autonomous Vehicle (UAV). By taking advantage of both classical and
novel techniques, this project will provide new insights into the coordination
of plant response to water stress over spatial (leaf to canopy) and temporal
scales (short to long term). Including mechanical responses in physiological
studies of drought at the scales of entire tree crowns will provide novel
mechanistic insights into drought-science and will facilitate building
comprehensive mechanistic approaches into ecosystem-scale
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.