* 2005042
* Resolving (non-) exhaustivity in questions: experimental and computational pragmatics
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Judith Degen, Moyer, Morgan
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Linguistics program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Judith M Degen at Stanford University, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating
the semantics and pragmatics of language. Linguistic utterances are often
underspecified for their meaning in several ways. Pragmatics plays the crucial
role of providing information that the hearer can exploit to determine the
meaning of the speaker's utterance, and then determine her next conversational
move. This project analyzes the linguistic (the speaker’s choice of lexical
items and the syntactic structure of the question) and extra-linguistic (the
discourse context and the speaker’s goals) factors that influence the resolution
of such underspecification. It will address theoretical proposals regarding the
division of labor between syntax, semantics, and pragmatics in question-answer
dynamics, and will provide empirical data that bear on debates concerning the
integration of linguistic and extra-linguistic information in the understanding
of context-sensitive utterances. The project will provide valuable opportunities
for undergraduate students, from experimental design and running to the
presentation of results in scholarly venues. This project will also directly
impact underserved populations because it will employ underrepresented
undergraduate RAs for corpus annotation purposes. Understanding how questions
and context interact also has applications in the development of intelligent
conversational agents, a core goal in AI research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research integrates corpus, psycholinguistic and computational modeling
in a novel way. The complementary methods approach the phenomenon from different
angles: a large-scale corpus analysis, an answer-rating task, a goal-inference
task, and systematic theory comparison using computational cognitive models.
Following Degen (2013, 2015), the corpus analysis quantifies the contribution of
linguistic and contextual cues to (non-)exhaustivity. This will elucidate the
role of context and prior world knowledge in meaning, by testing the link
between the naturally occurring productions and judgements of
(non-)exhaustivity. Further, advances in computational pragmatic modeling
provide a useful tool for evaluating hypotheses about the interaction of
language, cognition and experience. Systematic model comparison between
cognitive models that offer formalizations of proposed theories that differ in
the role of context, will be driven by the data collected in the corpus-based
studies. There are currently few accounts which examine question interpretation
in this particular light. The proposed research puts meat on the bones of
pragmatic mechanisms using experimental and computational methodologies, thereby
addressing fundamental questions in both linguistics and cognitive science
involving the interaction between semantic representations and our pragmatic
abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.