* 2005057
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Studies of Carrier Selective Passivating Contacts for Efficient Photovoltaic Devices using Laser Processing and Atomic Resolution Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Ajeet Rohatgi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 05/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar cells convert sunlight to electricity
and have several unique advantages. They operate without monitoring, do not emit
pollution, and can be made from earth-abundant and non-toxic materials. The use
of solar energy is rapidly growing, but it still accounts for only a small
fraction of electricity production. To increase their share of the energy
market, the cost of making and operating solar cells must be decreased and their
efficiency must increase. Carrier-selective passivating contacts hold the
promise of doing just that. Such contacts increase cell efficiency by reducing
electrical losses at the interface between the layer of a solar cell that
absorbs light and the metal contacts that extract electrical current. This
project will use a unique way to improve the fundamental understanding and
control of loss mechanisms in solar cells with such contacts. Laser processing
provides a way to electrically activate carrier-selective passivating contacts
by selectively depositing laser energy into a selected layer with fine control
at high speed. This process has the potential to increase the power conversion
efficiency of solar cells while maintaining low temperature and high throughput,
thereby decreasing the cost per kilowatt-hour of energy produced. The generated
knowledge will improve various types of solar power generating as well as other
electronic and photonic devices. The proposal brings together an experienced
multidisciplinary team with expertise in solar cell fabrication, laser
processing, and atomic-scale characterization. The PIs will engage in extensive
outreach to local high schools, museums, and libraries. The economic impact will
be amplified through work with solar cell manufacturing companies. This project
will help society meet its future energy needs using fewer resources at a
reduced cost while preventing pollution and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
encompasses carrier-selective passivating contact development, photovoltaic
device fabrication, laser processing, and imaging at the atomic level using
transmission electron microscopy. Carrier-selective passivating contacted (CSPC)
devices are a promising next generation technology for photovoltaic devices
because they eliminate the two primary loss mechanisms: the direct metal contact
to silicon and dopant diffusion into the bulk. A fundamental understanding of
the interface quality, dopant type, dopant activation (and potential diffusion),
tunneling mechanism, and the effect of the passivation layer is still lacking.
Through a combination of device modeling, fabrication and laser processing
experiments, and transmission electron microscopy studies, the quantitative
degree of CSPC band bending and band gaps; effect of thermal crystallization on
optical absorption, implied open-circuit voltage and defect content; and
independent control of dopant activation, crystallization, grain growth, and
dopant diffusion will be investigated to provide the photovoltaic industry a
better understanding of CSPC for is manufacturing adoption. The novelty of the
aim of this study lies in the use of pulsed laser processing of CSPC to provide
a non-contact way of annealing the device with surface heating only. This work
will provide a fundamental understanding of the interface properties at the
atomic and nanoscale level and relate these studies to the optical and
electronic properties as well as to device performance of a full-area state-of-
the-art CSPC device. This project will have a broad impact by training an
interdisciplinary, interuniversity, and diverse team of graduate and
undergraduate students across two universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.