* 2005447
* Broadening Participation in Informal STEM Learning for Autistic Learners and Others through Virtual Reality
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,287,932.00

Virtual Reality (VR) shows promise to broaden participation in STEM by engaging
learners in authentic but otherwise inaccessible learning experiences. The
immersion in authentic learner environments, along with social presence and
learner agency, that is enabled by VR helps form memorable learning experiences.
VR is emerging as a promising tool for children with autism. While there is wide
variation in the way people with autism present, one common set of needs
associated with autism that can be addressed with VR is sensory processing. This
project will research and model how VR can be used to minimize barriers for
learners with autism, while also incorporating complementary universal designs
for learning (UDL) principles to promote broad participation in STEM learning.
As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. This project will
build on a prototype VR simulation, Mission to Europa Prime, that transports
learners to a space station for exploration on Jupiter's moon Europa, a strong
candidate for future discovery of extraterrestrial life and a location no human
can currently experience in person. The prototype simulation will be expanded to
create a full, immersive STEM-based experience that will enable learners who
often encounter cognitive, social, and emotional barriers to STEM learning in
public spaces, particularly learners with autism, to fully engage and benefit
from this STEM-learning experience. The simulation will include a variety of
STEM-learning puzzles, addressing science, mathematics, engineering, and
computational thinking through authentic and interesting problem-solving tasks.
The project teamâ€™s learning designers and researchers will co-design puzzles and
user interfaces with students at a post-secondary institute for learners with
autism and other learning differences. The full VR STEM-learning simulation will
be broadly disseminated to museums and other informal education programs, and
distributed to other communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research is
designed to advance knowledge about VR-based informal STEM learning and the
affordances of VR to support learners with autism. To broaden STEM participation
for all, the project brings together research at the intersection of STEM
learning, cognitive and educational neuroscience, and the human-technology
frontier. The simulation will be designed to provide agency for learners to
adjust a STEM-learning VR experience for their unique sensory processing,
attention, and social anxiety needs. The project will use a participatory design
process will ensure the VR experience is designed to reduce barriers that
currently exclude learners with autism and related conditions from many informal
learning opportunities, broadening participation in informal STEM learning.
Design research, usability, and efficacy studies will be conducted with teens
and adults at the Pacific Science Center and Boston Museum of Science, which
serve audiences with autism, along with the general public. Project research is
grounded in prior NSF-funded research and leverages the team's expertise in STEM
learning simulations, VR development, cognitive psychology, universal design,
and informal science education, as well as the vital expertise of the end-user
target audience, learners with autism. In addition to being shared at
conferences, the research findings will be submitted for publication to peer-
reviewed journals for researchers and to appropriate publications for VR
developers and disseminators, museum programs, neurodiverse communities and
other potentially interested parties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.