* 2005345
* Dynamics and Singularities of Geometric Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* William Minicozzi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 589,466.00

The project focuses on understanding fundamental properties of nonlinear heat
equations in geometry. The laws of nature are often expressed as differential
equations and these fall into several broad categories. The classical heat
equation is one prototype; it describes the evolution of temperature in space
over time. This and similar equations play a central role in diverse fields,
such as physics, economics, information theory, engineering and mathematics. One
of the fundamental principles of the heat equation is diffusion: heat spreads
out over time as the temperature becomes more and more constant. In the
classical heat equation, the heat particles move independently and do not
interact. When the particles interact with each other, then the situation
becomes much more complicated and the evolution is governed by a nonlinear
partial differential equation. This is seen in many geometric problems, such as
the evolution of interfaces where the governing principle is a nonlinear version
of the heat equation. The equations describing the evolution of interfaces is
known as mean curvature flow; it was initially studied in material science and
now plays a role in many areas of science, engineering and mathematics. In
addition to the research component of this proposal the project also will also
train students: the PI is currently advising several PhD students as well as
working with an advanced undergraduate student. The PI is writing books on
research topics of current interest based on graduate courses (on the heat
equation and on the mean curvature flow) with his colleague Toby Colding. The PI
serves on the editorial board of eight highly regarded mathematics journals,
including the Annals of Mathematics. The PI is also working on curriculum reform
at his home institution, the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project attacks fundamental questions on
geometric flows, including properties of singularities and dynamical properties
of the flow. In mean curvature flow (MCF), a sub-manifold evolves over time to
decrease its area as efficiently as possible, pulling itself tight. Over time,
the non-linearity dominates and singularities develop. The key is to understand
these singularities. Most of the progress has been for hyper-surfaces where the
flow can be expressed as a single equation. In higher co-dimension, the flow is
a complicated system of interacting equations and much less is known. This
project focuses on fundamental questions in higher co-dimension MCF:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Which singularities are generic and which can be perturbed
away?&lt;br/&gt;2. What are the dynamics of the flow near a
singularity?&lt;br/&gt;3. What does the flow look like near a singularity? Is
the blow up unique?&lt;br/&gt;4. When are singularities
isolated?&lt;br/&gt;These are absolutely fundamental questions and progress will
have significant implications. One of the key tools is the subtle interplay
between function theory and geometry. Many of the techniques developed apply to
a broader class of systems, including Ricci flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.