* 2005898
* Developing a Network to Coordinate Research on Equity Practices and Cultures in STEM Maker Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jill Castek, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,985.00

The goal of the National Science Foundationâ€™s Research Coordination Network
(RCN) program is to advance a field or create new directions in research or
education by supporting groups of investigators to communicate and coordinate
their research, training and educational activities across disciplinary,
organizational, geographic and international boundaries. This RCN will bring
together scholars and practitioners working at the intersection of equity and
interdisciplinary making in STEM education. Making is a culture that emphasizes
interest-driven learning by doing within an informal, peer-led and creative
social environment. Hundreds of maker spaces and maker-oriented classroom
pedagogies have developed across the country. Maker spaces often include digital
technologies such as computer design, 3-D printers, and laser cutters, but may
also include traditional crafts or a variety of artist-driven creations. The
driving purpose of the project is to collectively broaden STEM-focused maker
participation in the United States through pursuing common research questions,
sharing resources, and incubating emergent inquiry and knowledge across multiple
working sites of practice. The network aims to build capacity for research and
knowledge, building in consequential and far-reaching mechanisms to leverage
combined efforts of a core group of scholars, practitioners, and an extended
network of formal and informal education partners in urban and rural sites
serving people from groups underrepresented in STEM. Maker learning spaces can
be particularly fruitful spaces for STEM learning toward equity because they
foster interest-driven, collective, and community-oriented learning in making
for social and community change. The network will be led by a team of multi-
institutional and multi-disciplinary researchers from different geographic
regions of the United States and guided by a steering committee of prominent
researchers and practitioners in making and equity will convene to facilitate
network activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Equitable processes are rooted in a
commitment to understand and build on the skills, practices, values, and
knowledge of communities marginalized in STEM. The research network aims to fill
in gaps in current understandings about making and equity, including the many
ways different projects define equity and STEM in making. The project will
survey the existing research terrain to develop a dynamic and cohesive
understanding of making that connects to learners' STEM ideas, communities, and
historical ways of making. Additionally, the network will collaboratively
develop central research questions for network partners. The network will create
a repository for ethical and promising practices in community-based research and
aggregate data across sites, among other activities. The network will support
collaboration across a multiplicity of making spaces, research institutions, and
community organizations throughout the country to share data, methodologies,
ways of connecting to local communities and approaches to robust integration of
STEM skills and practices. Project impacts will include new research
partnerships, a dissemination hub for research related to making and equity,
professional development for researchers and practitioners, and leveraging
collective research findings about making values and practices to improve
approaches to STEM-rich making integration in informal learning environments.
The project is funded by NSF's Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which supports innovative research, approaches, and resources for use in a
variety of settings. As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in
informal environments, the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds
innovative research, approaches, and resources for use in a variety of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.