* 2005501
* Geometric Limits in Higher Teichmueller Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Andrea Tamburelli, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 136,500.00

A manifold is an abstract mathematical object that in the small looks like the
space we live in, but that can have different global properties in the large. A
geometric structure on a manifold is a way of measuring quantities that are
invariant under a certain group of symmetries, the same way distances and angles
do not change under rotations or translations. In many cases, on a fixed
manifold, one can consider different geometric structures with the same
underlying group of symmetries. The world of possible such structures is the
moduli space. One example is the classic Teichmuller space that parametrizes
metrics of constant negative curvature on certain two dimensional manifolds.
Higher Teichmuller theory studies more general geometric structures on more
complicated manifolds and their dynamical properties. This award provides
funding for the research that focuses on fundamental questions in higher
Teichmuller theory: how can we describe the geometry of these objects starting
from the parameters in the moduli space? In particular, can we understand how
these structures degenerate when the parameters leave all compact sets in the
moduli space? Some numerical experiments related to this research will be
carried out as undergraduate research supervised by the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to study geometric structures on low-
dimensional manifolds with a rank 2 semi-simple Lie group of symmetries, such as
anti-de Sitter, convex projective and Lorentzian conformally flat, using
techniques from Higgs bundles, harmonic maps and representation theory. More
precisely, the PI will study geometric limits of these structures when the
parameters leave every compact set in the corresponding moduli spaces, with the
aim of finding a (partial) compactification of these moduli spaces and give a
geometric interpretation of the boundary points. A different line of research is
related to a long-standing question by Gromov about existence and regularity of
minimal area metrics on surfaces with a fixed systolic constraint, which he will
investigate exploiting tools from convex optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.