* 2005199
* Collaborative Research: Surface functionalization to promote beneficial biofilm formation and stability
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Chengzhi Cai, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 491,730.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harmful biofilms cause many
major problems in human health and the environment. Instead of developing
strategies to prevent biofilm formation on materials, an alternative approach is
to design materials that promote the formation of beneficial biofilms that expel
harmful bacteria. In addition to live microbes, the major component of biofilms
is the extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) secreted by the microbes. In
this collaborative project, researchers will modify materials surface with
specific biologically active molecules and investigate their role on the
formation and stability of the biofilms and EPS. Increasing body of evidence has
indicated that different material surfaces may strongly influence the properties
of a biofilm. However, the underlying mechanism and the role of the immobilized
biologically active molecules on EPS secretion and biofilm formation are largely
unknown. The proposed research project aims to bridge this important gap of
knowledge which will facilitate development of surface biofunctionalization to
promote formation of stable beneficial biofilms. Furthermore, this collaborative
project will provide training opportunities for undergraduate students including
underrepresented students in biomaterials technology and data science,
especially in analyzing large datasets consisting of thousands of
biomacromolecules and elucidating their functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project aims to gain
understanding on how surface presentation of multiple ligands affects the
formation and stability of beneficial bacterial biofilms as well as their
extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). The investigators will employ their
surface functionalization methods to present a variety of strong and specific
ligands targeting various bacterial surface components on silicone surfaces.
They will determine the effect of such surfaces on biofilm formation by two non-
pathogenic E. coli strains. They will also evaluate the long-term stability of
such biofilms against the challenge by other bacteria using their unique high-
throughput flow biofilm reactor system. The EPS components secreted by the
bacteria throughout the biofilm life cycle will be identified and quantified by
state-of-the-art mass spectrometry. The data is expected to provide new insights
into how EPS are developed during biofilm formation and shed light on their
biological functions. Guided by the knowledge generated from the study, the
investigators will explore the potential of tailoring the surface presentation
of specific ligands to “program” the formation of biofilms with desired
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.