* 2005439
* RAPID: Characterizing the Sedimentary Archive of the Longest Mississippi River Flood on Record, while Implementing a New Model for Inclusive Undergraduate Geoscience Research
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Travis Swanson, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 300,857.00

Vast areas of the Mississippi River Delta are rapidly disappearing due to
subsidence, dwindling sediment supply, and rising sea levels. Billions of
federal dollars are currently invested in mitigation strategies to combat land
loss in coastal Louisiana. These strategies include the construction of
engineered diversions to direct sediment-laden flood waters to regions that have
sunk beneath sea-level. In response to these urgent needs, the basic science
that underpins these strategies must be advanced apace. The spring flood of 2019
lasted several months and prompted the opening of Bonnet Carre Spillway to
protect New Orleans from flooding. The diverted floodwaters constructed a large
deposit in the spillway. This grant supports 17 undergraduate researchers and 4
early-career investigators to collect, archive and analyze sediment data from
this deposit, which serves as an analog for engineered land construction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Querying the 2019 Mississippi River flood deposits that
fill Bonnet Carre Spillway will: 1) advance our understanding of the
hydrodynamic controls on the sedimentary architecture of floodplain deposits,
and 2) bolster models that predict the dynamics of basin filling at the outlets
of sediment diversions using these hydrodynamic variables. Analyzing data from
this deposit will allow the investigators to address fundamental questions in
coastal restoration science. Creative scientific solutions for a diverse society
require a diverse scientific workforce. The geoscience community must create
accessible research opportunities that will include African American, Hispanic
and Native American students, who currently comprise less than 9 percent of all
students enrolled in geoscience graduate programs. This grant will improve
diversity in the future geoscience workforce through targeted recruiting efforts
and alliances with institutions in under-served communities. The funding
facilitates an inclusive field research experience by providing financial
assistance for students and opportunities to analyze collected data at home
institutions amongst students’ communities. This undergraduate research
framework is intended as a template for fostering diversity and inclusion in
Earth science. This research will provide training for undergraduate researchers
in traditional methods in sedimentology and advanced techniques in digital data
collection and quantitative analysis, thereby delivering training in data-
analysis to a diverse cohort of students preparing to join the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.