* 2005609
* Multiscale Methods in Quantitative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Robert Young, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 336,925.00

This NSF award provides funding for a project to develop new methods for working
with objects with complicated geometry at many different scales. Coastlines,
clouds, and leaves are examples of such objects that occur in nature. The famous
coastline paradox states that since a coastline is so rough at so many different
scales, it has no defined length. The PI plans to develop and study new methods
to build such multiscale objects and to break them down into easily handled
pieces. New ways to decompose objects often lead to great advances in
mathematics, where simple problems can have complicated, multiscale solutions.
The projectâ€™s three-prong approach includes studying ways to break down complex
objects, build complex objects out of simple pieces, and to measure multiscale
complexity. In addition to the research, the PI will train graduate students and
postdocs in the techniques developed by this project through advising, seminars,
minicourses, and reading groups and disseminate material on his webpage for
public access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to study problems in metric
geometry, geometric measure theory, and harmonic analysis related to maps and
surfaces with multiscale structure, that is, objects like Lipschitz and Holder
maps or fractals, that are hard to approximate by affine maps or by planes. One
focus is the study of geometric problems that have non-smooth solutions but no
smooth solutions, such as the Nash Embedding Theorem. Solutions to these
problems often use multiscale or self-similar structure to break rules that
smooth maps have to satisfy, and one aim of this project is to understand when
and why this phenomenon occurs. Another focus is quantitative and uniform
rectifiability. Uniform rectifiability has been a powerful tool for studying
singular integrals and geometric measure theory in Euclidean space. Recent work
has made it possible to find sharp bounds on the quantitative rectifiability of
surfaces in the Heisenberg group, and this project will explore the possibility
of extending notions of uniform rectifiability to the Heisenberg group and using
them to solve problems in the geometry of Euclidean space and the Heisenberg
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.