* 2005323
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Geometric Shortest Paths and Related Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Haitao Wang, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 12/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Finding a shortest path between two locations is a natural problem in the real
world. In today's information age, shortest path and related problems have been
extensively studied in computer and information science. Yet new problems keep
emerging as more and more applications are desired in practice. Among them, a
growing number of problems lie in certain geometric domains, which originate
from applications such as robot motion planning, transportation, geographic
information systems, logistics, computer graphics, computer vision, intelligent
systems, facility locations, VLSI design, etc. This project aims to study
fundamental shortest path and related problems in geometric settings. The goal
is to explore novel ideas and insights to develop efficient algorithms to solve
these problems. Research results produced from this project will be integrated
into several courses on data structures, algorithms, and computational geometry,
which will benefit both graduate and undergraduate students with diverse
backgrounds. This project will train graduate students as well as bring research
opportunities to undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
the topics in the project include, but are not limited to, shortest paths
avoiding obstacles and many of variations thereof, minimum-link paths, geodesic
Voronoi diagrams, geometric facility locations, etc. Some of these problems
already have existing algorithms, and this project is expected to develop more
efficient solutions based on new insights and techniques. Others have never been
studied before, and this project is expected to provide first-known algorithms
with an in-depth understanding of the geometric structures of these problems. By
developing new algorithms and techniques, this research will advance knowledge
and make progress on solving shortest path and related problems in geometric
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.