* 2005919
* Collaborative Research: Hyaluronan, NRF2 and Protracted Female Fertility in Long-lived Naked Mole-Rats
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Melissa Holmes, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,144,088.00

Naked mole-rats are the longest-living rodents, with a maximum lifespan of 35
years, and females of this species show no decline in fertility as they age.
Some degree of reproductive aging is typical of other mammals, with the naked
mole-rat being a notable exception to this rule. The principal objective of this
project is to determine if the molecule that is thought to provide naked mole-
rats with nearly complete resistance to cancer also contributes to the long
reproductive lifespan of females. The molecule is known as very high molecular
weight hyaluronan, and the naked mole-rat form can be produced by transgenic
mice. Mice that express the gene responsible for the synthesis of very high
molecular weight hyaluronan have been shown to live a longer and healthier life
than mice lacking this naked mole-rat gene, and the hypothesis to be tested is
that female reproductive aging will be reduced in these specialized mice. If the
naked mole-rat form of hyaluronan maintains female fertility in mice, then these
results could be applicable to species that are of conservational and
agricultural importance, as well as preserving fertility in women as they age.
This project will provide hands-on research opportunities to trainees ranging in
experience from high school students to postdoctoral associates. It will also
provide zoos and animal parks that maintain naked mole-rat colonies with
educational materials to add to their informational displays about the
remarkable reproductive biology of this species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
focus of this proposal is to discover the physiological mechanisms that underlie
the remarkably long reproductive lifespan of female naked mole-rats, which show
no aging-associated declines in fertility or fecundity into their third decade
of life. Two of the physiological mechanisms that contribute to the naked mole-
rat’s remarkable longevity and healthspan will be investigated for their impacts
on ovarian structure, function and fertility as females age. These include the
very high molecular weight form of hyaluronan and enhanced cytoprotective
signaling by nuclear regulatory factor erythroid 2 (NRF2). Through
interrogations of ovaries from naked mole-rats themselves, and from transgenic
mice that express naked mole-rat hyaluronan synthase 2, this project will
determine whether female reproductive aging is attenuated by very high molecular
weight hyaluronan and/or enhanced NRF2 signaling. This would manifest as reduced
ovarian inflammation, fibrosis and stiffness, more ovarian follicle numbers with
better quality oocytes, and improved fertility in older females. The project
will advance scientific knowledge about the roles that inflammation and fibrosis
play in the process of ovarian aging and elucidate how long-lived mammals can
maintain the size and quality of their ovarian reserves to support protracted
fertility. The broader impacts include providing hands-on research experiences
for trainees, including high school students enrolled in the Ithaca Youth
Bureau’s College Discovery Program, establishing a Naked Mole-Rat Investigator
Network (listserv), and helping North American zoos to expand their educational
repertoires to include exciting information about naked mole-rat reproductive
biology in order to increase public scientific literacy about these amazing
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.