* 2005678
* Youth Lead the Way: A Youth Advisory Research Board Model for Climate Impact Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Schwade, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,403.00

The impacts of changes in the climate at local and global levels threaten how
people live. Some frontline communities, especially in historically
disenfranchised and under-resourced areas, are particularly vulnerable to the
devastating effects of climatological events such as wildfires, flooding, and
urban heat islands. As such, there is an urgent need for collective, evidence-
based understanding and engagement to prevent and prepare for these potentially
fatal events. Led by the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI) in
Portland, Oregon, in collaboration with local and national partners, Youth Lead
the Way is an early-stage Innovations in Development project that offers a
theory-based approach for youth in climatologically vulnerable communities to
work in climate science research alongside field researchers, develop leadership
skills, and engage in timely conversations that impact their own communities.
The project will develop and evaluate a Youth Advisory Research Board model to
equip and support youth and informal STEM education institutions to conduct
evidence-based research on local climate impacts and communicate the findings of
their research to their communities. Youth Lead the Way advances the work of
several previous NSF-funded projects on climate education, youth advisory
boards, and collaborative networks to engage the public in informal STEM
learning. Findings from this project will support ongoing efforts in the
informal STEM education field to meaningfully engage youth and to more
effectively communicate science related to climate and its impacts to the
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this initial two-year early-stage project,
youth predominantly from racial and ethnic groups underrepresented in STEM will
engage in a year-long extended STEM experience. These youth will work
collaboratively with scientists and museum professionals to enhance their skills
as climate researchers, science communicators, and educational leaders, while
reaching an estimated 4,000 or more public audience members through research and
events at OMSI, in their schools, and in their communities. Using a cohort
model, the youth will conduct scientifically based research studies on various
local climate impact topics while concurrently serving in an advisory role at
the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry, where they will participate in
shaping relevant museum programs and practices. The youth will also develop and
present climate stories—a communication approach based on storytelling—to raise
public understanding and awareness about local climatological changes and
impacts. In addition to the youth component, a companion workshop will be held
at the Sciencenter in Ithaca, New York, a partner organization, to train staff
and formatively assess the feasibility of scaling the model in other museums. At
the program level, an exploratory qualitative research study will be conducted
to identify the factors of the overall model that contribute to desired outcomes
of youth engagement, climate impact education, and informal science education
professional development. Interviews, surveys, focus groups, group chats among
youth cohort members, and reviews of artifacts generated by the youth will
inform this exploratory study. A theory-based guide outlining key findings,
considerations, and recommendations will also be produced. The dissemination of
this work will be multi-tiered, reaching thousands within the target communities
through public programs, professional networks, at conferences, and a live
virtual professional development event hosted by the Association for Science-
Technology Centers. If successful, Youth Lead the Way will lay the groundwork
for a model that promotes youth and public engagement in STEM through climate
science research and identifies promising pathways for future research and
similar efforts well beyond this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This early-stage
Innovations in Development project is funded by the NSF Advancing Informal STEM
Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.