* 2005421
* International Group Travel: Engaging students in science international decision making: Madrid, Spain - December 2019
* GEO,RISE
* 12/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Gillian Bowser, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2022
* USD 30,916.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Addressing global environmental issues involves working at the
intersection of science and decision making. Graduate students and early career
researchers who engage in environmental research, however, have few meaningful
opportunities within academia to gain the knowledge and training on how their
research can be employed for social innovation and collective impacts. PIs
propose an innovative and immersive experience for students on communicating
science for decision making through student-led presentations and outreach at an
international United Nations meeting on international environmental issues. By
coupling training and authentic, real world engagement, students will learn how
to navigate environmental issues in decision making, gain intercultural and
diplomacy skills and build professional networks. Communicating science to
decision makers is a critical part of preparing graduate students and early
career researchers. Using a team-based approach to build research presentations
for decision makers can provide graduate students professional development
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Team-based projects can
bring together students from different institutional backgrounds as well as from
different disciplines. Students from three different institutions have worked
together on presentations to international negotiators at the COP25 on science
topics related to their own research and tied to the sustainable development
goals (SDGs) of the UN. These topics include carbon markets, atmospheric
sciences, emerging technology, gender issues, biodiversity loss, green careers,
and many others. Presenting data on complex environmental issues that combines
disciplines such as geosciences, atmospheric sciences and environmental sciences
will provide students with unique international and interdisciplinary
experience. In addition, presenting research in an international context
provides students with cross cultural experiences as students move into
professional careers. Each student team conducted primary and secondary data
gathering on topics related to the sustainable development goals (SDGs) so
students experienced aligning research questions with policy target
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.