* 2005966
* Smart Science Exhibits: Enhancing STEM Learning through Sustained Use of Mixed-Reality in Multiple Informal Learning Spaces
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nesra Yannier, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,372,212.00

Museums and similar informal learning settings offer opportunities for children
and families to learn together in an engaging way. Current exhibits rely mainly
on parents, teachers, signage, and staff in science museums to provide support
and guidance. Since it is not always feasible to have knowledgeable staff on
hand and not all parents have the same knowledge and background, children
receive varied support and people often miss the point of the learning
experience or activity. This project will develop and research a new genre of
Smart Science Exhibits that use artificial intelligence (AI) in an adaptive
system to support children in learning science by doing science. The aim of the
project is to incorporate AI adaptivity and personalization to maximize inquiry-
based STEM learning and engagement in informal learning settings. This research
builds on the project team’s first Smart Science Exhibit (EarthShake), which
uses AI vision to give interactive feedback to visitors based on their actions
and guides them through scientific inquiry. In the project’s preliminary work,
the first smart exhibit demonstrated higher engagement and more learning gains
than resulted from a traditional museum exhibit addressing the same scientific
content. Smart exhibits can extend and enhance the limited support that staff
and parents can provide. This project will develop and investigate adaptive
approaches to mixing exploration and AI guidance, which will personalize
feedback during constructive exploration. The project will build on learning
science techniques and technology, proven in intelligent tutoring systems in
formal settings, and apply this to different informal learning contexts. The
goal is to provide just-in-time learning support, which will extend the time
visitors spend with exhibits, thereby deepening inquiry-based science learning.
The project is partnering with science museums and afterschool programs, which
will enable thousands of children and families from a wide variety of
backgrounds to use the project’s smart exhibits each year. Smart Science
Exhibits is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which
supports innovative research, approaches, and resources as part of its overall
strategy to enhance learning in informal environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many informal learning settings are considering mixed-
reality (MR) technologies to increase engagement and understanding of science.
Using Smart Science Exhibits, the project will investigate how design choices in
mixed-reality systems impact users’ engagement and learning of STEM concepts.
(Mixed reality is the blending of the physical world and the digital world,
enabling interaction between human and artificial intelligence.) Project
research will extend current research, which is largely descriptive, by
investigating empirical results on learner outcomes. Key research questions are:
What types of adaptivity and personalization can improve Smart Science Exhibits
and MR systems generally? What balance of exploration and AI guidance is best to
maximize enjoyment, engagement and learning? Do findings about the effective
features of Smart Science Exhibits generalize to different content areas and
informal learning settings? The project will employ user-centered design
research, formative evaluation, and controlled experimentation to discover how
mixed-reality systems should be designed to best meet visitor and staff needs in
informal learning settings including multiple museums and afterschool providers.
Data on learner behaviors in mixed-reality experiences in a variety of informal
settings will inform the design of Smart Science Exhibits. The project will
investigate whether adaptive approaches generalize across content and context to
achieve better STEM learning, engagement, collaboration, and productive
dialogue. The project will incorporate the team’s prior technical research,
which developed both vision techniques to track children’s physical interactions
and interactive pedagogical techniques to provide scaffolds for and reactive
feedback on children’s inquiry and construction behaviors. New technical
research will develop AI techniques for adaptive task selection and personalized
feedback that draws on a visitor’s history of interaction. Project research and
design resources will be widely shared with the science museum educators and
designers through presentations at annual conferences and with researchers,
developers and others through peer-reviewed journal publications and
professional publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.