* 2005836
* Tennessee Valley Tri-State LSAMP Pre-Alliance Planning
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Ross Alexander, University of North Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2023
* USD 116,835.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
(URM)populations(African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or
Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully
complete high quality degree programs in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSAMP
Pre-Alliance Planning effort for a potential Tennessee Valley Tri-State STEM
Pathways and Implementation-Only (SPIO) alliance in 2022 involving the
University of North Alabama, Mississippi University for Women, the University of
Mississippi-Martin, East Mississippi Community College and Northwest-Shoals
Community College with other non-academic organizations will allow an extensive
network a platform from which to evaluate and develop inter-institutional
resources, policies and pathways to improve graduation rates for URMs in STEM in
this predominantly rural U.S. region. This planning period will a) yield new
information about the effectiveness of a diverse array of partners to formalize
an Alliance; b) provide a comprehensive assessment of the current suite of
services, resources, and opportunities offered to URM STEM undergraduates and
determine where the gaps exist; and c) design and promote new pathways with
evidence-based activities that will improve the numbers of URM undergraduates in
STEM fields. Regionally, this work will provide knowledge to advance a specially
targeted cohort of students by implementing activities that will be sustainable
for the proposed network of partners, including employers. With a strong blend
of academic and administrative leadership experiences in STEM fields, this team
offers an understanding of the barriers and challenges faced by students and
families in surrounding rural areas of the targeted tri-state region. Through
this planning effort, new pathways will be enabled that, otherwise, would not
converge without such a concerted effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from
this project will be used to develop a full proposal in 2022 to establish a
successful model through the NSF LSAMP STEM Pathways Implementation-Only (SPIO)
funding opportunity for recruitment, retention, graduation, and post-graduate
success of primarily rural students from historically underrepresented
backgrounds in STEM disciplines. By assessing current resources and approaches,
we will establish and formalize pathways from rural northern Alabama, rural
Mississippi and rural Tennessee in preparation for a full Alliance that will be
both responsive and competitive for workforce needs across this tri-state
region. This planning grant will enable strategic partnerships that will
ultimately strengthen the tri-state's collective economy and infuse the national
job market with highly trained STEM professionals who hail from rural settings
and will be prepared to make economic and social contributions in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.