* 2005976
* EAGER: Using Historic Art to Explore Legacies and Lost Function in Eastern Us Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2020,12/31/2022
* William Keeton, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2022
* USD 162,235.00

Understanding forests of the past helps to understand current forest ecosystems
and how they may change in the future. In many forests, however, historical
information is limited and it is difficult to assess the impact of loss of
species on forest ecosystem structure and function. Historical landscape
paintings may be a valuable source of information about the past, as they
present color images that pre-date photography. These pictures may offer a way
to explore past changes in forest structure that relate to current patterns in
forest productivity and ecosystem function. However, the use of these images in
historical ecology has been hampered by questions of image validity: How truly
accurate are the images portrayed in these paintings? How much of an image is an
artist’s manipulation of a scene to best illustrate a message, allegory, or
romanticized view of nature? The proposed interdisciplinary project uses tools
and knowledge from humanities and ecological sciences to address these concerns.
The main objective is to assess how to mine forest paintings by nineteenth-
century American artists as a potential data set for historical ecology. This
project also represents a rare deep integration of approaches from science and
humanities and has the potential to serve as a model for how crossing of
disciplinary boundaries may have high value to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project joins the expertise of art scholars
(who understand how and why nineteenth-century landscape images were created)
with the expertise of scientists (who understand the structure and function of
forest ecosystems). Research will focus on images and forests in the
northeastern US from the nineteenth century. This was an era in which the forest
landscape was rapidly transforming, and during which the popularity of landscape
painting – particularly as practiced by the so-called Hudson River School – was
simultaneously exploding. With historic and ongoing land use changes coupled
with historic (and ongoing) species losses, northeastern forest landscapes are
an ideal place to explore forest change over the past two centuries. Most
historic records for this region, while extensive in some regards, generally
tell us little about forest structural dynamics, stand regeneration dynamics, or
community composition and natural disturbance rates. An interdisciplinary
research approach exploring forest ecology and art history in tandem can help us
understand historic ecosystems and how the representation of forested landscapes
affects modern concepts of wilderness and nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.