* 2005194
* Twist and route canalized polariton nano-light in MoO3 microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Siyuan Dai, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2024
* USD 328,038.00

The manipulation of light at small scales is important for delicate biomedical
treatment, fast optical circuits, super-resolution microscopy and many others.
For this purpose, recent efforts typically involve a type of nanoscale optical
waves called polariton nano-light. Polariton nano-light travel in materials like
water ripples propagating in a pool. They carry the energy of light and are
affected by material properties. This project explores the manipulation of
polariton nano-light in a new type of layered material: molybdenum trioxide. The
research team plans to tune the wavefront geometry of polariton nano-light by
stacking and twisting molybdenum trioxide in a LEGO-like fashion. The energy
flow of polariton nano-light can also be routed by geometric structuring of
molybdenum trioxide, for a variety of practical applications including
biochemical sensing, nano-manufacturing and optical forces. In addition, this
project provides the training opportunity for undergraduate and graduate
students, especially the underrepresented minorities, on scanning probe nano-
optical characterization, electromagnetic simulation and van der Waals material
fabrication. The outreach and summer research activities provide K-12 students
and high-school teachers hand-on research experience and teaching units for
their curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project is to
explore the propagation routing and wavefront configuration of nanoscale light-
matter waves – polariton nano-light – by van der Waals twisting and structuring
of molybdenum trioxide. The routing and configuration rely on the
electromagnetic directionality of polariton nano-light in molybdenum trioxide:
they propagate along certain direction(s) with extremely anisotropic
electromagnetic field. This electromagnetic directionality suggests the
wavefront configuration via electromagnetic interactions of polariton nano-light
in stacked vdW structures. The research team exploits state-of-the-art optical
nano-imaging and electromagnetic simulation to reveal the configured polariton
nano-light with straightforward real-space images. Furthermore, the research
team plans to investigate exotic optical physics that are ungoverned by
conventional optics laws, when additional geometric structuring is applied to
the already directional nano-light. This project is expected to complement
current knowledge in van der Waals materials and polaritonic nano-optics with
the understanding of twisting configuration and exotic optical physics of
directional polariton nano-light, and demonstrate the prototype van der Waals
structures with tailored and reconfigurable properties for on-demand nano-
optical functionalities. This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and
Photonics Materials Program in the Division of Materials Research and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.