* 2005346
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Effects of Environmental Change on Fish Ecology
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Emily Jones, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 30,298.00

Jonathan Dombrosky and Dr. Emily Lena Jones of the University of New Mexico,
will research the impact of a changing environment on the incorporation of new
foods into human diets. This project helps develop archaeologically visible
indicators of when a food type recovered in relatively low abundance might
relate to human nutritional demands. In the American Southwest, it has long been
assumed that fish were unimportant in the diet of Ancestral Pueblo groups. Yet,
small numbers of fish remains are consistently recovered from late prehispanic
archaeological sites in New Mexico, and they are rare during earlier time
periods. The end of drought conditions may have impacted how people made
different decisions about the foods they ate. In addition, prehispanic fishing
in desert ecosystems is of interest to both archaeologists and ecologists.
Understanding more about the ecology of prehispanic fish communities will
provide a new source of paleoenvironmental information in a region where fish
remains are thought to be insignificant. Desert streams are of critical
conservation concern given modern anthropogenic impacts and current drought
forecasts. The results of this project will be of interest not only to scholars,
but to agencies charged with the management of plants and animals in desert
ecosystems. This research will also support the work of a young scholar earning
his PhD and will provide hands-on training and funding for one undergraduate
research assistant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dombrosky, under the supervision of Dr.
Jones, will use theory rooted in behavioral ecology to understand how fishing
might have become an optimal food-getting strategy for Ancestral Pueblo farmers.
Three lines of evidence will test this question: 1) radiocarbon dates of fish
bones, to establish the timing and tempo of fishing; 2) body size estimations of
fishes from archaeological sites, to assess whether they were unusually large;
and 3) analysis of the stable isotopic composition of fish bones recovered from
these sites, to determine if fishes had more variable diets during the late
prehispanic period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.