* 2005572
* Category I: Crossing the Divide Between Today's Practice and Tomorrow's Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2026
* Gregory Bauer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2026
* USD 24,499,999.00

Advances in scientific applications and user interfaces have democratized the
availability and accessibility of advanced research computing systems, allowing
a broader range of researchers to pursue answers to ever more complex problems.
Further, advances in computational and data-intensive research techniques are
employed in a growing number of fields, both as primary methods of investigation
and as complements to traditional modeling and simulation methods. Underpinning
these advances is an accelerating shift in many research applications away from
traditional processors to the vastly parallel floating-point processors
available in modern computer graphics hardware. The National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign will deploy and operate Delta, an advanced computing and data resource
that will capture the essence of change in technology and practice that NCSA, as
a global leader in advanced research computing, pursues in its mission to
advance human understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delta will advance the
productivity and usability of advanced computing resources by deploying modern
interfaces, such as science gateways and other web-based interfaces that will
both improve usability and provide results to researchers in real-time.
Federation across the national cyberinfrastructure ecosystem will enable
integration as a component of multi-site workflows that include campus,
national, and commercial cloud resources. NCSA will partner with the Science
Gateways Community Institute (SGCI) to implement the science gateway
infrastructure that will enable broad communities of researchers to take
advantage of the advanced computing and data analytics capabilities of the
system. Significant development will take place to evaluate and advance the
accessibility of Delta by individuals with disabilities and to disseminate these
advances throughout the broader research computing and data ecosystem. NCSA will
take an active role in identifying applications and research teams that have the
greatest potential for application acceleration through the adoption of GPU
computing, thus greatly expanding the adoption of GPU-based computing as a
growing norm and reducing time-to-solution for a broad range of research
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Delta system will be a unique addition to
the NSF-funded ecosystem of advanced computing resources due to its balanced
mixture of a substantial GPU capability alongside more traditional CPU
processing capabilities. Taking advantage of next-generation processor
architectures and NVIDIA graphics processors, Delta will include what will be,
at its launch, the most performant GPU computing resource in the National
Science Foundation portfolio with its 800+ graphics
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The compute elements of Delta will employ an
advanced network interconnect, delivering at least 100 gigabits per second of
bandwidth to each compute node for application communications and access to an
innovative storage environment. Data-intensive research will be accelerated by a
nearly 10 petabyte high-performance storage subsystem, which incorporates three
petabytes of flash-based, relaxed-POSIX file system which NCSA will use to
demonstrate the effectiveness of modern file systems in advancing the
performance of data-intensive and high-performance computing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.