* 2005092
* Topological superconductivity and high order non-abelian excitations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Leonid Rokhinson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 611,387.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Statistical properties are central to the
quantum mechanical understanding of the world. All known particles have so-
called Abelian statistics, meaning that result of several consecutive particle
exchanges does not depend on the order of the exchanges. Recently it has been
proposed that particles with non-Abelian statistics can be realized in some
exotic systems, and signatures of simplest non-Abelian particles – Majorana
fermions – have been reported. The main driving force in the search for these
elusive excitations, apart from scientific curiosity, is a possibility to
realize a fault tolerant quantum computer. Qubits based on Majorana fermions are
not computationally universal,, which means one cannot perform all the
operations with these fault tolerant qubits alone. The main objective of this
proposal is to develop a new system where more computationally complete higher
order non-Abelian excitations can be realized. Outreach to local Indiana schools
and training of students in convergent skills of quantum materials synthesis and
characterization, quantum computing and quantum technologies is
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed research is to develop a system where high-order non-Abelian
excitations can be realized and manipulated. Specifically, spin transitions in
the fractional quantum Hall effect regime will be explored to realize a
reconfigurable network of helical channels with fractionalized charged
excitations. Demonstration of induced superconductivity in these channels will
be a major milestone. An intricate interplay between superconductivity and
integer and strongly interacting fractional quantum Hall states will be
investigated. While signatures of Majorana fermions, the simplest type of
excitations with non-Abelian statistics, have been seen in recent experiments,
current experiments fall short of demonstrating non-Abelian exchange statistics.
This proposal will address development of a system where high order non-Abelian
excitations (parafermions) can be realized and manipulated. Outreach to local
Indiana schools and training of students in convergent skills of quantum
materials synthesis and characterization, quantum computing and quantum
technologies is planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.