* 2005840
* Cultivating Science: Examining the Free-Choice Science Learning Networks of Urban Gardeners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Elysa Corin, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,901.00

Free-choice and interest-driven learning activities are a highly significant
source of STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) learning for
adults through their lifespans. Gardening is one such activity that is
widespread across communities with one in every fifty American adults reporting
an interest in gardening/plants and who associate that interest/hobby with
science. While the terms interest and hobby are related, the latter refers to
something one actively does, not just thinks about doing. Adults who seek out
learning and participation opportunities in highly visible community spaces
(e.g., gardening clubs, science centers, botanical gardens) are likely to be
White and well-educated. Further understanding is needed of when and how
community members from other demographic groups access different resources
(people, organizations, and places) for information and opportunities, and what
influences them to do so. This Pilot and Feasibility Study will explore informal
learning networks in Alameda County, California, specifically around gardeners
and gardening. Researchers will use surveys, focus groups, and program
observations to gather data on how those who pursue self-directed scientific
learning about gardening access information. Of interest is how the differential
access to and pursuit of information occurs among diverse community members,
especially those outside of more established Master Gardener and other organized
gardening programs. This research will: 1) contribute to understanding of the
resources that interest-driven adult STEM learners access, describing the
barriers they perceive and how/if the accessed resources differ by gender, race,
or socioeconomics; 2) determine the feasibility of a sampling approach to gather
data from individuals in demographic groups who may not have been reached in
prior research efforts; and 3) generate insights for informal science education
practitioners and researchers about how to better support diverse interest-
driven STEM learners. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that there is a large
percentage of individuals from non-dominant populations engaged in free-choice
STEM learning; past efforts have likely under-counted the participation of
individuals from these communities. To achieve the research aims the research
team will utilize respondent-driven sampling, engaging gardening hobbyists’
social contacts to recruit participants, and collect data from diverse (gender,
race, socioeconomics) urban gardeners who may be differently connected to STEM
learning ecosystem resources/organizations than their highly visible peers. This
approach will be used to investigate the behaviors, perceptions, and outcomes
related to STEM learning such as development of self-efficacy and science
identity. Focus groups will provide context for themes that arise in the survey
data and clarify hobbyists’ participation preferences and experiences. In situ
observations of learning environments comprise the third mechanism for
collecting data. All three data sources will support triangulation of results
and contribute to the findings. Key outcomes of this project will be to
determine if the target population has been reached through the sampling
approach, to identify methodological guidelines for sampling with an intent to
reach those from populations under-represented in STEM-related free-choice
activities, and to clarify which network variables are most useful to study.
This research lays the foundation for future work. It is anticipated that the
approach developed and tested in this research may be adapted by others in the
future and will have the potential to serve as a model for community-based
organizations and researchers interested in studying the learning ecosystems of
previously hidden populations of participants, including how these individuals
perceive and access resources to support their STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.