* 2005899
* Structure and Function in Large-Scale Complex Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Mark Newman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 329,172.00

Many systems of interest in science, technology, and medicine can be represented
as networks, including the Internet, the power grid, neural networks in the
brain, and the contact networks between individuals over which diseases spread.
This project focuses on modeling of such networked systems using mathematical
and computer models and will address two areas of need. The first concerns how
we determine the structure of networks in the first place. To make a model of,
for instance, a disease outbreak, one must determine the pattern of contacts
between people in order to understand spread. Experimental measurements of
network structure, however, are known to have inaccuracies and can give
misleading results. To circumvent the impossible task of making perfect
measurements, this project will use a combination of state-of-the-art
computational and mathematical techniques to formulate methods for making
accurate estimates of network structure even when the underlying data are
unreliable. The result will be new ways to make more trustworthy calculations of
network quantities and precise indications of the margin of error that can be
used to inform scientific judgment. The second focus of this project is the
development of new computer algorithms for calculation of network quantities
using the mathematical technique known as belief propagation. These algorithms
will focus on calculations such as resilience of networks to failure or attack,
outcomes of epidemiological processes, or large-scale structural features of
networks. As an example, belief propagation methods permit calculation of the
expected number of individuals who will be infected by a disease given the
structure of a contact network and fundamental parameters of the disease
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new mathematical
methods for the analysis of network data, for the self-consistent solution of
processes taking place on networks, and for optimal estimation of network
properties in the presence of measurement error. The first of two research
themes will focus on message passing methods, a powerful class of self-
consistent methods for solving for the structural and dynamical properties of
networked systems. Though useful, these methods have long been handicapped by
technical limitations that restrict their use to loop-free, or nearly loop-free,
networks. Building on successful preliminary studies, this project will show how
these limitations can be overcome and develop a new generation of message
passing methods that work on realistic networks, including those with a high
density of loops. A range of specific applications will be pursued and the
methods developed will also serve as the foundation for new formal developments,
such as new random graph models, theories of structural phase transitions in
networks, and the computation of spectra for very large networks. A second theme
will focus on rigorous methods for making estimates of network structure from
rich but potentially unreliable data sources. Most empirical observations of
network structure contain measurement error of one kind or another, but these
errors are rarely considered, in part for lack of a comprehensive mathematical
framework for treating them. This project will develop such a framework, based
on formal models of the measurement process coupled with statistical and machine
learning tools including Bayesian methods, expectation-maximization algorithms,
and Monte Carlo techniques. The result will be a new set of tools that allow
practitioners to make reliable estimates of networks and their properties from
noisy data and to quantify the level of uncertainty in those estimates. In
collaboration with domain experts in computer science, biology, and the social
sciences, specific applications of these methods will be developed for systems
such as the Internet, ecological networks, and social
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.