* 2005804
* CAREER: Advances in Graph Learning and Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Chinmay Hegde, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2024
* USD 364,678.00

Graph-based data processing algorithms impact a variety of application domains
ranging from transportation networks, artificial intelligence systems, cellphone
networks, social networks, and the Web. Nevertheless, the emergent big-data era
poses key conceptual challenges: several existing graph-based methods used in
practice exhibit unreasonably high running time; several other methods operate
in the absence of correctness guarantees. These challenges severely imperil the
safety and reliability of higher-level decision-making systems of which they are
a part. This research introduces an innovative new computational framework for
graph learning and inference that addresses these challenges. Specific
applications studied in this project include: better approaches for monitoring
roadway congestion and identify traffic incidents in a timely manner; root-cause
analysis of complex events in social networks; and design of better personalized
learning systems, lowering educational costs and increasing quality nationwide.
Activities include integrated programs to increase participation of women and
under-represented minorities in the computational sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint, the investigator pursues
three research themes: (i) designing scalable non-convex algorithms for learning
the edges (and weights) of an unknown graph given a sequence of independent
static and/or time-varying local measurements; (ii) designing new approximation
algorithms for utilizing the structure of a given graph to enable scalable post-
hoc decision making in complex systems; (iii) developing provable algorithms for
training special families of artificial neural networks, and filling gaps
between rigorous theory and practice of neural network learning. Progress in
each of the above themes will be extensively evaluated using real-world data
from engineering applications including social network data, highway monitoring
data, and fluid-flow simulation data. Collaborations with domain experts in each
of these application areas will ensure that the new theory, tools, and software
emerging from this project will lead to meaningful societal benefits.