* 2005422
* NSF Student Travel Support for 2020 ACM Special Interest Group of Management of Data (ACM SIGMOD)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Min Chen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 02/28/2023
* USD 20,929.00

This National Science Foundation award funds Student Travel Fellowships for US
students attending SIGMOD 2020, the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
Management of Data, which will be held in Portland, Oregon, USA
(https://sigmod2020.org/) from June 14 to June 19, 2020. The Student Fellowships
will help cover the travel costs for 16 US students (out of which 8 will be
females and from under-represented groups and at least 4 will be first-time
undergraduate students), making it possible for them to attend the conference
and discuss and disseminate their work. The conference also provides an
opportunity for them to interact with future national and international
scientific collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SIGMOD conference, which was
established in 1975, has a dynamic and comprehensive program for publication,
education, and interaction, including research papers, tutorials, panels,
industrial papers, technical demonstrations, and undergraduate research papers.
The program includes publications relating to all aspects of data management
defined broadly, and particularly encourages publications on topics of emerging
interest in the research and development communities. The program also includes
workshops that showcase dedicated coverage due to their relevance to the current
data management research and development, industrial exhibits, and keynote talks
by leaders in academia and industry. All these activities provide a unique
opportunity for students to share their knowledge, experience, and research work
with internationally recognized researchers from both academia and industry. In
recent years, more than 800 attendees attended SIGMOD, and we expect the same
this year as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.