* 2005584
* Collaborative Research: The Development of Culturally Responsive Digital Media to Support STEM Knowledge Acquisition for English Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Kelsey Savage, COMPLEXLY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 247,881.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project would expand the informal STEM learning field’s understanding of
how to use digital science media to increase STEM educational experiences and
opportunities for English language learners. Across the U.S. there are
significant STEM opportunity and achievement gaps for English learners with
varying levels of English proficiency. This is at a time when the U.S. is facing
a shortage of STEM professionals in the workforce including the life and
physical science fields. This project aims to close these gaps and improve
English learners' STEM learning outcomes using digital media. Within community
colleges, there are multiple site-based programs to provide content to help
English learners to learn English and to improve their math and literacy skills.
Involving the state community college networks is a critical strategy for
gathering important feedback for the pedagogical approach as well as for
recruiting English learner research participants. The team will initially study
an existing YouTube chemistry series produced by Complexly then produce and test
new videos in Spanish using culturally relevant instructional strategies. The
target audience is 18-34-year-old English learners. Project partners are
Complexly, a producer of digital STEM media and EDC, a research organization
with experience in studying informal STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has the potential to advance knowledge about the use of culturally
relevant media to improve STEM opportunities and success for English language
learners. Using a Design-Based Implementation Research framework the research
questions include: 1) what are the effective production and instructional
strategies for creating digital media to teach science to English learners whose
native language is Spanish? 2) what science content knowledge do English
learners gain when the project’s approach is applied to a widely available set
of YouTube videos? and 3) how might the findings from the research be applied to
future efforts targeting English learners? The project has the potential to
significantly broaden participation in science and engineering. Phase 1 of the
research will be an exploration of how to apply strategic pedagogical approaches
to digital media content development. Interviews will be conducted with
educators in 3 focal states with high numbers of English language learners (NY,
CA, TX) to reflect on pedagogical foundations for teaching science to English
learners. A survey of 30 English learners will provide feedback on the perceived
strengths and weaknesses of a selection of existing YouTube chemistry videos.
Phase 2 will create/test prototypes of 6 adapted chemistry videos. Forty
students (ages 18-34) will be recruited and participate in cognitive interviews
with researchers after viewing these videos. Based on this input additional
videos will be produced with revised instructional strategies for further
testing. Additional rounds of production and testing will be conducted to
develop an English learners mini chemistry series. Phase 3 will be a pilot study
to gauge the science learning of 75 English learners who will view an 11-episode
chemistry miniseries. It will also identify gaps in expected learning to
determine whether any further adjustments are necessary to the instructional
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.