* 2005464
* Beyond Stability of Black Holes in General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Igor Rodnianski, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 466,536.00

This project strives to answer fundamental questions about strong field dynamics
in general relativity, including black hole processes and the formation and
structure of spacetime singularities. These questions can be expressed in
mathematics and the project will contribute to the venerable tradition of
rigorous mathematics making fundamental statements about our physical world, a
tradition which in the long run has proven central to advances in science and
technology. The subject of black holes and spacetime singularities has inspired
the popular imagination well beyond the confines of the scientific community, as
was apparent in the public reception of the &lt;br/&gt;detection of
gravitational waves from binary black hole systems and, most recently, of the
first stunning images of the immediate vicinity of a supermassive black hole.
The PI and co-PI will also contribute to broader impacts via training of PhD
students on problems related to the research in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project strives to advance beyond the study
of stability problems in general relativity and answer fundamental questions
about strong field dynamics of the theory, including non-linear aspects of
gravitational scattering, the fine structure of gravitational radiation and the
nature of spacetime singularities. The first major objective of this project,
based on a long sequence of previous joint work of the proposers, is to finish
up the mathematical proof of the non-linear stability of the Kerr black hole
metric. The second major objective of this project concerns understanding the
structure of spacetime singularities inside black holes, aiming to understand
their general form, in particular, whether they eventually become strong and
spacelike. A third and final major objective concerns the question of whether
singularities exist in the vacuum which are not hidden in black holes. The
project aims to answer this question in the affirmative, investigating also the
stability of these singularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.