* 2005432
* A Machine-Learning Approach to Quantitative Phase Analysis of Whole Rocks and Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Emily Evans, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 294,743.00

Studies of the chemistry of natural rocks and sediments usually require
quantification of how much of different minerals and related materials are
present. This is true for academic studies, as well as those by environmental
consulting, petroleum extraction, and mining companies. This project is meant to
improve the quality of a standard method of making these measurements, powder
X-ray diffraction. The main problem with using powder X-ray diffraction for such
a purpose is that when multiple minerals are present, the analyst needs to
supply a rather limited list of possible minerals for which to test. To do this
successfully, the analyst must have a certain amount of background knowledge
about which minerals are common or rare, and which tend to occur together in the
same geologic environments. Consequently, novice analysts are notorious for
producing implausible, or even strange, results. This project will address this
problem by using artificial intelligence techniques to make the process of
choosing minerals to include in an analysis more automated, allowing novice
analysts to produce more reliable results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
test the hypothesis that computer algorithms generated via machine learning
techniques can enhance a popular powder X-ray diffraction analysis technique to
deliver credible quantitative phase analyses in an automated, or semi-automated,
manner. The starting framework is a program (RockJockML) that fits sample
diffraction patterns with experimental patterns in a library that includes ~150
minerals. A large synthetic data set of powder X-ray diffraction patterns and
X-ray fluorescence analyses will be generated using crystal structure data from
the American Mineralogist Crystal Structure Database for mineral specimens that
are similar to those in RockJockML's standards library. The individual samples
in the synthetic data set will be modeled as mixtures of 1-15 minerals found
together at randomly chosen locations included in the Mineral Evolution Database
(MED), so that the data set will mimic known mineral prevalence and co-
occurrence patterns. Various machine learning algorithms will be fed the
training sets to produce models that best predict which phases are included in
each sample. The best models will then be incorporated into RockJockML, and
versions of the software will be produced in MATLAB and Python. The
investigators will also produce a database tool for adding phases to the
RockJockML database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.