* 2005120
* High School to College Mathematics Pathways: Supporting State Efforts
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* David Bressoud, Conference Board Math Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2022
* USD 155,755.00

The Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences (CBMS)---working in
collaboration with the Charles A. Dana Center at the University of Texas,
Austin, and Achieve---will hold two Forums on High School to College Mathematics
Pathways, one virtual in October 2020 and one in person in October 2021. The
forums will bring together the leadership teams already established from 23
states that are working across their state's K-12, two-year college, and
university systems. In the forum, the state teams will continue to identify
problems with and then to formulate and implement solutions for the transition
from high school to post-secondary mathematics. This is part of an ongoing
project that began in Fall 2018 funded by NSF #1840722. These state teams will
gather to share their experiences and knowledge gained over the past two years.
The Dana Center will provide technical assistance to help state teams advocate
for their proposals and plan for their implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of the forums will be the continuation of work with state-based
teams, incorporating leaders in K-12, two-year colleges, and the state's higher
education system, that are coordinating action to improve the articulation of
high school through post-secondary mathematics education. By facilitating better
communication and articulation across the high school to college transition and
paying attention to the personal and social skills that often impede student
progress, the outcomes of the forum should see the implementation of programs
that create improved student readiness for post-secondary education and improved
success. This program has the potential for broad impact across all categories
of students, with particularly strong implications for students who are
currently at most risk, including students from under-resourced schools, from
members of groups underrepresented in their participation in STEM, and those who
are in their family's first generation to go to college. These are the students
who are most at risk and who would benefit the most from well-crafted state-
based efforts to improve this articulation. This project is supported with
funding from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program. This effort
will continue to build on the existing work by the Charles A. Dana Center at the
University of Texas, Austin, and will draw on recent reports and recommendations
of CBMS member societies. The conference will be built around 20 to 25 state-
based teams, each team representing the state's department of education, the
flagship university and higher education system, and the two-year college
system. Teams will also draw on state leaders who have been engaged in efforts
to improve mathematics education at either the high school or college level.
This proposal is funded by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE)
program in the Division of Undergraduate Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.