* 2005593
* AGS-PRF: Constraining and Modeling the Contribution of Organic Nitrate to Fine Mode Particulate Matter
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Jessica Haskins, Haskins, Jessica Danielle
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 190,000.00

Organic nitrate is a major contributor to fine particular matter (PM2.5) that
affects Earthâ€™s radiative balance, visibility, and environmental and human
health. Atmospheric formation pathways of this particulate organic nitrate are
ill-defined, however. In the current project, data collected during past field
campaigns will be synthesized and analyzed to determine particulate organic and
inorganic nitrate concentrations in PM2.5. This data will be used to constrain
formation mechanisms in current atmospheric chemistry models which will help
guide future research, improve predictive modeling of PM2.5, and inform nitrogen
budget models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data obtained with High-Resolution Time of
Flight Aerosol Mass Spectrometers (HR-ToF-AMS) during 15 US field campaigns
between 2009 and 2016 will be exploited for particulate organic and total
nitrate. To test and validate mechanisms of organic and inorganic nitrate
formation, temporally and spatially matched 3-D atmospheric chemistry transport
(GEOS-Chem) model simulations will be performed and compared with observed
concentrations. The new dataset will be made publicly available for use by other
groups to guide future studies and help constrain regional and global models
beyond the GEOS-Chem community. The PI will perform this work as a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology while engaging
diverse undergraduate students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.