* 2005890
* Learning Data Science Through Civic Engagement With Open Data
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This AISL Pilots and Feasibility project will study the data science learning
that takes place as members of the public explore and analyze open civic data
related to their everyday lives. Government services, such as education,
transportation, and non-emergency municipal requests, are becoming increasingly
digital. Generally, program workshops and events may be able to support
participants in using such data to answer their own questions, such as: "How do
City agencies respond to noise in my neighborhood?" and "How do waste and
recycling services in my neighborhood compare with others?” This project seeks
to understanding how such programs are designed and facilitated to support
diverse communities in accessing and meaningfully analyzing data will promote
innovation and knowledge building in informal data science education. The team
will begin by summarizing best practices in data science education from a
variety of fields. Next they will explore the design and impacts of two programs
in New York City, a leader in publicly available Open Data initiatives. This
phase will explore activities and facilitation approaches, participants’
objectives and data literacy skills practice, and begin to identify potential
barriers to entry and levels of participation. Finally, the team will build
capacity for other similar organizations to explore and understand their impacts
on community members’ engagement with civic data. This pilot study will
establish preliminary evidence of the effectiveness of these programs, and in
turn, inform future research into the identifying and amplifying best practices
to support public engagement with data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research team
will begin by synthesizing data science learning best practices based on varied
literatures and surveys with academic and practitioner experts.
&lt;br/&gt;Synthesis results will be applied as a lens to gather preliminary
evidence regarding the impacts of two programs on participants’ data science
practices and understanding of the nature of data in the context of civics. The
programs include one offered by the Mayor's Office of Data Analytics (MODA),
which is the NYC agency with overall responsibility for the City’s Open Data
programs, and BetaNYC, a leading nonprofit organization working to improve lives
through civic design, technology, and engagement with government open data. The
research design triangulates ethnographic observations and artifacts, pre and
post adapted surveys, and interviews with participants and facilitators.
Researchers will identify programmatic metrics and adapts existing measures to
assess various outcomes related to public engagement with data, including:
question formulation, data set selection and manipulation, the use of data to
make inferences, and understanding variability, sampling and context. These
metrics will be shared through an initial assessment framework for data science
learning in the context of community engagement with civic open data.
Researchers will also begin to identify barriers to broader participation
through literature synthesis, interviews with participants and facilitators, and
conversations with other organizations in our networks, such as NYC Community
Boards. Findings will determine the suitability of the programs under study and
inform future research to identify and amplify best practices in supporting
public engagement with data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
NSF Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.