* 2005887
* High-Resolution Observations of Alfvenic Waves in the Solar Corona: Critical Early DKIST Science
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Daniel Wolf Savin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2024
* USD 545,875.00

One of the most enduring mysteries in solar physics is the coronal heating
problem. The solar corona has temperatures of over a million kelvins. Its only
significant heat source, the solar photosphere, has a temperature of only a few
thousand kelvins. An emerging model suggests that energy may be deposited into
the corona nonthermally through “Alfven waves” in the solar/interplanetary
magnetic field. This team will fully test this model by making observations of
Alfven waves in the solar corona using the newly-commissioned Daniel K. Inouye
Solar Telescope (DKIST). The work will be used to train a postdoctoral
researcher and will provide research opportunities for undergraduate students.
In addition, participants will conduct outreach through a public lecture and
stargazing program conducted by Columbia University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will observe the Solar corona as well as coronal holes to test four
different aspects of the Alfven wave dissipation model of coronal heating.
First, they will use widths of spectroscopic emission lines as observed by
DKIST’s Cryo-NIRSP instrument to examine Alfven wave damping in coronal holes.
Next, the team will use Cryo-NIRSP measurements of Doppler shifting of Alfven
waves in the corona to examine wave reflection. Third, they will conduct high-
spatial-resolution imaging spectroscopy with DKIST’s DL-NIRSP instrument to
examine the Alfven wave structure inside the corona, and determining which wave
modes (kink, torsional) might be present. Fourth, they will use the DL-NIRSP
instrument to examine the spatial extent (‘perpendicular wavelength’) of Alfven
waves to determine the characteristic region of particles accelerated by a given
wave. These kinds of measurements are only possible because of the high spatial
resolution of DL- NIRSP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.