* 2005942
* Young Patients as Innovators: Developing Pediatric Makerspaces to Enhance Chronically Ill Children's STEM Learning, Self-Agency, and Identity
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Gokul Krishnan, Digital Harbor Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 827,316.00

A makerspace is a place where participants explore their own interests and learn
by creating, tinkering, and inventing artifacts through the use of a rich
variety of tools and materials. This project will develop and research a
flexible model for makerspaces that can be adapted to local settings to support
informal STEM learning for hospitalized, chronically ill patients in pediatric
environments who are predominantly youth of color from low-income backgrounds.
These youth are subject to health disparities and healthcare inequities. Their
frequent absence from school and other activities disrupt friendship formations,
reduce their opportunities for social support, reduce their access to
environments where they can feel a sense of self-agency through learning and
creative activities. Through patient centered co-design, this project will build
adaptable STEM makerspace environments conducive to STEM-rich learning, the
exercise of self-agency, and development of STEM identity. Project design will
focus on the sensitive nature of working with vulnerable populations (i.e.,
immunocompromised patients). The project will develop and disseminate several
resources: (1) a flexible makerspace model that can be adapted to work in
different pediatric settings; (2) research methods for conducting research in
highly sensitive environments with and alongside young patients; and (3)
professional development resources and a playbook including guidebook and
facilitators guide that will articulate principles and processes for designing,
implementing and sustaining makerspaces in pediatric settings. These resources
will be widely disseminated through maker and other informal STEM networks.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will pursue two innovations. First, the
project will develop the physical design of adaptable informal STEM makerspaces
in pediatric settings. Second, the project will develop innovative patient-
centered methodologies for studying approaches to physical design and the
effects of makerspace installations for informal STEM-learning, self-agency, and
STEM identity development. Using a design-based research approach, the project
will investigate: (1) the extent to which physical makerspace designs support
access to material, relational, and ideational resources for STEM-learning and
well-being; (2) the extent to which makerspace installations, researchers, and
medical care staff support patients in accessing and generating tools and other
resources for personal learning and a sense of agency; and (3) the extent to
which makerspace design with a focus on affording material, relational, and
ideational resources provide rich opportunities for young patients to explore
their own interests and cultivate STEM identities. One of the project's
innovations, beyond development of adaptable makerspace model involves
developing an innovative patient-centered methodology for conducting educational
research toward broadening participation in STEM in highly sensitive medical
care environments. The project will employ a mixed-methods research design and
collect a variety of data to address these areas of research including
documentation of makerspace design plans and renderings, observational data
gathered through fieldnotes, video and audio recordings, informal interviews
with patients, their families, and child-care staff, and patient generated
artifacts. Articles for researchers and practitioners will be submitted for
publication to appropriate professional journals and peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of its overall strategy to enhance
learning in informal environments, the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program funds innovative research, approaches, and resources for use in a
variety of settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.