* 2005810
* Enacting and Researching Culturally Sustaining STEM Pedagogies Across Informal Settings in Gullah/Geechee Communities in the Southeastern United States
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Regina Ciphrah, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,978.00

The University of South Carolina will develop and research an educational
program in the Southeastern United States designed to recognize and foreground
the scientific contributions of the descendants of West Africans and West
Indians. Though these contributions have been vital to many scientific
enterprises, including land stewardship and aquaponics, they have remained
largely underappreciated in educational programs. To address this issue, this
project will develop an informal science education program for youth from
Gullah/Geechee communities whose ancestors were formerly enslaved West African
and West Indian peoples. Across centuries, Gullah/Geechee people have developed
historical and contemporary scientific, engineering, and technological practices
that enabled the mastery of fishing and the cultivation of numerous crops across
barrier islands and coastal cities from North Carolina to Florida. Guided by
Gullah/Geechee scholars and community members, pre-service and in-service
teachers will co-design culturally sustaining summer programs, which provide
Gullah/Geechee youth with opportunities to engage in culturally-embedded
scientific and engineering practices as they learn about numerous STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) career pathways related to these
practices. The University of South Carolina will host these summer programs in
partnership with the historic Penn Center, an African American historical and
cultural institution, and in partnership with the Belle W. Baruch Institute for
Marine and Coastal Sciences, a research organization dedicated to improving the
management of marine and coastal resources. Researchers will study how the in-
service and pre-service teachers enact pedagogies that sustain Gullah/Geechee
cultural practices. They will also study how the Gullah/Geechee youth share
their understandings of culturally-embedded scientific content through creating
iMovies and through giving community presentations hosted by the Penn Center,
Baruch Institute, and other community partners. This project will advance
knowledge on broadening participation in STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) career pathways in informal settings through culturally
sustaining pedagogies. This project will also advance partnerships through
illuminating how different institutions and stakeholders—such as community
leaders, cultural centers, university educator programs, and scientific research
organizations—can work together to support culturally-embedded learning across
informal settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of South Carolina will
conduct a mixed-method study grounded in principles of design-based research and
community-based participatory research. Pre-service and in-service teachers from
underrepresented groups will participate in an immersive two-year professional
development experience during which they co-design and teach culturally
sustaining summer programs with Gullah/Geechee scholars and leaders. In these
programs, fifth- and sixth-grade Gullah/Geechee youth will engage in project-
based learning by applying historical and contemporary scientific practices
grounded in Gullah/Geechee cultures. Guided by cultural mentors, youth will
engage in STEM practices similar to those of STEM professionals in the
community. Researchers will study how the educators understand and apply
culturally sustaining pedagogies by using constant comparative analytic methods
to analyze transcripts from observations and interviews, as well as the
educators’ work materials (e.g., lesson plans). They will also study how the
youth convey their understandings of culturally-embedded scientific content and
practices by using constant comparative and multimodal analysis to analyze
transcripts from interviews and observations, as well as youth-generated
artifacts such as the iMovie. Additionally, pre- and post-tests will enable the
research team to determine changes to the youths’ understandings of scientific
content and perceptions regarding participation in STEM enterprises and careers.
Deliverables, such as youth-generated products, will be shared with local media
and with relevant cultural centers, while empirical results will be widely
disseminated through local and national conferences. This project is funded by
the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts, and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers. This project is also co-
funded by the Advanced Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program. As part of its
overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments, the AISL program
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.