* 2005341
* Mechanobiology of Phagocytosis
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Richard Superfine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2024
* USD 767,993.00

Macrophages are immune cells that act as one of the first lines of defense
against bacteria, viruses, cancer cells and other pathogens. Macrophages wrap
themselves around a foreign particle, engulfing and digesting it. This process,
called phagocytosis, involves both chemistry and physical forces. Though the
process of phagocytosis has been well studied biochemically, this project takes
a different perspective: it treats the macrophage as a machine and the
phagocytic process as a mechanical event. What are the forces? How do they
coordinate? How does the machine work? Without understanding forces, we lack a
complete scientific description of phagocytosis and, more broadly, the immune
response itself. The project employs both advanced microscopic techniques as
well as unique force measurement methods to investigate the three-dimensional
structure of the macrophage in real time while simultaneously measuring the
forces it generates. The data generated from this project will provide a more
comprehensive model of this fundamental biological process that integrates the
biochemistry, the structure, and the biophysical forces. Another critical
component of the overall project is bringing the research to the public to help
inform folks on the latest exciting science that is happening in the lab.
Broader impact projects include a virtual-reality-based exhibit that will be
developed at a local museum, and a week-long biophysics “mini-term” that will be
taught at a local high school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this project is to use advanced imaging and force measurement tools to reveal
the mechanisms of force generation and mechanosensing in phagocytosis.
Phagocytosis is the process through which macrophages, neutrophils and other
cells engulf large foreign pathogen particles as a first line of immune system
defense. To engulf a target particle, one or more distinct actin-driven
mechanical processes draws in the target, surrounds and encloses it. Along with
biochemical signaling dynamics, phagocytosis is also driven by fundamentally
mechanical processes involving forces and structural dynamics. The most
fundamental questions are unanswered: What forces does a macrophage produce?
What actin dynamics and associated cell morphological dynamics give rise to
them? How do external forces and mechanical environment affect decision making
in phagocytosis? Measurements directly associating macrophage-target forces with
actin dynamics are a crucial missing piece to developing models of the
engulfment process. Within this project, a set of hypotheses will be tested that
are guided by analogous mechanisms that have been proposed for other cell
systems such as the “molecular clutch” mechanism in mesenchymal motility which
provides force generation as well as mechanosensing. Measurements of macrophage
force generation during engulfment will be performed along with accompanying
high quality, live cell volumetric imaging of cell morphology and cytoskeletal
dynamics. This will be complemented by use of soft beads as targets to measure
local compressive and shear forces being imposed by the macrophage on the
target. Quantitative spatio-temporal correlation analysis of volumetric actin
dynamics and force measurements will also be performed. This will provide rich
detailed data informing location and timing of the local dynamic actin
remodeling that produce a specific macrophage force event. If successful, the
project will produce a completely new dynamical atlas of the macrophage that
maps the relationship of dynamic 3D cell morphology and actin dynamics with
local force generation and mechanosensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.