* 2005511
* STEM Workforce Stories for Adolescents Who Are Deaf or Hard of Hearing
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Judy Vesel, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,942.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot and feasibility project addresses the needs of
youth (ages 10-19) who are deaf or hard of hearing and use either English or
American Sign Language as their preferred method of communication. The project
will develop and study video stories from members of the STEM workforce who are
deaf or hard of hearing. Youth will view these videos on the web at home or at
an afterschool program. These stories will help the youth become aware of the
range of STEM careers that are available and their potential to pursue and
succeed in these occupations. One of the biggest challenges young persons who
are deaf or hard of hearing face is not having role models who are members of
the STEM workforce. Without these role models they are not aware of the
possibility that they could work in these fields. Several studies indicate that
seeing other people with disabilities having success in STEM boosts self-
confidence. Exposure to deaf role models allows deaf student to identify with
successful deaf people and consequently believe they themselves could accomplish
goals they previously thought out of their reach. Project collaborators include
Gallaudet University Regional Center, Northeast Deaf &amp; Hard of Hearing
Service, Boys &amp; Girls Club of Lynn, MA, and Bridge Multimedia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance knowledge in the field of deaf
education in informal settings. The research questions are: 1) How do
adolescents who are deaf or hard of hearing integrate and use digital versions
of firsthand stories from members of the STEM workforce? 2) How do parents and
club leaders make use of the stories? 3) What kind of outcomes are made possible
by using the stories such as interest in STEM careers 4) What modifications and
additional would improve the stories to make them more useful and effective? 5)
What dissemination strategies would maximize story use? The project will do a
formative evaluation of the pilot videos using a sample of 30 family groups and
10 boys’ and girls’ participants. Families will meet with researchers at one of
the collaborating institutions (Gallaudet University Regional Center East,
Northeast Deaf &amp; Hard of Hearing Service or TERC) depending on where they
live. The researcher will work with one family or adolescent at a time. They
will view the videos on a computer while the researchers observe and record
data. After viewing the videos, researchers will ask them questions about what
they learned, what might be added, changed, or improved. They will be asked to
look at the videos later on their home computers and do things such as select a
STEM career for further research. Additional data collection will involve
completing a post-use online survey for adolescents and their
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.