* 2005796
* Multi-Generational STEM Makerspaces in Affordable Housing: Co-Designing a Model with the Community
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Sam Catherine Johnston, CAST, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,401,163.00

Makerspaces are learning environments that engage participants in authentic
science and engineering practices, using hands-on and collaborative approaches
to support activities and projects that foster creativity, interest, and skill
development. Recently there has been a rapid growth of makerspaces in schools
and in informal places like museums, libraries, and community centers. However,
many of these spaces are not accessible to all members of society. This project
will produce a model for a STEM makerspace that focuses on increasing access.
The model has four critical components that operate together: affordable
housing, informal STEM learning, maker education, and multi-generational
learning. This project will develop and study the community-based,
multigenerational makerspace model for Bayview Towers, a 200-unit affordable
housing complex in Connecticut. The Multi-Gen STEM Makerspaces project brings
together CAST, a non-profit education research organization, the NHP
Foundation/Operation Pathways, a national affordable housing provider, and the
Boston University Social Learning Lab, which researches the social context for
STEM learning. The project will produce a Multi-Gen Maker Playbook comprised of
an educational guide for a series of four-week workshops around different themes
and modes of making. The Playbook will also serve as a program model that guides
similar communities on how to create and run sustainable and thriving maker
programs of their own. Families in the Bayview Towers community will build an
understanding of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
concepts through participation in an onsite makerspace. Families will relate
what they are doing through making to longer-term goals connected to STEM
learning, education, and careers. The project will also enable the engagement of
individuals in the co-design (individuals provide creative contributions) of
making that can be translated into community structures and values that support
a sustainable makerspace. The affordable housing context will provide
understanding of individual and other social factors that impact learners' sense
of STEM identity. The project will support mobility from poverty by including
STEM learning as part of the resident services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will examine how low income communities access, engage, and learn in
makerspaces, and relate their learning to relevant goals. The team will use
design-based research (DBR) whereby participants and researchers work together
to design interventions intended to explore theory through cycles of enactment,
analysis, and revision. The DBR research will answer the following questions: 1)
In what ways, if any, does the model support residents experiencing STEM
learning as consequential? 2) What kind of making goals do residents set and how
do they embed STEM in these goals? 3) If residents experience STEM learning as
consequential through the workshops, do they also see the relationship between
their making goals and longer term goals? 4) Do those residents that use the
makerspace more frequently experience more positive outcomes in terms of
consequential STEM learning? 5) How do the various makerspace structures -
training of facilitators, dedicated space and equipment, Playbook - support the
model? 6) Are groups of residents participating regularly in the makerspace and
if so, who is in these groups? Do these groups start to identify as a maker
community? Is the community finding the makerspace of value? 7) In what ways
does the organization and operations of the makerspace support building a
sustainable model for multigenerational and consequential learning? Participants
will include 90 youth and 90 adults from the resident community at Bayview
Towers. Research data to be collected includes open-ended response measures for
scoring residents' interpretation, analysis and understanding of each workshop
elements. Also, interview protocols will be used to guide the refinement of the
Multi-Gen Maker Playbook features and analyze usability, feasibility, engagement
and user experience of the Multi-Gen Maker Playbook within the platform. The
program will use semi-structured interview protocols on participants' goals and
STEM identity and focus group protocols on community maker values and makerspace
structures. Additionally, a Likert-style survey on STEM identity will also be
adapted from the Science Identity Scale. Project evaluation will examine the
overall achievement of program goals and objectives. Project results will be
communicated by traditional means of dissemination to scholars and
practitioners. The team will also create targeted digital media, including
online articles, podcast interviews, and blog posts, to reach a broader
audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.