* 2005524
* Algebraic K-Theory in Fixed-Point Theory and Smooth Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Cary Malkiewich, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 154,000.00

Fixed-point theory studies the fixed or stationary states in dynamical systems,
which are critical to questions in topology, analysis, and even economics.
Smooth manifolds are a special class of high-dimensional shapes that are of
fundamental importance in geometry and physics. This project is concerned with
important and unexpected connections between these two fields. To be more
precise, they can be related using algebraic K-theory, a deep and abstract but
pervasive subject whose reach already encompasses several mathematical
disciplines, including homotopy theory, differential topology, algebraic
geometry, and number theory. These research projects will develop these
connections, giving us new ways to think about classical problems and to use
techniques from fixed-point theory in unexpected places. Broader impacts include
mentorship, workshop organization, and the writing of foundational works to
lower the entry barrier into these disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four groups
of projects will be pursued. The first shows that the Fuller trace, a certain
noncommutative trace in genuine G-spectra, provides a complete invariant for
removing n-periodic points from a map by a homotopy. The second uses the trace
from K-theory of endomorphisms to topological restriction homology (TR) to show
that this Fuller trace is a topological, non-commutative generalization of the
characteristic polynomial from linear algebra. The third project proves the
equivariant refinement of Waldhausen's parametrized h-cobordism theorem, a
fundamental and celebrated result in high-dimensional manifold theory. The
fourth project uses noncommutative traces to compute transfer maps in algebraic
K-theory, leading to torsion calculations that identify exotic bundles and
fibrations that cannot be stably smoothed. In other words, fixed-point theory
techniques can be used to understand smooth
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.