* 2005869
* STEM Webcams as Tools for Learning and Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Sara Hagenah, The Peregrine Fund
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 12/31/2023
* USD 285,526.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This Pilot and Feasibility study will build foundational knowledge about basic
aspects of STEM webcams in the United States (US) from the perspectives of both
practitioners and viewers. Thousands of webcams available to the public are
operated by STEM organizations, such as zoos, museums, and government agencies.
Learning theory suggests that STEM webcams, especially those with accompanying
interpretive tools, have the potential to offer rich informal learning
opportunities. However, yet no research has quantified any aspect (cognitive,
behavioral, or emotional) of viewer outcomes. This study will be the first to
develop baseline data regarding cognitive, behavioral, and emotional aspects of
perceived viewer experience. Project activities include 1) An inventory of STEM
webcams that exist in the US, the STEM disciplines they represent, learning and
engagement tools they employ, the number of viewers they reach, and the
resources required for their operation; 2) A survey of webcam operators, their
STEM education goals, implementation strategies, and evaluation results; and 3)
Surveys and interviews gathering data on viewers demographics and potential
increase in curiosity, interest, knowledge, and behavior toward the STEM
subject. This research will provide foundational knowledge for the STEM-
education and research community that quantifies and describes many facets of
the population of STEM webcams in the inventory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Research
activities will take place in three distinct phases, with Phase 1 laying the
groundwork for Phases 2 and 3. Phase 1: The project team will conduct a
systematic internet search for all identifiable STEM related webcams. Phase 2
(operator-focused): An online survey of practitioners of webcams operated by US-
based STEM organizations will be conducted using Qualtrics software. Likert
scales will be used. Various hypotheses will be tested regarding webcam program
objectives, operations, and evaluations from the perspective of program
operators or practitioners. Phase 3 (viewer-focused): Surveys and interviews
with likely viewers of STEM webcams. Using the webcam inventory built in Phase
1, the team will collaborate with 20 informal STEM institutions that agree to
survey their constituents to test hypotheses regarding webcam viewing practices,
such as why and how viewers watch, and perceived outcomes of viewing, such as
perceived influence on their interest, attitudes, knowledge, or behavior. The
findings from this study will be widely shared with informal STEM institutions
and webcam operators. It will provide foundational data for future experimental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.