* 2005893
* Seeing Scientifically: Developing Smart Microscope Exhibits That Support Authentic Visitor Observation and Scientific Inquiry of Living Microscopic Organisms
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kristina Yu, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,563,786.00

The science museum field is only starting to look at ways of providing visitors
with opportunities for the authentic observation of complex, real-time
biological phenomenon. The project will develop and research a microscope-based
exhibit with pedagogical scaffolding (i.e., helpful prompts) that responds to
visitors’ changing views as they explore live samples and biological processes.
As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. Scientific
observation is a systematic, complex practice, critical in the biological
sciences where investigation is heavily reliant on visual data. Using techniques
and equipment similar to what scientists themselves use, the exhibit will enable
visitors to see and explore the complex, dynamic visual evidence that scientists
themselves see. The exhibit will use new and more affordable high-resolution
imaging technology and image analysis software to make microscopic images of
living organisms visible. Armed with "smart" (i.e., computer-assisted)
pedagogical scaffolding that supports inquiry, the project will develop exhibits
that help informal learners bridge the gap between everyday observation and
authentic scientific observation. The platform will incorporate strategies
grounded in prior work on learning through observation that will be applicable
to a range of biological content and live specimens. The project platform will
be designed for use to a variety of informal science learning environments,
including nature centers and mobile laboratories as well as interactive science
centers. The project platform itself, including the microscope, related imaging,
and learning technologies will be relatively inexpensive, bring it within reach
of small science museum and schools. The exhibit will directly engage thousands
of learners who visit the Exploratorium and will reach underserved audiences
through partnerships with BioBus, a mobile unit that serves the New York City
area, and the Noyo Center of Marine Science, a science museum that serves rural
areas in Northern California. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will move beyond
simulation and modeling of complex visual phenomena and provide learners with
experiences using real visual evidence that can deeply engage them with the
content and practice of biological science. By grounding the work in prior
theoretical and empirical findings, project research will refine and broaden
understanding of scaffolding strategies and their effect on informal science
learning at exhibits. Project research will investigate how the project supports
learners (1) asking productive questions (i.e., those answerable through
observations) that are meaningful to them, (2) interpreting what they see, and
(3) connecting their observations to biological concepts to build a more
coherent understanding of the content and practice of biological disciplines. A
series of comparative studies across and within venues, specimens, and content
will assess engagement and scaffolding strategies, with a particular focus on
appropriately integrating computational imaging techniques in a way that is
responsive to the interests and needs of different venues' audiences. Project
research will contribute important knowledge on ways to support informal
learners who are engaged in authentic observation of biological phenomenon.
Project research findings and technology resources will be widely shared with
informal STEM researchers and practitioners concerned with engaging the public
in current research in biology, as well as those interested in supporting
observation in other disciplines (e.g., meteorology, ocean science,
environmental science) that rely on an evidence base of live, dynamic, complex
imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.