* 2005269
* STTR Phase I:  Making Waves: Educational Technologies Combining STEM and Music Learning
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Jay Brockman, SOUTH BEND WOODWORKS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 01/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is the enhancement of analytic and creative skills of children through
the development of a educational delivery system, where students design and
build musical instruments using hands-on science, technology, engineering, and
math (STEM) learning, and then compose and perform original musical works on the
instruments via music education. Previous NSF research has shown strong
correlations between achievement in the STEM fields and the study and practice
of the arts, as well as greater academic success for at-risk youth. The unique
integration of physical hands-on activities with live, remote STEM and arts
experts promise to engage students in ways that other approaches have failed to
reach, without burdening the at-site instructor with unrealistic required
professional development. This project will enable systematic establishment of a
distributed network of expert STEM and music instructors that can simultaneously
reflect the cultural multiplicities of a broad range of students, while also
supporting the on-site organizer with the level of instructional expertise and
professional talent normally available to only to elite out-of-school programs
in sophisticated urban centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
develop technology for an integrated STEM and music education program that will
be highly engaging and rewarding for both students and instructors when
delivered in a fully online or hybrid learning environment. The research
objectives will focus on the development and assessment of learning modules that
incorporate the use of physical hands-on kits and manipulatives as well as
online tools and simulations, taught by remote instructors using
videoconferencing with optional onsite adult facilitators. The core content will
center upon material drawn from the accepted national standards involving
concepts which include fractions, wave properties, and the engineering design
process as applied to both musical instrument analysis and design and music
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.