* 2005588
* Mass Rigidity and Curvature Problems in Mathematical Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lan-Hsuan Huang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,336.00

Einsteinâ€™s theory of gravity has been a strong driving force for the modern
development in several branches of mathematics. Among its profound implications
and wide applications, the theory of gravity successfully describes the shape of
our universe and predicts celestial objects that were not known to exist, such
as black holes. Over the past few decades, remarkable progress using advanced
techniques in geometry and analysis has been made to resolve fundamental
questions in general relativity, which has also led to the astonishing
realization that some celestial objects are governed by the same mathematical
principles as daily life objects, such as soap films. This project employs
frontier developments in mathematics to investigate those interconnections and
to further advance our understanding on the geometric structures of mathematical
models of our universe. The project also incorporates mentoring and educational
activities to promote geometry, analysis, and their interrelations with other
STEM disciplines, to broader communities and to the society.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Because of rapid advancement in geometric analysis in recent years,
several longstanding questions in general relativity have been largely resolved.
A prominent example is the resolution to the positive mass conjecture, including
recent work on the spacetime positive mass theorem. At the same time, those
resolutions in general relativity have motivated the development of new and
unexpected techniques in geometry and analysis. The goal of this project is to
interconnect general relativity with neighboring areas in geometry and analysis
where some of innovative techniques can be further developed and applied. The
scope of the project is to analyze curvature and geometric structure of initial
data sets and their spacetime development, arising from mass minimization
problems related to quasi-local mass, to investigate scalar curvature problems
for compact manifolds and classification of static manifolds, and to
characterize Einstein manifolds from the aspect of hyperbolic and conformal
geometry. The project develops new ideas and techniques from differential
geometry, analysis, partial differential equations, functional analysis, and
calculus of variations to tackle fundamental questions in mathematical
relativity and in the neighboring areas of geometry and analysis and is
anticipated to have impact in other areas of mathematics and in theoretical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.