* 2005786
* Ideal memristor based on the spin liquid state in magnetic heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sergei Urazhdin, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 352,890.00

Computers operating with digital representation of information and Boolean logic
have revolutionized science and technology. However, they remain far inferior to
human brain due to their inability to adapt and to process massive amounts of
imprecise information. These capabilities can be accomplished with neuromorphic
computing, which can be efficiently implemented at the hardware level by
utilizing memristors - electronic devices whose resistance depends on their
electrical history. The existing memristors operate mostly like on/off switches,
lacking the ability to continuously vary the resistance in response to electric
stimuli required for neuromorphic applications. These devices commonly rely on
the physical motion of atoms, and as a result lack durability and
reproducibility. The proposed project will develop a new class of memristors
based on the special magnetic properties of ferromagnet/antiferromagnet
bilayers. The operation of the proposed devices will rely on the magnetic
frustration at the interfaces between ferromagnets and antiferromagnets,
resulting from the incompatible magnetic ordering of the two materials, which
will lead to the formation of a viscous spin liquid state in the
antiferromagnets. The project will explore the most suitable materials and
geometries, electronic mechanisms enabling device operation, and device
functionality at nanoscale. The proposed research will be integrated with STEM
education through the development of a comprehensive undergraduate Materials and
Engineering Physics program, which will include a hands-on freshman seminar and
a state-of-art research training course for undergraduate students. The plan is
also to organize a Science club at the local elementary
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theoretically envisioned ideal memristor is an
electronic device whose resistance is proportional to the total charge that
passes through it, with the coefficient of proportionality known as memristance.
The proposed project will experimentally realize ideal memristor nanodevices, by
utilizing bilayers of low-anisotropy ferromagnets, such as Permalloy, and thin
films of antiferromagnets such as NiO, CoO, or Fe50Mn50. A spin liquid state is
expected to be formed in the antiferromagnets, due to the magnetic frustration
associated with the random exchange interaction at the magnetic interface. The
proposed project will utilize a combination of material and heterostructure
engineering, nanofabrication, measurements of time-domain magnetic dynamics and
transverse ac susceptibility, to address questions related to physical
mechanisms of device operation, and device design. The proposed research will
explore the possibility to engineer frustrated thin-film magnetic
heterostructures that exhibit a spin liquid state with a well-defined and
tunable viscosity, resulting in ideal memristive functionality with controlled
memristance. Additionally, the project will identify and characterize the
magnetoelectronic mechanisms that can facilitate writing, reading, and resetting
of the memristive devices based on viscous spin liquids. The relevant length
scales for the memristive properties will be established, to determine whether
the proposed devices are scalable to the technologically relevant nanoscale
dimensions. By addressing these questions, the proposed project will provide a
transformative contribution to the research and development of memristive
devices characterized by high-endurance, scalability, and tunable memristive
properties, which will facilitate the implementation of efficient neuromorphic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.