* 2005096
* Engineering quantum electronic materials by  phonon-polariton metamaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Hanyu Zhu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Quantum mechanics describes electrons in materials as both particles and
wavefunctions. In “quantum materials” the entangled electronic wavefunctions
exhibit properties that differ from conventional metals, semiconductors or
insulators. Controlling these properties not only advances our understanding of
the fundamental interactions among electrons, but also promises new devices for
next-generation information technology. Light contains oscillating electric
field, so at the right frequency light can simultaneously strongly couple with
motions of both electrons and atoms. These coupled electrons and atoms may enter
entirely different states from those in existing materials. This project designs
hybrid materials with both enhanced light-matter interactions and quantum
correlations. The characterization of these materials dynamically engineered by
light potentially provides insights into emergent phenomena like unconventional
superconductivity. Besides scientific impact, this program trains the next-
generation STEM workforce through research opportunities for community college
students. It will also raise awareness of quantum technology to a broader
audience by a new course in quantum materials
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-equilibrium open systems such as Floquet
states, present in time-periodic fields, emerge as new platforms to create
quantum materials on demand. The dynamic nature of such systems makes it
possible to override stability constraints and induce new electronic structures
in old materials. Experimental investigation of optically driven states at the
presence of electronic correlation is particularly important due to the rich
physics and the difficulty in theoretical treatment. However, studying coherent
dynamics in solids faces practical challenges such as interband transition and
lattice dissipation. This project seeks to overcome some of the challenges by
coupling materials supporting phonon-polaritons and materials hosting gapped
interacting electrons. Exciting the phonon-polariton with resonant pulsed light
provides the necessary strong field and fast coherent evolution that outpaces
thermalization. Using metamaterials consisting of micro-resonators, the light
intensity can exceed those commonly achievable by table-top sources. Meanwhile,
the frequency of phonon-polaritons in the metamaterial is chosen to reduce both
the multi-photon transition and the field-induced ionization. The transient
changes of electronic energy levels, transport properties and dissipation
dynamics are subsequently probed by time-resolved
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.