* 2005816
* Social Wearables: Enhancing Girls' Computational Learning and Motivation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Katherine Isbister, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,779,336.00

This award takes an innovative approach to an ongoing, pervasive, and persistent
societal issue: women are still drastically underrepresented in computing
careers. This project targets middle school-aged girls because it is a time when
many of them lose interest and confidence in pursuing technical education and
computing careers. This project will design, develop, and deploy a one-week
experience focused on middle school girls that targets this issue with a novel
combination of teaching techniques and technology. The project will use wearable
computing devices to support girls' social interactions as they learn computing
and solve technical challenges together. The goals of the project are to raise
interest, perceived competence, and involvement in the computational ability of
girls. Additionally, the project aims to increase a sense of computational
community for girls that makes pursuing computational skills more relevant to
their identities and lives, and that helps continued participation in computing.
The project will deploy a one-week experience four times per year with a
socioeconomically diverse range of campers. The project will also develop a
'program in a box' kit that can be broadly used by others wishing to deliver a
similar experience for girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research will
determine if a one-week experience that uses social wearable construction in the
context of live-action role play can use the mediating process of computational
community formation to positively impact middle school girls' engagement with
and interest in computation. Computational community is defined as girls
engaging together in the process of learning computation, trading resources and
knowledge, and supporting growth. Research participants will include 100 6th to
9th-grade girls. At least 75% of the participants will be either low income,
first-generation college-bound, or underrepresented in higher education.
Students will be recruited through the longstanding partnerships with title one
schools in the Salinas Valley, the Educational Partnership Center, and in the
Pajaro Valley Unified School district, where 82% of the students are
Hispanic/Latinx, 42% are English Learners, and 73% are eligible for free or
reduced lunch. The research questions are: 1) Does the proposed experience
increase girls' self-reported competence, self-efficacy, and interest in
computational skills and careers? and 2) Will the proposed experience lead to
activity-based evidence of learning and integration of computational skills at
the group social level? The project will use a mixed-methods, design-based
research approach which is an iterative design process to rapidly collect and
analyze data, and regularly discuss the implications for practice with the
design team. Data will be collected using observations, interviews, focus
groups, surveys, and staff logs. Quantitative data will be analyzed using
frequencies, means, and measures of dispersion will be applied to survey data
from both time points. Pearson correlation coefficients will be used to describe
the bivariate relationship between continuous factors. ANOVAs will assess
whether there are significant differences in continuous measures across groups.
Qualitative data will be analyzed using a constant comparison
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.