* 2005009
* Musculoskeletal modeling and simulation of hominin bipedal locomotion
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Anna Ragni, Ragni, Anna
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 124,500.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Ashley Heers
at California State University, Los Angeles, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist creating a computer simulation of how human
ancestors may have walked. While walking on two feet may seem mundane, this
remarkable ability predates other uniquely human qualities, including a large
brain, and separates us and our fossil lineage from other primates. All fossil
human ancestors show some indication of walking on two feet, but several
species, like 3.2 million-year-old Australopithecus afarensis, may have walked
more like an upright chimpanzee than a modern human, or in a unique way all
together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomechanical modeling and simulation are
quantitatively rigorous methods that have the unique ability to address this
type of uncertainty. Modeling and simulation allow researchers to create
realistic three-dimensional musculoskeletal models whose anatomical parameters
can be individually manipulated to explicitly examine form-function
relationships. By creating a musculoskeletal model of A. afarensis and
bracketing parameters with data on humans and chimpanzees, this project will
explore the hypotheses that A. afarensis was capable of chimp-like, human-like,
or uniquely in-between bipedal walking, in conjunction with positive,
stabilizing, or negative selection. Musculoskeletal modeling and simulation have
previously been used to assess certain aspects of hominin locomotion, but a
phylogenetically bracketed model based on the most up-to-date reconstructions
has not yet been created or tested in a paleoanthropological context. This
project will improve our understanding of locomotor potential in “mosaic”,
“proto”, or “transitional” taxa during human evolution, and can inform
evolutionary scenarios that will impact not only paleoanthropology, but also
evolutionary biology. This project will also introduce data for future
hypothesis testing, allowing researchers to explore how the locomotion of A.
afarensis might have related to paleobiological variables like environment,
diet, and social behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.