* 2005611
* CSHL 2020 Conference "From Neuroscience to Artificially Intelligent Systems," Cold Spring Harbor, New York, March 24-28, 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Anthony Zador, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 01/31/2021
* USD 49,312.00

The conference,"From Neuroscience to Artificially Intelligent Systems", to be
held at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory will bring together researchers from
diverse disciplines such as neuroscience, cognitive science, machine learning
and computer science to articulate a convergence approach to explore new
directions in artificially intelligent systems. While machine learning (ML) and
artificial intelligence (AI) has revolutionized our ability to process large
data sets and infer patterns within them. Algorithmic advances in ML and AI have
created entirely new sectors of the economy and have the potential for myriad
societal benefits. However, natural systems remain more adept at interacting
with the world compared to artificial ones. Moreover, they do so with
considerably less processing and energetic constraints. The guiding principle of
this conference is that insights from neuroscience are vital for designing the
next generation of AI and ML systems. This meeting will assemble an
international gathering of scientists from both AI and neuroscience disciplines.
Participants will be drawn from academic centers, research institutes and
industrial centers and will include leaders in the field, established
investigators, junior faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students. This
broad representation will enable excellent coverage of the scientific topics
while providing opportunities for synergistic interactions among the
participants. The intimate and informal setting will promote community-level
discussion of challenges and opportunities for the field. The results of this
project will achieve broad impact by identifying new and facile approaches to
draw from insights into brain function to design ML and AI algorithms. Invited
workshop participants will include a very diverse range of participants in order
to achieve diversity across a number of dimensions, including faculty rank,
gender, underrepresented groups and institutional diversity. This approach will
facilitate the scientific and professional development of early career
researchers as well as the inclusion of scientists from traditionally
underrepresented groups.

The workshop will bring together research leaders across diverse disciplines for
intensive discussions aimed at leveraging insights from neuroscience to design
the next generation of machine learning and artificially intelligent systems.
This meeting will focus on the most successful examples of unification and seek
to explore their basis and generalization. The meeting will identify tools,
models and theories from biology, evolution and neuroscience that can be used to
catalyze new designs of artificially intelligent systems that can potentially be
as adept as natural ones. This activity is consistent with the National
Artificial Intelligence Research and Development Strategic Plan, which
identifies as its first strategic objective the need to make long-term
investments in AI research in areas with the potential for long-term payoffs in
AI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.