* 2005734
* Engaging Rural Youth in Multidisciplinary Inquiry through Archaeology
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lynda Carroll, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 295,951.00

An ecosystems model of learning suggests there are critical partners within and
across a community that support learning across the lifespan. These school-
community partnerships, developed with shared accountability and goals, are
essential to rural students given the lack of economic and geographic access to
such services. Youth in rural areas may have limited opportunities to engage
with professionals. The team proposes to overcome this gap by capitalizing on
the wide-spread interest in archaeology to teach critical thinking using STEM
concepts and testing components of a partnership program. This project will
advance knowledge on multidisciplinary STEM education by iteratively developing
and researching an after-school program in which youth engage in
multidisciplinary inquiry in the context of archeology. Mentored by
archaeologists, rural youth and citizen scientists will use concepts and tools
drawn from biology, ecology, geospatial science, mathematics, physics, and data
science to identify and answer questions related to the history of their local
region. An outcome of this project will be a road map for moving from a
feasibility project to a larger implementation project locally and an
understanding of community partnerships engaging more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at SUNY Binghamton will conduct a
mixed-methods research study that examines the ways in which participation in a
multidisciplinary after-school archaeology program supports the development of
STEM identities among rural youth in sixth through eighth grades. The research
team will use content analysis to analyze field notes from observations, as well
as transcripts from focus groups and interviews with the youth. They will use
inferential statistics to explore changes in the youths’ STEM identity using an
identity survey, which will be administered to the youth before and after
participation in the program. Additionally, the research team will conduct
qualitative research that explores shifts in the afterschool program providers’
perceptions about supporting middle school youth as STEM learners. The program
providers are comprised of graduate and undergraduate archaeology students,
citizen scientists, and professional archaeologists. The course modules
developed for the after-school program will be disseminated through professional
networks and organizations dedicated to archaeologists and informal educators,
and empirical findings will be shared widely via peer-reviewed publications.
This project is funded by the Advanced Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program. As
part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments, the
AISL program seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.