* 2005374
* CAREER: Mechanics of Kirigami-based Reconfigurable Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Jie Yin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2024
* USD 483,556.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will support
fundamental research on the mechanical behavior of kirigami-based reconfigurable
two dimensional (2D) and three dimensional (3D) structures. Very recently,
kirigami, the ancient paper cutting art, has inspired emerging scientific
research and engineering innovations, ranging from mechanical metamaterials,
stretchable devices, and solar tracking, to self-assembled 3D meso-structures.
However, it largely lacks the fundamental understanding of cut-structures
determined macroscopic mechanical response of kirigami structures. This research
program will establish a theoretical framework for connecting the macroscopic
mechanical behavior and cuts-based microstructures in a new class of kirigami-
based structures, which are reconfigurable in both 2D and 3D. The knowledge
developed through this project will advance multiple technologies, including
scaffolds for conformable and stretchable electronics, electronic skin, adaptive
energy efficient building envelope, programmable soft machines, soft robots, and
reconfigurable acoustic wave guides. The education and outreach objectives will
align with the research goal in generating better understanding of mechanics and
structure-determined properties and functionalities in kirigami structures.
Programs at Temple and museums in Philadelphia will be used to broaden the
participation of K-12 in STEM, including Women's Engineering Exploration summer
program and STEM education department at Temple, as well as Science museum
displays (Franklin Institute) and Art show (Philadelphia Museum of Art) in
Philadelphia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kirigami-based 2D/3D structures will be
constructed by applying designed cuts and/or folds to both planar sheets and
bulk materials for actuation under forces or external stimuli. Systematic
theoretical framework will be developed to predict the kinematics and
constitutive modeling of 2D and 3D kirigami structures, with validation by
numerical simulation, fabrication, and experimental testing. For 2D structures,
a unified design of patterned cuts will account for both symmetric and non-
symmetric deformation. The quantitative relationship between the overall
mechanical properties and the geometry of localized cut structures will be
determined through developed homogenization continuum model. 3D reconfigurable
kirigami structures will be constructed from either (self-) folding of kirigami
sheets or assembly of 3D cut polyhedron units as fundamental building blocks for
architected structures. For 3D architected kirigami structures, their
reconfigurability and mechanical properties will be determined by the
deformation modes in localized 3D cut units. A theoretical framework will be
developed to predict the overall deformation modes through mode analysis under
both small and finite deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.