* 2005776
* Playful Learning Landscapes: Promoting Informal STEM Learning in Public Spaces
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kathy Hirsh-Pasek, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,574,937.00

A long history of research suggests that early informal STEM learning
experiences such as block play, puzzles, visiting zoos and science museums can
build a strong foundation for STEM learning and which leads to later STEM
success. Yet, children from low-income and historically underserved communities
have less access to these opportunities due to scarce resources and barriers to
access such as transportation and cost. To address these challenges, this
project will endeavor to infuse public urban spaces such as local parks, bus-
stops, and grocery stores with playful and engaging informal STEM learning
opportunities in low-income Latinx neighborhoods as a strategy for understanding
how public spaces—when co-designed with community partners and informed by the
science of learning—can foster rich, informal STEM learning experiences for
young children in neighborhood places where families naturally spend time. This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using techniques of Community-
Based, Participatory Design Research, researchers will collaborate closely with
community families and partners in Santa Ana, California to achieve three aims:
1) Co-design a series of outdoor Playful Learning Landscape (PLL) exhibit
installations with community partners that reflect the goals, values, and
cultural capital of the Latino community. 2) Explore how caregivers and their
children experience PLL exhibit installations and examine the development and
changes in: a) caregiver-child STEM conversation and interactions, and b)
caregiver attitudes about the importance of informal STEM learning and their
beliefs about their role in facilitating STEM learning. 3) Leverage existing
data from county partners to examine the potential effects of having multiple
PLL installations within a specific neighborhood on promoting STEM learning and
development across an array of cognitive and socio-emotional outcomes in early-
childhood. This project will advance current knowledge on informal STEM learning
by demonstrating new ways to understand the cultural assets that Latinx families
bring to learning contexts, showing how the unique assets and needs of a local
community can be incorporated into public infrastructure, and documenting the
STEM-related learning experiences and interactions that occur in these settings.
Due to a partnership with the Orange County Children and Families Commission,
which collects data on child learning and development on every child in the
county, researchers will examine the longitudinal impacts of a cluster of
playful STEM-learning exhibit installations in a single neighborhood on
children’s developmental outcomes compared to matched neighborhoods without
access to these installations. By leveraging everyday routines to promote
playful STEM learning and caregiver-child STEM-related interactions, this
project will: 1) empower caregivers to build a STEM learning foundation for
children during early childhood; and 2) serve as a model for how cities can be
re-designed to enhance ubiquitous STEM learning across public spaces, with the
cultural capital of local families and children at the center of urban design
and revitalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.