* 2005484
* Understanding the Role of Informal STEM Educators in Creating Maker-based and Community-Centered Technology and Computer Science Learning Hubs for Urban Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Coy, Digital Harbor Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,177,470.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making, which supports interest-driven skill-
development and learning, has been recognized as having the potential to engage
underserved youth in STEM. Makerspaces are community spaces that allow
participants to create items using tools, such as 3-D printers, computer-aided
design, and digital fabrication technologies. Makerspaces and making-related
programs are often inaccessible, unaffordable, or simply not available to
underserved youth. Digital Harbor will partner with recreation centers, two in
Pittsburgh and two in Baltimore, to research, refine and implement an equity-
based approach to making that will engage underserved youth aged 12-16 in
making. The project will prepare out-of-school time (OST) educators to
collaboratively develop culturally sensitive curricula with underserved youth to
engage them in maker-based technology and computer science experiences. The
project will (1) design a professional development program that will prepare and
support local educators to collaboratively design and deliver localized, maker-
based, STEM curricula; (2) research the impact of these programs on both
educators’ and youth’s self-efficacy, creativity, and attitudes towards STEM;
and (3) develop and evaluate an online Localization Toolkit that will prepare
educators in makerspaces across the nation in using an equity-based approach to
create localized content. The project will result in four new maker sites (two
in Baltimore and two in Pittsburgh directly impact 4 sites (10 educators and 240
youth). The project will result several resources that will support the
development and educational programs of other community sites. The resources
will include the Localization Toolkit, Case Studies, Best Practices, and
Research Study. The Localization Toolkit has the potential to strengthen
infrastructure and capacity building in OST maker-based programs, as well as
other informal and formal education programs using similar pedagogies and design
principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a mixed-methods approach
in researching the challenges and processes involved in establishing the four
maker sites in Baltimore and Pittsburgh, the approaches and effectiveness of the
professional development program on OST educators, and the impacts of the
project of participation on the self-efficacy, creativity, and attitudes on
participating youth and educators. The research study will apply several
instruments and data collection sources to develop quantitative data, including
youth attendance logs, the Upper Elementary and Middle/High School Student
Attitudes toward STEM survey, a retrospective technology self-efficacy survey
and pre-post surveys. In addition to project document review, the researchers
will collect qualitative data through educator interviews, educator focus
groups, and youth focus groups. Project research and resources will reach key
audiences of learning scientists and OST educators through articles in peer-
reviewed and practitioner journals, public events and professional conferences.
These audiences will also be reached through the project website, which will
share project resources. The project will reach OST sites across the country
directly through dissemination partners, including the National Recreation and
Parks Association, Association of Science and Technology Centers, and statewide
out-of-school networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.