* 2005541
* Viscous Extension of the Classical Theory of Unsteady Aerodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Haithem Taha, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The current state-of-the-art of fluid dynamic models of the flow over wing
sections are either computationally too expensive to be used in preliminary
design phases or overly simplified, neglecting some essential physics. The
objective of this proposal is to fill this gap by developing efficient
aerodynamic models that capture the main physics of the flow dynamics. Relying
on a unique combination of the fundamental knowledge of basic unsteady
aerodynamics and the recent advances in data science (for example, machine
learning techniques), this project will yield more realistic computations of the
aerodynamic loads. The developed theory will be indispensable for preliminary
design of next generation flying vehicles (flying taxis, micro-air-vehicles, and
drones) and wind turbines, which will improve national security and economic
prosperity. The project will include the development of a graduate course on
unsteady aerodynamics based on this research, plans are underway to develop a
textbook on the subject, and undergraduate students will be involved byway of
aerodynamic-related senior projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realizing that the
lift generation and vorticity production are essentially viscous processes, a
viscous extension of the classical theory of unsteady aerodynamics is proposed.
This extension will be achieved by coupling the potential theory with a special
boundary layer theory that resolves the flow details in the vicinity of the
trailing edge. This approach will provide the circulation dynamics without any
need for an auxiliary condition (i.e., Kutta-like condition). Moreover, to
generalize this approach, machine learning tools will be employed to extract
information about the circulation dynamics from high-fidelity simulations. This
modeling approach can be conceptually described by a bow tie architecture: a
compressive mapping taking a high-dimensional input space (e.g., flow field from
high-fidelity simulation) to a smaller, more compact lower-dimensional core
model (e.g., one-dimensional circulation dynamics). Then, the potential flow
theory, with the accurate circulation dynamics, will be used to recover a high-
dimensional output space of the flow field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.