* 2005476
* Equivariant and Motivic Deformations of Stable Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Mark Behrens, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 338,800.00

These projects aim to address major problems in the field of algebraic topology.
Topology is the study of geometry where you identify one geometric object with
another if one can be deformed into the other. The goal of algebraic topology is
to ascribe discrete algebraic invariants to these geometric objects to
distinguish their topological types. In this way, distinguishing geometric
objects is reduced to algebraic computations. Understanding the topological type
of geometric objects is a fundamental act of scientific/mathematical inquiry,
comparable to the study of prime numbers, or the classification of the
fundamental particles that constitute matter and carry forces. Topological
computations have recently been applied to solve problems in solid state
physics. Also, data involving the interrelation of a large number of variables
naturally traces out a geometric object in a high dimensional space. The study
of such data-sets using algebraic topology is the subject of the new and active
field of topological data analysis. The focus of these projects is in the
interaction of classical algebraic topology, equivariant homotopy theory, and
motivic homotopy theory. Equivariant homotopy theory is the study of the
topology of symmetry, whereas motivic homotopy theory is the study of the
topology of solutions to systems of polynomial equations. Recent years have
witnessed a dazzling array of progress in the field of algebraic topology
through the importation of equivariant and motivic methods. Broader impacts of
these projects include work with graduate students, a summer math research
program, a directed reading program, and a bridge program for entering graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particular projects involve investigating novel
structures in equivariant and motivic stable homotopy theory, and seek to
leverage these structures to give new approaches to some long outstanding
problems in classical stable homotopy theory. The telescope conjecture will be
investigated using a tower of spectra which appeared in the Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel
solution of the Kervaire Invariant One Problem. Recent work of Pstragowski and
Gheorghe-Isaksen-Krause-Ricka gives a synthetic construction of complex motivic
stable homotopy theory. The principal investigator plans to extend this to the
real motivic context using equivariant homotopy theory. Another project uses
equivariant chromatic homotopy theory to study the interaction of classical
chromatic homotopy theory with the Tate construction, with the aim of making
progress on the chromatic splitting conjecture. Recent work of Barthel-Schlank-
Stapleton gives a means of studying stable homotopy theory at generic primes
using ultra-filters. Computations in this context will be investigated using
Drinfeld Modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.