* 2005170
* Ferroelectric Nematic Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,03/31/2024
* David Walba, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 03/31/2024
* USD 777,259.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric nematics are fluids of
essentially rod-shaped molecules that spontaneously organize into domains with
macroscopic polar order. The recent discovery of this liquid crystal phase has
created an opportunity to probe and understand the appearance of spontaneous
polarization in a broad range of soft materials, including polymers,
biomaterials, liquid crystals and colloids. The polar nature of the
ferroelectric nematic makes it attractive for a host of novel applications,
including electrooptical and non-linear optical devices, and will lead to new
discoveries in the science and applications of nematic liquid crystals. This
project offers excellent opportunities for undergraduate research participation
and internships for minority high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The ferroelectric
nematic (FN) is a new and essentially unexplored fluid state that occurs below
the conventional nematic phase of liquid crystals, combining orientational order
and spontaneous polarization for the first time in any homogeneous three-
dimensional fluid. The estimated FN polarization density is larger than many
solid state ferroelectrics, its magnitude implying almost perfect polar
alignment of the nematic molecular dipoles. Because of their large spontaneous
polarization, FN materials give a facile, rapid orientational response to
applied electric fields, giving virtually every nematic effect and application a
new dimension. A broad-based, coordinated effort of molecular design, synthesis,
and physical characterization will be pursued to characterize the ferroelectric
nematic state and to evolve an understanding of its nanoscale origins, emergent
mesoscopic properties, and potential applications. Experimental methods
including electro-optic studies, x-ray scattering, optical and SHG microscopy,
and dielectric spectroscopy will be used to characterize FN molecular
organization, macroscopic structure, and field response dynamics. Continuum
modeling will be developed to describe a new regime of nematic elasto-
hydrodynamics where polarization space charge stabilization becomes a dominant
player.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant
supports research to understand ferroelectric nematic liquid crystals with
funding from the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) program in DMR of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.