* 2005982
* Quasilinear Dissipation of Turbulently-Generated Kinetic Alfven Waves:  Kinetics of Ion Heating and Solar Wind Acceleration in Coronal Holes
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Philip Isenberg, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 552,964.00

The solar wind defines the Earth's plasma environment, mediating all solar
disturbances and space weather effects. A full microscale understanding of the
processes that operate in the flow will aid investigations in these areas. This
3-year research study of ion heating by turbulently generated kinetic Alfven
waves (KAWs) will address the long-standing puzzle of how the solar wind is
heated and accelerated through the dissipation of Alfvenic plasma turbulence.
The ion energization expected from this mechanism should finally provide a
kinetic basis for detailed solar wind models that require accurate, physically
motivated heating rates. It will also provide a physical explanation for the
preferential heating of heavy ions in the solar wind. Ultimately, this 3-year
project will yield a quantitative kinetic model of the multi-ion accelerated and
heated solar wind as it emerges from a coronal hole. Furthermore, it will
provide valuable insight on the many other phenomena in the plasma universe that
involve turbulence, such as solar and stellar flares, supernova remnants,
accretion discs of compact objects, as well as interstellar, intergalactic and
intra-cluster flows. Additionally, the project team members are active
participants in the educational efforts at the UNH, and the support provided by
this grant will enable continuation of their productive research interactions
with graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely
accepted that the solar wind is driven by ion heating due to the dissipation of
plasma turbulence in the solar corona. The kinetic details of this heating
process determine the microscale properties of the resulting wind, but such
details are not presently known. Observationally, the heating must act
preferentially on the perpendicular ion motion, and act more strongly on heavy
ions than on protons. Simulations of plasma turbulence can produce these results
but do not clearly pinpoint the kinetic mechanism. Recently, a picture of
collisionless turbulence has emerged that describes the small-scale fluctuations
in terms of KAWs. These fluctuations are highly oblique, compressive, and
elliptically polarized. Although these turbulent fluctuations are not waves in
the standard sense, their polarization and propagation properties may still be
obtained from a plasma dispersion relation. In the past, the project team has
shown that a plausible turbulent spectrum of KAWs will heat ions in the
perpendicular direction through the quasilinear (QL) cyclotron resonance, and
that this heating can dominate the effect of the seemingly stronger Landau
resonance in circumstances relevant to the solar wind. During this 3-year
project, the team will carry out a thorough investigation of this QL interaction
in the corona and solar wind, adding more physical details to their initial
example and investigating the effects of different plasma and turbulent
properties. In each case, the team will follow the self-consistent evolution of
the ion distributions and fluctuation dispersion relations obtained from our
Arbitrary Linear Plasma Solver (ALPS). The investigators will explore the
effects of different plasma beta: different assumptions on the turbulent
spectral shape; imbalanced turbulent spectra; intermittency; and, resonance
broadening. They will study the preferential effects on heavy ions throughout
these explorations. The results of spatially homogeneous studies will be
incorporated into their inhomogeneous kinetic guiding-center coronal hole model,
which derives radially dependent ion distributions when the turbulent heating is
coupled with global coronal forces. The research and EPO agenda of this project
supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.