* 2005012
* Elements: Data-Science Methods for Resource Allocation During Characterization of Dynamic Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Stephen Niezgoda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 05/31/2024
* USD 596,785.00

The project develops the software infrastructure and its integration with
physical infrastructure that is required to bring state-of-the-art data science,
machine learning, and artificial Intelligence (AI) tools to novel materials
science experiments at a national user facility. The work will create an openly
available control package that will enable dynamic experiments informed by
modeling in real-time. The developments will make more efficient use of scarce
beam-time at national synchrotron user facilities, enabling higher scientific
throughput for in-situ experiments probing the mechanical response of materials
under load.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort evaluates the hypothesis that rare
material failure events can be predicted from a small number of features that
describe evolving local material states using machine learning solutions. The
project is focusing on synchrotron x-ray scattering measurements of materials
under mechanical load, and specifically integrating new and existing toolsets
into a control package capable of dynamic resource allocation for hyper-
efficient data collection at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS),
a national user facility. The project integrates these toolsets to detect
precursor signatures through real-time processing of data from user facilities
such as CHESS, and suggests resource allocations to facilitate study of early
stages of stochastic events in dynamic materials systems. The goal is to develop
machine learning (ML) techniques and software infrastructure to inform the best,
in a probabilistic sense, allocation of limited detector resources at material
testing facilities, to better capture early stages of rare events in materials
and the key factors for these events. The effort is also interested in applying
the same resource allocation strategies to computational resource allocation in
simulations of materials systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) within the NSF Directorate for
Engineering, and the Division of Materials Research (DMR) within the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.