* 2005319
* Comunidad de Ciencia: Building Latina STEM Interest through Community Cultural Wealth and Familial Problem-Based Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Peter Rillero, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,431,827.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
The project aims to understand ways to empower Latinx families (adult
caregivers) to feel confident in their ability to support their middle school-
aged girls in science and engineering activities. The project involves seven
weeks of family programming around rockets or urban farming, as well as separate
conversation groups for adult family members and girls. The project is relevant
for several reasons: females and Latinx individuals are both underrepresented in
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) coursework and careers; girls
tend to lose interest in STEM by middle school age; and adult family members may
have an impact on their children’s attitudes and interests. The project partners
with school districts and nonprofit organizations in Arizona and California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project’s priority is broadening
participation, with a focus on increasing Latina girls’ science and engineering
interests through Family Project-Based Learning Activities, Conversation Groups,
and a cultivated Community of Learners. It is based on the frameworks of Social
Cognitive Career Theory and Community Cultural Wealth. The project aims to
empower families (adult caregivers) to feel confident in their ability to
support their daughters in science and engineering activities, which is often
low especially among Latinx parents. The project will develop and evaluate two
out-of-school enrichment methods for aiding families in encouraging and
supporting their daughters in science: Family Problem-Based Learning Activities,
which focus on rockets and urban farming, and Conversation Groups, which provide
information and discussion for separate groups of parents and girls. A series of
pilot studies will be conducted with 80 families to iteratively evaluate and
improve the materials and procedure prior to the main study with 180 families,
featuring a factorial design with a control group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
materials developed and research findings may inform similar projects,
especially those for students from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds and projects seeking to enhance the role of families in learning.
The hypothesis guiding the project is that the greatest gains will be produced
with the synergistic combination of enrichment methods. Another component that
can potentially have broad impact is working to create environments where
Community Cultural Wealth is recognized and enhanced through interactions of
different families, creating Communities of Learners. This can inform projects
that recognize the importance of community and/or that seek to use culture as an
asset. The proposed study will engage three geographically distributed
universities and several community partners. It will also provide university
students and community leaders opportunities for work on instructional design,
implementation, and research. The team will disseminate their findings and
methods through multiple avenues to reach researchers, parents, leaders,
curators, and educators in informal and K-12 settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.