* 2005944
* Developing STEM Skills through Play and Exhibit Design for Early Learners in Children’s Museums and Science Centers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Laura Huerta Migus, Association of Children's Museums
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,045,852.00

The Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. An ongoing challenge to the design of
effective STEM learning exhibits for diverse young children is the absence of
reliable and evidence-based resources that designers can apply to the design of
STEM exhibits that draw upon play as a child’s primary pedagogy, while
simultaneously engaging children with STEM content and processes that support
development of STEM skills such as observation. To address these challenges, the
project team will use a collaborative process in which learning researchers and
informal STEM practitioners iteratively develop, design, and test the STEM for
Play Framework that could then be applied to the design of STEM-focused exhibits
that support play and STEM skill use among early learners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in Service to Practice project will address
these questions: 1) What is a framework for play in early STEM learning that is
inclusive of children’s cultural influences?; 2) To what extent do interactions
between early learners (ages 3-8) and caregivers or peers at exhibits influence
the structure and effectiveness of play for supporting STEM skill development?;
3) How do practitioners link play to STEM skill development, and to what extent
does a framework for play in early STEM learning assist in identifying types of
play that supports early STEM skill development?; and 4) What do practitioners
identify as best practices in exhibit design that support the development of
STEM skills for early childhood audiences, and conversely, to what extent do
practitioners perceive specific aspects of the design as influential to play?
The project team will address these questions across four phases of study that
will include (a) development of a critical research synthesis to inform the
initial STEM for Play framework; (b) the use of surveys, focus groups, and
interviews to solicit feedback from practitioners; (c) testing and revising the
framework by conducting structured observations of STEM exhibits at multiple
museums. The project team will use multiple analytic approaches including
qualitative thematic analyses as well as inferential statistics. Results will be
disseminated to children’s museums, science centers, and research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.