* 2005490
* Student Support: Thirty-First Annual International Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) Symposium - An Additive Manufacturing Conference; Austin, Texas; 17-19 August 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Guhaprasanna Manogharan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 49,800.00

This NSF award will support student participation at the Thirty-First Solid
Freeform Fabrication (SFF) Symposium, Austin, Texas, 17-19 August 2020. The SFF
Symposium is a forum for transfer and dissemination of knowledge and
understanding in the field of additive, freeform and hybrid manufacturing. The
2019 meeting drew 702 researchers from 25 different countries representing
universities, companies and national laboratories. Similar attendance is
expected in 2020 and students will have opportunities to interact and share
ideas with top researchers from academia, research laboratories, industry, and
students from both domestic and international
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort to make the conference
affordable, and therefore accessible to students, the travel award will
contribute towards the conference registration fees of qualified awardees. The
call for student support applications will be disseminated through: (1) emails
to corresponding authors of submitted abstracts (due in April 2020), (2) emails
to participants of recent SFF meetings (2017-2019), (3) SFF website and (4)
social media (newsletter and LinkedIn posts). Submitted applications will go
through a selection process by the conference committee using selection criteria
that include (1) students must be from US institutions and (2) students must be
actively participating in the conference through presenting a paper or poster,
or participating in a competition, with preference given to students from
underrepresented minorities. Student awardees will be invited to a luncheon
panel discussing research and future career opportunities in additive
manufacturing. This award will afford the next generation of leaders a global
perspective, exposure to the latest cutting-edge ideas, and insights on future
manufacturing challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.