* 2005794
* NSF/MCB-BSF: RNA quality control in the chloroplast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* David Stern, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2023
* USD 492,695.00

One of the main avenues to optimizing plant performance is to improve their
ability to harvest the sun’s energy. Plant cells contain chloroplasts where
light energy is harvested and converted into sugars and ultimately into food,
feed and fiber. The chloroplast contains its own DNA and genes that must
function correctly for photosynthesis to occur. Like all biological processes,
these functions are prone to errors that must be corrected for plants to
function. This project seeks to understand the fundamental yet mysterious
process by which this quality control is accomplished. Quality control of this
type is not specific to chloroplasts, nor to plants, and therefore advances made
in this project will be applicable to other living systems. The project also
creates opportunities for training diverse undergraduates in experimental and
computational techniques, including plant genetic engineering and bioinformatic
analysis. Students will also be taught communications skills and will be exposed
to a variety of career options. This training will occur through mentoring and
teamwork, which are important transferable skills for early career scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In chloroplasts, RNA quality control is of paramount
importance because transcription itself is relatively unregulated. This project
builds on biochemical, genetic and computational findings in Arabidopsis,
focusing on the essential RNA quality control enzyme, RNase J, which has been
shown to trim 5’ and 3’ RNA termini and to eliminate deleterious antisense RNA.
This project seeks to discover how RNase J is regulated, and how its specificity
is imparted. The two major approaches are first, to create transgenic
Arabidopsis lines that express versions of RNase J with informative site-
directed mutations or deletions, and second, to biochemically measure the
activities of RNaseJ in vitro. Overall, the experiments should advance knowledge
of how the chloroplast transcriptome is shaped, and provide insights into
mechanisms that discriminate transcripts among large populations of RNA
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and
the Plant Genome Research Program of the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems in the Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.