* 2005140
* Black Youth Understanding of Racial Inequality: Scale Development and Validation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Natasha Johnson, Johnson, Natasha Cierra
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 129,375.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and the Social
Psychology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Riana Anderson and Enrique Neblett at the
University of Michigan, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist examining the cognitive process through which Black youth know
about, make meaning of, and understand racism, that is, their awareness of
racism. Recent work has found that during early adolescence, Black youth can
identify and articulate connections between systemic issues and inequities in
their schooling experiences. Critical Consciousness theory suggests that without
an awareness of oppression, marginalized groups cannot work to disrupt
oppressive norms and societal inequities. To date, there has not been a
psychometric tool that captures Black youth's cognitive understanding of racism,
a specific form of oppression. An understanding of Black youth's cognitions
around racism has the potential to provide empirical support for untested
theoretical assumptions, enhance clinical approaches to addressing racial stress
and trauma, and strengthen research approaches to examining the influence of
racism in the lives of Black youth and their families. Finally, understanding
how awareness of racism develops may serve as a catalyst to identify points of
intervention that may draw on internal and external strengths to combat the
negative consequences of racism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
project is to contribute to theory and research seeking to understand the
influence of racism on the lives of Black youth. The proposed study aims to
address these current gaps by: (1) deconstructing the extent to which Black
youth understand and can articulate their understanding of racism, and (2)
developing a psychometric tool that can streamline and strengthen the connection
between studies by using similar measurements and definitions to assess racism
awareness. By understanding the extent to which Black youth are aware of the
distinct forms of racism, within and across systems, this work can provide
empirical support for intervention programs aimed at combating racism. The
development of the forthcoming Racism Awareness Scale will be achieved using a
three-phase model—item development, scale development, and scale evaluation—of
scale development. The first two phases of the scale development consist of
designing and testing the dimensionality of the Racism Awareness Scale. The
final phase will consist of data collection and analyses for scale evaluation.
During this phase of data collection, a survey will be developed that includes
other related scales and tests the predictive, convergent, and discriminant
validity of the scale. This evaluation will also spark new questions related to
the associations between and divergences from experiencing racism and
understanding racism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.