* 2005430
* CHS: Small: An Analysis-and-Synthesis Framework for Small Group Conversations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Zhigang Deng, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2024
* USD 477,733.00

As one of the most common forms of human-human communication, group conversation
is essential to our daily life. Humans can intrinsically manage and regulate a
group conversation via the concerted effort of gaze, head movement, and hand
gesture. However, research communities only gain limited knowledge and insight
on its pattern and mechanism. Understanding and modeling its structure,
mechanism, and interaction patterns can not only help to reveal the science of
group conversation but also find numerical potential applications in science and
engineering. Computationally modeling and generation of group conversations can
provide a potential transformative paradigm to empower the group conversational
capability on machines and engineering systems, including virtual agents,
humanoid robots, and Internet of Things, so that they can follow real-world
social norms while interacting with humans. Also, it can significantly
facilitate the creation of more socially-engaging and life-like digital humans
in education, simulation, and virtual world applications. Furthermore, this
project will support the training of a diverse cohort of graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of Houston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses the research question: whether and how we can computationally
analyze small group conversations and further holistically synthesize life-like
group conversational motion for a variety of potential applications? Most
existing research works have approached this problem using aggregated methods of
analysis on the computation of various average quantities or statistical
measures. This project takes a different approach and addresses this problem by
computationally modeling the group conversation behaviors and leverages this
model to holistically synthesize life-like group conversational motion for a
variety of potential applications. The research team will first acquire, in-
house, a high quality, small group conversational motion dataset that includes
acoustic speech, facial expression, gaze, head movement, hand gesture, and body
movement. Based on this dataset, the project will work towards the objectives by
focusing on three inter-related research thrusts. The first research thrust is
to develop a computational analysis model to extract and compare meaningful gaze
patterns for turn-taking and turn-keeping in small group conversations. With the
insight obtained from the first thrust, the second research thrust is to design
a holistic, deep learning based framework to efficiently generate or synthesize
life-like small group conversational animations based on various user inputs.
The third research thrust is to comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness and
usefulness of the proposed framework via two selected applications: small group
teleconferencing within virtual worlds, and crowd simulations with group
conversations. The synthesis framework can potentially transform development of
applications that deal with virtual human crowds such as the ones in shopping
plazas, downtown streets, and airport waiting areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.