* 2005973
* Investigating the Development of STEM-Positive Identities of Refugee Teens in a Physics Out-of-School Time Experience
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* John Matthews, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,137,834.00

Refugee youth are particularly vulnerable to STEM disenfranchisement due to
factors including limited or interrupted schooling following displacement;
restricted exposure to STEM education; and linguistic, cultural, ethnic,
socioeconomic, and racial minority status. Refugee youth may experience a gap in
STEM skills and knowledge, and a conflict between the identities necessary for
participation in their families and communities, and those expected for success
in STEM settings. To conduct research to better understand these challenges, an
interrelated set of activities will be developed. First, youth will learn
principles of physics and computing by participating in cosmic ray research with
physicists using an instructional approach that builds from their home languages
and cultures. Then youth periodically share what they are learning in the cosmic
ray research with their parents, siblings, and science teachers at family and
community science events. Finally, youth conduct reflective research on their
own STEM identity development over the course of the project. Research on
learning will be conducted within and across these three strands to better
understand how refugee youth develop STEM-positive identities. This project will
benefit society by improving equity and diversity in STEM through (1) creating
opportunities for refugee youth to participate in physics research and to
develop computing skills and (2) producing knowledge on STEM identity
development that may be applied more broadly to improve STEM education.
Deliverables from this project include: (a) research publications on STEM
identity and learning; (b) curriculum resources for teaching physics and
computing to multilingual youth; (c) an online digital storytelling exhibit
offering narratives about belonging in STEM research which can be shared with
STEM stakeholders (policy makers, scientists, educators, etc.); and (d) an
online database of cosmic ray data which will be available to physicists
worldwide for research purposes. This Innovations in Development proposal is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program is designed to provide multiple
contexts, relationships, and modes across and within which the identity work of
individual students can be studied to look for convergence or divergence. To
achieve this goal, the research applies a linguistic anthropological framework
embedding discourse analysis in a larger ethnography. Data collected in this
study include field notes, audio and video recordings of naturalistic
interactions in the cosmic ray research and other program activities, multimodal
artifacts (e.g., studentsâ€™ digital stories), student work products, interviews,
and surveys. Critically, this methodology combines the analysis of identity
formation as it unfolds in moment-to-moment conversations (during STEM learning,
and in conversations about STEM and STEM learning) with reflective tasks and the
production of personal narratives (e.g., in digital stories and interviews).
Documenting convergence and divergence of STEM identities across these sources
of data offers both methodological and theoretical contributions to the field.
The research will offer thick description of the discursive practices of refugee
youth to reveal how they construct identities related to STEM and STEM
disciplines across settings (e.g., during cosmic ray research, while creating
digital stories), relationships (e.g., peer, parent, teacher), and the languages
they speak (e.g., English, Swahili). The findings will be of potential value to
instructional designers of informal learning experiences including those working
with afterschool, museums, science centers and the like, educators, and scholars
of learning and identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.