* 2005297
* Group Actions on Trees and Boundaries of Trees
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Rachel Skipper, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 133,009.00

Geometric group theory connects two foundational fields of mathematics, namely
group theory and geometry. A group can be thought of as the set of symmetries of
an object such as a water molecule or a Rubik's Cube. A single group can
represent the symmetries of many geometric or topological spaces. If the chosen
space is nice enough and can be sufficiently well understood, the
characteristics of the spaces can reveal properties inherent to the group. One
can take the opposite approach as well. Often one can detect properties of a
topological or geometric space by studying groups which describe their
symmetries. This project aims to explore these connections between groups and
the spaces on which they act. Broader impacts of the project include continued
mentoring through various programs and networks, public outreach for middle and
high school students, and dissemination of knowledge through conference
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is primarily on
groups acting on infinite trees and on boundaries of infinite trees. This
includes large classes of groups; for instance it contains all residually finite
groups but also many of the known examples of infinite simple groups. The first
goal of the project is to extend the PI's past work to better understand the
universe of infinite simple groups. The last 10 years have seen an influx of new
and surprising theorems illuminating the understanding of the variety of groups
in this class. The PI will study groups in the extended Thompson family using
their partial actions on a rooted tree, their full action on the Stein-Farley
complex, and their embeddings into the homeomorphism group of the Cantor space.
The second goal of the project is to better understand branch and automata
groups. Over the last forty years, this class of groups has served as a rich
source of exotic yet tractable groups. The PI will use automata theory to
investigate questions of growth and torsion and apply the long developed theory
of branch groups to work towards a general theory of maximal subgroups of branch
groups. The final focus of the project is on group properties coming from
topological constructions. The PI will develop a geometric group theory analog
of the topological theory of branch coverings as well as explore connections
between the general theory of homological stability and topological finiteness
properties, first through certain natural subgroups of some big mapping class
groups by exploiting actions on highly connected complexes related to the curve
complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.