* 2005404
* Game Changers exhibition: A sports exhibition and research study to encourage inventive identity development and broaden participation in STEM innovation
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Monica Smith, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,804,552.00

National priorities recommend the U.S. fortify a culture of innovation by
encouraging broader participation in invention and STEM. The Game Changers is an
Innovations in Development exhibition project with embedded research that
advances knowledge about how museum exhibits can activate STEM-related inventive
identities among the public. The project is a collaboration between the
Smithsonian's Lemelson Center for the Study of Invention and Innovation at the
National Museum of American History (NMAH-LC), educational researchers, an
exhibition design firm, and community based organizations. While the Game
Changers exhibition theme of inventiveness in sports provides an initial spark
for broad audience interest and engagement, its ultimate intent is to foster and
enhance inventive identity among diverse audiences, particularly girls and young
women ages 10-17, African American youth ages 10-17, and people of all ages with
disabilities. Visitors will be met by a brief introductory display to launch
their journey from passive learner to active inventor. A diverse array of
athletes and inventors provide relevant motivational exemplars and “ask”
visitors “How will YOU Change the Game?” Examples of invention challenges
include, applying the principles of physics and materials science to aid in
designing a safer helmet and exploring computational fluid dynamics to design a
faster swimsuit. Throughout the exhibition experience, visitors will draw on an
array of STEM skills and knowledge essential to sports, including physiology,
kinesiology, and biomechanical engineering, physics, biomimicry, robotics,
computer science, data analysis, and virtual and augmented reality. Throughout
the project, the team will work with priority audiences, starting with front-end
research and evaluation; progressing iteratively through stages of formative
research, design, and evaluation; and conducting summative evaluation to ensure
that the STEM-based content and design strategies are impacting inventive
identity and meeting audiences’ interests and needs. In coordination with the
exhibition development and evaluation teams, educational researchers will
iteratively explore and develop a model for innovative identity development in
informal learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational psychologists
from Old Dominion University and Temple University will collaborate closely with
the NMAH-LC team, exhibition design-fabrication firm Roto, and evaluators from
Randi Korn &amp; Associates to adapt a theoretical model of identity from a
formal education setting to an informal learning context. In the model, identity
is conceptualized as a complex dynamic system, with interdependent internal and
external elements (ontological/epistemological beliefs; self-perceptions;
purpose and goals; perceived action possibilities) and reciprocal influences in
a process of continuous emergence. Using design based research and a previously
developed coding manual, the team will iteratively apply, test, and further
advance the inventive identity development model, a set of inventive identity
indicators for future research and development, and a list of exhibition design
techniques for activating inventive, STEM-based identity development in informal
learning environments. The research team will prioritize diverse audiences for
iterative cycles and focus groups—including participants from the Girl Scouts of
the Nation's Capital, Smithsonian Accessibility Program, Smithsonian's Anacostia
Community Museum, and YMCA of Washington, DC. The exhibition’s research,
evaluation, and design outcomes will be disseminated widely across the AISL
field and through project collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, which seeks to advance
new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.