* 2005079
* Solving the Colloidal and Photophysical Instability Problems of Perovskite Quantum Dots via Surface Ligand Engineering
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hedi Mattoussi, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 510,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
(SSMC) Program in the Division of Materials Research, Professors Mattoussi and
Ma at Florida State University are developing strategies to enhance the long-
term stability of colloidal perovskite nanocrystals. Colloidal perovskite
nanocrystals are a class of semiconductor nanocrystals that exhibit several
unique physical and spectroscopic properties. These properties can be extremely
useful for various technological applications, such as energy harvesting and
light-emitting devices (LEDs). However, their limited colloidal and structural
stabilities have prevented in depth understanding and inhibited further
integration of these materials into electronic devices. The strategies explored
by Professors Mattoussi and Ma involve the design of a new set of metal-
coordinating polymers that may impart long-term stability to these materials
over a wide range of conditions, preserve the nanocrystal integrity, and enhance
their optical and electronic properties, thereby bringing the materials closer
to use in industrial applications. The research provides an example where
chemistry, materials science,and engineering are combined to address important
fundamental problems and to advance new technologies. The project also provides
a good training for graduate and undergraduate students in aspects ranging from
chemical synthesis, engineering, and advanced analytical characterization of
light-emitting devices. In addition, Professors Mattoussi and Ma are
collaborating with the Florida Center for Research in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (FCR-STEM) to create and disseminate K-12 science
videos to teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-supported project
addresses some of the salient problems affecting perovskite nanocrystals, such
as poor colloidal and structural stability, using interfacial chemistry
approaches. Colloidal perovskite nanocrystals have cores made of either
all–inorganic or organic/inorganic hybrid materials and exhibit several unique
photophysical properties. They have potential for use in a variety of
technological applications. These include use in display technology and
photovoltaic cells. One major technical hurdle that has inhibited in-depth
characterization and further application of these materials in industry has been
their rather very limited stability. To address this issue, the Mattoussi and Ma
groups are designing and optimizing a set of coordinating polymers that present
either zwitterion or cation/anion anchors. The ligand design offers flexibility
in controlling the number, structure and properties of the coordinating motifs
as well as the solubilizing blocks, providing polymers that can tightly interact
with the nanocrystal surfaces. Such coatings can impart steric stability to
these materials over a wide range of conditions, preserve the nanocrystal
integrity and potentially enhance their optical and electronic properties. The
present project is interdisciplinary in nature, and as such, it provides
opportunities for training students in several areas of materials chemistry,
spectroscopy, and device engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.