* 2005749
* Theoretical Studies of Tunable Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Andrea Liu, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2025
* USD 402,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical,
computational, and data-driven research, and education to study how living
systems self-regulate by investigating mechanical networks that are tunable
through their links at edges. The central goal is to uncover an organizing
principle which can be further applied to materials design. On the face of it,
the mechanism by which many enzymes are turned on and off (allostery), the
ability of the brain vascular system to adjust blood flow to different parts of
the brain on demand, the ability of the cellular cytoskeleton to control
robustly cell shape and mechanics even as they are changing, and morphological
processes in embryonic development have little in common. This project suggests
and explores the possibility that there is an underlying organizing principle
that unifies these phenomena. In each of these systems, the network connectivity
can be modified at the level of individual links in the network, by evolution,
by dilating or contracting blood vessels, by specific proteins or by adjustable
levels of protein expression, respectively. This enables each link to have
different and mutable properties that can be tuned in order to give rise to the
aforementioned phenomena. The lessons that the PI and her research team will
learn by studying this new possible organizing principle and its consequences
will be applicable to synthetic systems and materials, and may provide insight
into how to design materials capable of performing tasks that approach the
diversity and complexity of those routinely accomplished by living
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will continue vigorous outreach, advocacy,
mentoring and service, particularly for women; a few of her recent activities
include (1) Lecturer to Philadelphia area high school science teachers; (2)
Panelist for discussions for women in academic science; (3) Speaker and co-host
of panels addressing issues affecting Asian-American scientists and engineers;
(4) Deliverer of public lectures in Philadelphia and elsewhere; (5) Holder of
leadership positions in the American Physical Society, representing
approximately 55,000 physicists in the US and worldwide, as well as the Physics
Section of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. The PI also
meets with groups of women students, postdocs and faculty during
seminar/colloquium trips to academic institutions in fields ranging from physics
and chemistry to materials science and mechanical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical, computational, and
data-driven research, and education to study athermal mechanical networks with
tunable edge properties to reveal organizing principles that unite different
features of living matter systems and are applicable to materials design. Living
matter systems are often composed of constituents that are non-identical (such
as amino acids in a protein or cells in a tissue) and mutable (amino acid
sequences can change during evolution and cells differentiate during
development). The ability of scientists to connect microscopic properties to
collective behavior in many-body systems, in which every constituent can be
different and can alter its properties, is currently limited. This project is
focused on a class of such systems, athermal mechanical networks with tunable
edge properties. The PI and collaborators have previously shown that such
networks are highly malleable in their properties upon alteration of a very
small fraction of edges.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project pursues three main
directions of research on tunable mechanical networks. (1) Topological data
analysis and machine learning methods will be used to connect microscopic
properties to collective behavior. (2) Potentially abstract questions involving
adaptability, evolvability and robustness of these systems will be addressed in
a concrete, quantitative way. (3) Edge tuning will be explored as a new
organizing principle for understanding and potentially designing functions and
processes in mechanical networks ranging from molecular to cellular and tissue
scales in living matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will use
data mining methods to go beyond statistical mechanics to understand microscopic
origins of many-body behavior. Such methods have been used in physics for fast
approximation (e.g. in calculating electronic structure) or classification (e.g.
in developing triggers for high energy experiments or distinguishing
astronomical objects in images), but there has been little focus on applying
them towards the central goal of condensed matter theory. The research also
brings a unifying viewpoint to biological processes ranging from the molecular
to the cellular and tissue scales. It will also provide a new perspective to
semiflexible networks, a focus of considerable excellent soft and living matter
research, as well as epithelial tissues, systems of increasing interest in the
soft/living matter community. The topological data analysis developed previously
by the PI and collaborators will be generalized and applied to real proteins,
potentially leading to new understanding of the link between conserved amino
acid sequences and allostery. An eventual goal is to develop a new strategy for
designing synthetic allosteric proteins, which would have potential medical and
other applications. The concept of tuning as a new organizing principle in
mechanical networks across scales in living systems could allow useful insights
to be exchanged across the fields of physics, materials science, mechanical
engineering, bioengineering, structural biology, cell biology and developmental
biology, to mutual benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will continue vigorous
outreach, advocacy, mentoring and service, particularly for women; a few of her
recent activities include (1) Lecturer to Philadelphia area high school science
teachers; (2) Panelist for discussions for women in academic science; (3)
Speaker and co-host of panels addressing issues affecting Asian-American
scientists and engineers; (4) Deliverer of public lectures in Philadelphia and
elsewhere; (5) Holder of leadership positions in the American Physical Society,
representing approximately 55,000 physicists in the US and worldwide, as well as
the Physics Section of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
The PI also meets with groups of women students, postdocs and faculty during
seminar/colloquium trips to academic institutions in fields ranging from physics
and chemistry to materials science and mechanical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.