* 2005259
* Elements: ALE-AMR Framework and the PISALE Codebase
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Alice Koniges, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,996.00

The solution of partial differential equations (PDEs) on modern high performance
computing (HPC) platforms is essential to the continued success of research and
modeling for a wide variety of areas of importance to the national interest.
This project will make available software for modeling with PDEs. It will also
apply the code for simulations of complex groundwater flow processes in Hawaiian
islands characterized by highly heterogeneous volcanic rocks and dynamic
interaction between freshwater and seawater. Roughly half the population in the
US lives near coastal areas where groundwater supplies much of the domestic,
agricultural, and industrial water supply. Almost all of Hawaii’s domestic water
use is pumped from volcanic aquifer systems since the islands are completely
surrounded by the Pacific Ocean. In Hawaii’s groundwater resources, freshwater
accumulates on top of the denser underlying saltwater, making it highly
susceptible to anthropogenic activities and saltwater intrusion induced by
possible sea water and volcanic events. It is essential that Hawaii’s
groundwater resources are properly modeled and managed for sustainable use.
Island-scale numerical groundwater flow modeling with PDEs on HPC will play an
important role in predicting the sustainable yields for the volcanic aquifer
systems and planning groundwater resources management. The software in this
project will be used both for applications and as a nexus for student
involvement in HPC. Curriculum material associated with the project will be
developed and offered at university level groundwater modeling
classes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PDE software developed, distributed, and
applied in this project uses an innovative combination of advanced mathematical
techniques for the solution of PDEs including parallel software tools to
dynamically adapt the grids and special Lagrangian-flow methods that allow for
solution of equations that can reproduce the sharp freshwater-seawater interface
observed in sea water monitoring locations. The software is particularly
appropriate for applications with equations that can be couched in a
conservation law form. Source terms of these applications can be included using
complex numerical techniques including the ability to handle anisotropic tensors
components.The software is based on techniques of ALE (Arbitrary Lagrangian
Eulerian Methods) with AMR (Adaptive Mesh Refinement) to create a publicly
available sustainable branch of the software known as PISALE for Pacific Island
Structured-amr with ALE. In addition to the subsurface flow and transport
application in Hawaiian aquifers, the project will provide capability for
collaborative research in a variety of fields that require efficient solution of
PDEs on advanced HPC architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Hydrologic
Sciences Program, part of the Division of Earth Sciences, within the NSF
Directorate of Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.