* 2005791
* Collaborative Research Broadening Participation of Latinx Students in Computer Science by Integrating Culturally Relevant Computational Music Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jason Freeman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,079,570.00

Computing and computational thinking are integral to the practice of modern
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM); therefore, computational
skills are essential for students’ preparation to participate in computationally
intensive STEM fields and the emerging workforce. In the U.S., Latinx and
Spanish speaking students are underrepresented in computing and STEM fields,
therefore, expanding opportunities for students to learn computing is an urgent
need. The Georgia Institute of Technology and the University of Puerto Rico will
collaborate on research and development that will provide Latinx and Spanish
speaking students in the continental U.S. and Puerto Rico, opportunities to
learn computer science and its application in solving problems in STEM fields.
The project will use a creative approach to teaching computer science by
engaging Latinx and Spanish speaking students in learning how to code and
reprogram in a music platform, EarSketch. The culturally relevant educational
practices of the curriculum, as a model for informal STEM learning, will enable
students to code and reprogram music, including sounds relevant to their own
cultures, community narratives, and cultural storytelling. Research results will
inform education programs seeking to design culturally authentic activities for
diverse populations as a means to broaden participation in integrated STEM and
Computing. This Broad Implementation project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments, including multiple pathways for broadening access to and
engagement in STEM learning, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the technical
innovation of the project, the EarSketch platform will be redesigned for
cultural and linguistic authenticity that will include incorporating traditional
and contemporary Latin sound beats and musical samples into the software so that
students can remix music and learn coding using sounds relevant to their
cultures; and developing a Spanish version of the platform, with a toggle to
easily switch between English and Spanish. Investigators will also develop an
informal STEM curriculum using best practices from Culturally Relevant Education
and Cultural Sustaining Pedagogy that provides authentic, culturally and
linguistically rich opportunities for student engagement by establishing direct
and constant connections to their cultures, communities and lived experiences.
The curriculum design and implementation team will work collaboratively with
members of Latinx diverse cultural groups to ensure semantic and content
equivalency across diverse students and sites. Validating the intervention
across students and sites is one of the goals of the project. The model
curriculum for informal learning will be implemented as a semester long
afterschool program in six schools per year in Atlanta and Puerto Rico, and as a
one-week summer camp twice in the summer. The curricular materials will be
broadly disseminated, and training will be provided to informal learning
practitioners as part of the project. The research will explore differences in
musical and computational engagement; the interconnection between music and the
computational aspects of EarSketch; and the degree to which the program promotes
cultural engagement among culturally and linguistically heterogenous groups of
Latinx students in Atlanta, and more culturally and linguistically homogenous
Latinx students in Puerto Rico. Investigators will use a mixed method design to
collect data from surveys, interviews, focus groups, and computational/musical
artifacts created by students. The study will employ multiple case study
methodology to analyze and compare the implementation of the critical components
of the program in Puerto Rico and Atlanta, and to explore differences in
students’ musical and computational thinking practices in the two regions.
Results from the research will determine the impact of the curriculum on
computer science skills and associated computational practices; and contribute
to the understanding of the role of cultural engagement on educational outcomes
such as sense of belonging, persistence, computational thinking, programming
content knowledge and computer science identity. Results will inform education
programs designing culturally authentic and engaging programming for diverse
populations of Latinx youths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.