* 2005875
* Shape Discovery for Convex Bodies: Measures, Invariants, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Erwin Lutwak, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 793,174.00

This research project concerns constructing, identifying, or describing
geometric objects from either indirect measurements or from a set of design
requirements. Such construction problems arise in mathematics, science,
engineering, and medicine. Identifying organs and tumors within the human body
is one such example. The design of the shapes of radar antennas is another. The
Brunn-Minkowski theory is at the heart of one of the core subjects that provides
the mathematical and computational tools used in such applications. The core of
the Brunn-Minkowski theory concerns the study of types of geometric measurements
(such as the surface area, volume, curvature of its boundary) of an object.
Another central area are Minkowski problems, which ask whether an object can be
reconstructed from a set of these geometric measurements. The investigators will
continue their efforts to expand and enrich both of these central areas. They
will also continue their work connecting ideas in information theory with Brunn-
Minkowski theory. The work of the investigators has generated interesting
questions, some that have still withstood the efforts of the best research
mathematicians and other problems that can be explored even by high school and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent discovery of
the dual curvature measures has led to new compelling problems to be attacked.
One of them is the dual Minkowski problem which requires solving a novel fully
nonlinear degenerated partial differential equations with measure data. By
combining techniques from geometry and analysis, the Investigators (with various
collaborators) have been developing new methods to solve characterization
problems for geometric measures that are related to degenerated partial
differential equations with measure data. These newly developed techniques (of
the Investigators) of obtaining delicate estimates for integrals with respect to
measures have led to the discovery (by the Investigators) that "measure
concentration" is the key phenomenon displayed by solutions to those geometric
characterization problems. Continuing these investigations should enable the
Investigators to make significant progress on fundamental problems regarding
characterizing geometric measures. Affine isoperimetric inequalities have for
many years been a central focus of the Investigatoirs' efforts and a number of
new directions are to be explored. The study (pioneered by the Investigators) of
connections between affine isoperimetric inequalities and sharp affine Sobolev
inequalities shows much promise and will be further explored. The Investigators
will continue to exploit connections between their quadratic Brunn-Minkowski
theory and the subject of information theory 9from electrical
engineering).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.