* 2005165
* Collaborative Research: Elucidation of the Grotthuss Topochemistry in Reticular Electrodes for Fast Proton Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Peter Greaney, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

Non-Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this collaborative project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research at NSF, two research groups at the University of California
Riverside and Oregon State University investigate fundamental aspects of how
fast diffusion of hydrogen ions occurs in confined networks of water. When metal
ions move though water, they push past the water molecules as they go. It is
already known that hydrogen ions migrate in a completely different manner and
faster. The researchers study in detail how this process works and what makes it
many times faster than the diffusion of metal ions, for example what makes it
faster than that of lithium ions in batteries. Several factors can enable very
fast, hydrogen-ion batteries that have the potential to be charged and
discharged for millions of cycles, and so present a remarkable opportunity to
realize the Holy Grail of electrochemical energy storage: to achieve
simultaneously the energy densities of batteries and the power and cycle life of
capacitors. The abundance of hydrogen also makes hydrogen-ion batteries a
promising candidate for the grid-level storage batteries that are needed to
provide a continuous and dependable electricity supply from intermittent power
sources such as wind and solar energy. Advancing knowledge and the associated
technology in these areas aids the United States to remain economically
competitive. Additionally, the project produces educational videos targeted to
students and the broader public that present concepts in energy storage and its
role in society. Training of graduate and undergraduate students with the skills
needed to enter the workforce in the energy technology sector and additional
outreach activities take place at both
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing knowledge of battery chemistry is built upon
the understanding that the kinetics are dictated by desolvation and vehicular
diffusion of the working ion. The research in this collaborative project, which
is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division
of Materials Research at NSF, explores a new paradigm of battery chemistry where
by using protons as the working ions with an aqueous electrolyte, charge
conduction does not rely on the long-range physical migration of ions through
the host electrode but instead obtains long-range movement of charge via the
Grotthuss mechanism of proton displacement along the crystal water network in an
electrode. Transport of protons via the Grotthuss mechanism involves the
movement of a quasiparticle defect in the bonding topology of water. It is
fundamentally different from the vehicular transport of metal cations and could
give rise to ultra-fast insertion kinetics and the ability to provide batteries
that deliver high power at ultra-low temperatures. The project focuses on
mechanisms of proton transport and storage in Turnbull blue and its family of
analog compounds. These systems have an open and defected crystal structure that
hosts an internal network of crystal water. The crystal water network provides
pathways for Grotthuss diffusion, making the kinetics of proton transport and
storage exceedingly fast, even at temperatures well below the freezing
temperature of water. This project tests the central hypothesis that the
transport performance of protons in this system depends on the topology imposed
on the H-bonding network of crystal water by the surrounding host framework. To
test this, the researchers a. determine the topological characteristics of the
water network in Prussian blue analogs, from the atomic to the mesoscopic scale,
and the role they play in Grotthuss topochemistry; b. elucidate the mechanisms
of proton insertion, storage, and transport in the water network within Prussian
blue analogs at all states of charge; and c. formulate testable design
principles that can guide the development of new reticular materials for proton
transport and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.