* 2005006
* Collaborative Research: Bridging the atomic scale and the mesoscale in the characterization of defect production and evolution in high entropy alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Djamel Kaoumi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2024
* USD 281,923.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Developing high strength materials that can
withstand significant amounts of radiation and deformation are critical to
advance many technical applications, including efficient nuclear energy
production and space exploration. High entropy alloys (HEAs) are emerging as
promising high strength and radiation-resistant materials as HEAs contain a mix
of many elements that disrupt the chemical ordering. The focus of this research
is to gain fundamental understanding at the atomic level on how the complexity
of chemical disorder interferes with the formation and evolution of undesirable
defects that weakens the material. To gain these insights, state of the art
analytical and imaging techniques will be used to reveal how an atomic sized
defect in the material evolves and how the chemical disorder interferes and
halts this undesirable process. Such insights are needed to develop the optimal
alloys with high radiation resistance, high strength and high stability that
would not only enable new advanced power generating technologies with high
efficiency and low or zero carbon emission but more generally, could transform
many technical fields related to energy and space. Students working on the
project will develop in-depth understanding on chemistry and physics of
materials and defects in solids and gain experience in important techniques in
material science. International student exchange and national internship
opportunities are offered to the graduate students involved in the project. A
wide range of research opportunities and outreach activities are provided to
undergraduates and high school students throughout the period of the project
where participation of underrepresented groups are actively encouraged.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;High entropy alloys (HEAs) are
emerging as an outstanding class of materials due to their excellent mechanical
properties and high radiation tolerance as a result of their unique electronic
structure. Chemical disorder and compositional fluctuations in these alloys have
large effects on energy dissipation and response to irradiation. While previous
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and other studies showed that damage
accumulation was suppressed by increasing chemical disorder, they could not
reveal vacancy clusters below 2 nm leaving critical gap in understanding defect
formation and buildup in these alloys. The proposed research aims to
experimentally monitor defect formation on atomistic scale and their buildup to
large clusters and voids by combining in-situ and ex-situ positron annihilation
spectroscopy (PAS) with in-situ and ex-situ TEM to capture isolated vacancies,
small vacancy clusters, larger clusters and voids, thus bridge the gap between
the atomic scale and mesoscale characterization of radiation induced defects in
HEAs. The use of In-situ PAS and In-situ TEM measurements both coupled with ion
irradiation offers a picture of the defect dynamics including production,
annihilation and evolution, on atomic scale (for PAS) and mesoscale (for TEM).
The proposed research is expected to reveal the effects of chemical disorder on
defect formation, migration and evolution in a radiation environment and reveal
the damage and annealing mechanisms in Single -Phase Concentrated Solid Solution
alloys (SP-CSAs) and HEAs through the study of defect production from collision
cascades on an atomic and mesoscale level in alloys with increasing chemical
complexity from one to five constituents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.