* 2005279
* Alexandrov Geometry and Its Relatives
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Anton Petrunin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 414,573.00

Alexandrov geometry studies metric spaces from an axiomatic point of view. These
axioms are very similar to the axioms of Euclid, the main difference is that a
certain equality is exchanged to the so called comparison inequality. It makes
it possible to consider a wide variety of metric spaces, which are important in
modern geometry, and to study them using the same old intuition known since
Euclid. This theory has fruitful applications in group theory, in particular
group actions and also in Riemannian geometry. Singular spaces appear naturally
in many problems and the advantage of Alexandrov geometry lies in the ability to
work with many such spaces directly. The PI also aims to advise PhD students,
complete writing two textbooks (one advanced graduate and another undergraduate
level), continue editorial service for the highly regarded mathematical journal,
Geometric and Functional Analysis, and participate in the MASS summer
undergraduate research program at Penn State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is divided into the following main parts: The study of a new type of
metric comparisons introduced by PI with collaborators. The spaces satisfying
these comparisons are far from being understood. Some strong connections to the
quotients by groups of isometries and to the spaces with continuity property of
optimal transport have been found already. The approximation of polyhedral
spaces by smooth Riemannian manifold with a curvature bound. This subject might
provide a tool that could be useful in the piecewise linear world as well as in
the smooth world. The study of a certain construction that provides a link
between Alexandrov spaces with non-positive curvature and discrete isometric
group actions on the Euclidean space. The study of the limit behavior of
curvature integrals for collapsing sequences of Riemannian
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.