* 2005750
* Collaborative Informal STEM Learning Between Researchers and Homeless Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Chris Hawn, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

This Pilot and Feasibility project will investigate: a) the kinds of learning
outcomes that occur in an informal STEM project utilizing a Critical
Environmental Justice-informed Participatory Action Research framework, co-
created between researchers and homeless communities, and b) the challenges and
opportunities that arise in evaluating such collaborative projects. To address
these questions, a team of university and community researchers will work with
two self-organized homeless communities, in Portland, OR and Baltimore, MD, to
systematically examine air quality at their sites and further develop a
multimedia environmental justice toolkit. The toolkit is aimed at equipping
homeless communities with STEM-based information and approaches to learn about
and address various environmental hazards. Homeless people are
disproportionately vulnerable to the impacts of air and soil pollution, rodents,
extreme weather, floods, fires, and other hazards. This collaboration will study
STEM learning outcomes related to the broader historical socio-political context
in which people are living. The project also anticipates finding ways to adapt
evaluation processes to better suit the needs of marginalized groups
participating in informal STEM projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by this
integrated framework, the team will undertake participant observation,
interviews, focus groups, and document analysis to assess learning. It also
anticipates gaining insights into how evaluation processes may be adapted to
better suit the needs of marginalized groups participating in informal STEM
learning. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.