* 2005283
* Gordon Research Conference on Plant Molecular Biology: Spatial and Temporal Dynamics in Plant Biology, Holderness, New Hampshire, June 14-19, 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* C. Robertson McClung, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The 28th Gordon Research Conference on Plant Molecular Biology, entitled
“Spatial and Temporal Dynamics in Plant Biology,” is scheduled for June 14-19,
2020 in Holderness, NH. Humanity faces the challenge of providing a global
population of 9-10 billion with nourishing food, sustainably, in spite of loss
of arable land and environmental degradation. Plants cannot move and so must
deal with a changing and increasingly stressful environment by responding in
place. This conference focuses on plant responses to their environment in real
time, but at different time scales. For example, light perception is rapid
(occurs in milliseconds), but many signaling cascades operate over minutes to
hours. The biological circadian clock operates on a time scale of days yet is
also critical for seasonal perception. Evolutionary time scales extend over
years to millennia. Plant environmental responses also occur at different
spatial scales, from subcellular and cellular to whole organ and whole plant.
Moreover, plant responses to the environment are also influenced by their
associated microbes, which include both beneficial and pathogenic interactions.
Understanding the mechanistic basis of plant responses to their environment
across both temporal and spatial scales is an important first step towards
developing crops better able to maintain or even increase their productivity in
the face of increasing and changing environmental stresses. The goal of this
conference is the dissemination of these insights both within the scientific
community and to the greater public to inform and enhance agricultural practice
and its appreciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To survive, plants must adapt to an
ever-changing environment in real-time, yet current studies typically capture
only a (single time point) snapshot of plant responses. This conference will
highlight new methods and approaches to track and analyze dynamic responses in
plants in real time, at different temporal and spatial scales – from the atomic
dynamics of light perception by phytochrome, through epigenetic and
transcription dynamics, to dynamics of cell biological and developmental
processes, to whole plant physiology and evolutionary dynamics. Novel modeling
and statistical approaches will be considered, including time-based studies,
that reveal previously unknown gene-network interactions at a variety of levels
that could not be identified using more conventional means. The small scale of
the meeting, and the emphasis on discussion offers a unique opportunity to
develop a community that embraces the importance of recognizing the multiple
distinct scales of organization, both temporal and spatial, at which life,
specifically plant life, operates. Plant signaling operates at different
temporal and spatial scales from the evolution of plant species and communities,
yet there are commonalities of logic that apply, and their application enriches
and advances our work to understand plant biology at each of these scales. While
one explicit objective is to broaden the thinking of the scientists who interact
at this GRC, a parallel objective is to build and broaden the plant research
community through the recruitment of new participants with new skill sets. This
objective is as important as the specific research discussed at the GRC. This
award was co-funded by the Plant Genome Research Program and the Plant, Fungal
and Microbial Developmental Mechanisms Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.