* 2005642
* Ninth International Conference on Computational Advances in Bio &amp; Medical Sciences (ICCABS)
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2021
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2021
* USD 8,000.00

Computational techniques are drastically impacting the way in which scientific
and engineering research are conducted. Impressive advances have been made in
different areas including biology, medicine, and drug discovery. Given the great
importance of these areas to the society at large, it is essential to advance
the state-of-the art in them. Such advances can be made when the scientists from
these domains work together and come up with the best possible diagnosis tools,
treatment procedures, drugs for various diseases, etc. Even though a number of
conferences exist today in the general area of bioinformatics, they focus on one
of these three areas to a large extent. The Ninth International IEEE Conference
on Computational Advances in Bio and medical Sciences (ICCABS) has the goal of
bringing together scientists in biology, medicine, and drug discovery and hence
serving as a collaboration platform for them. These collaborations are likely to
result in the solution of some of these challenging
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds will be used to support the
travel expenses of graduate students. These students will get to meet experts
and listen to their research results. Not only will the attending students but
so will their colleagues at their home institution, since when attendees return
to their schools they will communicate their experiences with other students.
The conference proceedings will be of great use to students, researchers, and
practitioners. Journal special issues are also
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.