* 2005640
* Boundaries and Nonpositive Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Talia Fernos, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2023
* USD 283,145.00

The collection of symmetries of an object has a mathematical structure known as
a group. Group theory has enjoyed a wide range of applications both in the
physical world and the ideal mathematical universe. A particularly fruitful
direction in the study of groups has been to consider symmetries of geometric
spaces of nonpositive curvature and their associated boundaries. A geometric
space is nonpositively curved if it is not "rounded" in any significant way.
That is, it is either flat (such as the Euclidean plane), saddle-shaped, or some
combination of the two. Given an infinite geometric object, one can attach a
boundary at infinity in a way that allows us to view it from the outside in.
This project centers on investigation of boundary theory in the context of
nonpositively curved spaces. The results are expected to both expand the class
of groups that are accessible through this theory and help define its
limitations. The award includes support for graduate students involved in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on structure-preserving
automorphisms of products of hyperbolic spaces and CAT(0) cube complexes
together with their associated boundaries. The investigator and collaborators
will: (1) introduce and study irreducibly-acylindrical actions on products of
hyperbolic spaces and examine persistence of known properties of acylindrically
hyperbolic groups; (2) establish automorphism-equivariant relationships among
three of the key natural boundaries associated to CAT(0) cube complexes: the
Roller, simplicial, and Tits boundaries; and (3) examine the quality of
convergence of a random walk on a CAT(0) cube complex, specifically to establish
a Central Limit Theorem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.