* 2005538
* Energy-Driven Instabilities in Nonlinear Elasticity and Other Questions from Materials Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Yury Grabovsky, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 307,986.00

This project is devoted to the application of the fundamental physical principle
of energy minimization to understanding and utilization of several important
phenomena arising in materials science. Of special interest are materials
instabilities when the material experiences sudden changes in response to the
changes in environment. One type of instability is a phase transition in
crystalline solids, where changing loading or temperature can make the original
phase (structure of the material) unstable and give rise to a different
crystalline phase that could have a different volume leading to the shape change
of the original material sample. Such materials can be used in switches,
cantilevers, or gauges in nano-scale devices. The transformed material is a
mixture of phases, separated by phase boundaries. Buckling of slender structures
under compression is another example of an instability. Buckling of axially
compressed cylindrical shells is of special interest for mathematical analysis,
since the theoretically computed buckling load of a perfect circular cylindrical
shell is more than 5 times higher than what is observed in experiments. This
investigation will provide analytical tools for identifying both stable
configurations and instabilities. It will advance our quantitative understanding
of specific mechanisms through which small imperfections of shape and load can
have a dramatic effect on buckling strength. Fundamental physical principles of
causality and passivity are very often expressed mathematically in terms of
special analytic dependence on parameters. The investigator will study
properties of relevant classes of analytic functions from the point of view of
recovering them from experimental measurements. Such questions emerge from a
wide spectrum of disciplines from materials science to particle physics. They
are relevant for remote sensing when one wants to measure material properties in
inhospitable environments, from the Arctic to planets and moons in the Solar
system. A related problem of nondestructive testing will benefit from harnessing
mathematical advances in the study of composites to predicting structural
features of heterogeneous media from boundary measurements. A junior scientist
will be trained while contributing to the research described
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics being developed to study stability of
phase boundaries represents a contribution to Calculus of Variations, where a
better understanding of quasiconvexity can have implications for mechanics of
metastability and hysteresis in shape memory alloys or giant magnetostrictive
materials. Such materials undergoing martensitic phase transitions are used in
sensors and actuators, and in everyday devices, like dental braces. The
investigation of buckling of cylindrical shells aims to create a mathematically
rigorous theory of buckling of slender bodies. Of special interest is the
rigorous justification of negligibility of departure from linear elasticity of
deformations before the onset of buckling, especially in the presence of shape
imperfections. Stieltjes functions is an important special class of analytic
functions in terms of which one can describe the complex impedance of electrical
circuits or complex electromagnetic permittivity of materials. They also arise
in signal processing, antenna design and particle physics. The fundamental
question that will be addressed by this research is the rigorous mathematical
theory of their recovery from noisy measurements at either a discrete set of
points or on a curve in the complex upper half plane. Provably optimal
reconstruction algorithms producing certifiably valid data will be a specific
target of this research. The theory of exact relations for composites will be
used to identifying properties of the Dirichlet to Neumann map that are
insensitive to the internal structure of the medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.