* 2005369
* Category II: Exploring Neural Network Processors for AI in Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2026
* Amitava Majumdar, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 12/31/2026
* USD 12,249,999.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is increasingly applied to science and engineering
problems, and as a part of a growing data science field that is enabling new
insights and discoveries not possible with traditional high-performance
computing architectures. In 2019 the President issued an executive order
announcing a national AI strategy involving the private sector, academia, and
the public. Among other things, this strategy calls for investments in AI
research and development, providing AI resources, and training an AI-ready
workforce. Researchers are increasingly applying machine learning (ML)
techniques to science and engineering problems including those from astronomy,
climate modeling, extreme-scale systems management, cell biology, high energy
physics, drug discovery, social science, satellite image analysis, among others.
In addition to advances in algorithms and software, the performance of AI
systems is heavily dependent on the underlying hardware. Evaluation of hardware
optimized for AI algorithms is of keen interest to the AI research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To extend the application of AI to evermore
challenging problems in science and engineering, the San Diego Supercomputer
Center (SDSC), working closely with their vendor partner Supermicro, will deploy
Voyager, a high-performance, innovative resource for conducting AI research
across a wide range of science and engineering domains. Based on AI processors
optimized for deep learning (DL) operations, Voyager will be a first-of-its-kind
system available in the NSF resource portfolio. This will give researchers the
opportunity to explore Voyager’s unique hardware and software using well-
established deep learning frameworks like PyTorch, Keras, and Tensorflow to
implement deep learning techniques such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and generative adversarial networks (GANs). Researchers will also be able to
develop their own AI techniques using software tools and libraries built
specifically for Voyager’s innovative AI architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is structured as a three-year Testbed phase followed by a two-year
Allocations Phase. During the Testbed phase SDSC researchers and collaborators
will work closely with a small number of research teams to evaluate the
performance of Voyager’s innovative deep learning (DL) hardware, specialized
compilers, and system libraries. Semiannual workshops will bring teams together
to share lessons learned, and develop the knowledge and best practices that
inform future users who will be given access during the Allocations Phase.
During the Allocations Phase, Voyager will be available to researchers with
projects deemed meritorious by an NSF-approved allocation process. Lessons
learned from the Testbed Phase is used to develop documentation, best practices,
allocations models, and user support strategies. Semiannual workshops continue
in the Allocations Phase. Through SDSC’s AI Technology Lab, the project will
engage with industry to explore how technologies like those in Voyager can
improve the global competitiveness of private sector companies, and prepare the
next generation workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SDSC will deploy Voyager in
SDSC's energy-efficient data center on the UCSD campus. Voyager will be
connected to multiple high-performance research and education networks at 100
Gbps. Supporting Voyager is a nationally recognized team of application and
systems experts at SDSC. The Voyager External Advisory Board will assist in
recruiting early users and providing guidance to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.