* 2005901
* Building Capacity for Inclusive Informal STEM Learning Opportunities for People with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jeremy Babendure, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,041,443.00

Over the past two decades the prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) has
nearly tripled and yet there is much to learn about serving this audience well.
After high school exit, most are left to navigate the world without appropriate
support or the requisite skills necessary for success. Educators working in
informal science institutions (ISI) can better promote both social interaction
and engagement in STEM education for individuals with ASD. A learning
environment in which the learner chooses content aligned with their personal
interests and where learning can be multifaceted (verbal, hands-on, fast or
slow, social or solitary, directed or inquiry based, physical, etc.) is
consistent with the central tenets of an evidence-based, outcome-driven approach
for autism intervention. ISI educators have the desire but may not have
sufficient and timely knowledge and skills to engage and support this audience.
Currently, many are working at the local level to develop new programs and
approaches for patrons with ASD, with little evaluation or research and not
building on each other’s work. The project will develop a rigorous customized
professional learning experience designed to enhance capacity of ISIs broadly in
ASD support techniques and strategies. The goal is to enable more inclusive
opportunities for people with ASD based on current and emerging promising
practices. The project’s theory of action is that the ability of people with ASD
to participate in traditional, mainstream experiences will improve their
motivation to seek other similar opportunities, build interpersonal skills
critical to successful interaction in society, formal education, and careers.
This, in turn, will help individuals with ASD gain the skills and confidence
needed to pursue STEM academically and professionally. The project is a
collaboration between the Institute for Learning Innovation, the SciTech
Institute, and the Southwest Autism Research &amp; Resource Center (SARRC). This
project is funded by the Advanced Informal STEM Learning program which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
pilot’s main research questions are: (1) To what degree does the professional
learning program support the learning outcomes in knowledge, awareness,
interest, skills, attitude, and behavior change in informal science education
providers? and (2) What features of the program do educators consider most
effective for improving their ability to serve this audience? Four Arizona ISIs
will participate in a research-based design study; their staff will also
comprise the founding members of a Community of Practice aimed at sharing
promising practices and promoting broader engagement among the informal science
education community. The professional development (PD) will be provided by
SARRC. New formative evaluation skills will support ongoing innovation and build
participant capacity. Leveraging this training, the ISIs will create and test
new approaches and programs, apply new skills in formative evaluation, and
develop internal workplace programs to create cultures of ASD understanding. A
pilot research study will recruit 20 diverse individuals with ASD who will visit
each institution prior to and after the PD for staff. The research will measure
the degree to which the PD impacts attendee experience as well as assess the
science learning that occurred because of their visit. This project will advance
collaboration between ASD experts and ISI educators to iteratively develop
effective museum learning strategies. Other goals of this work are to provide
important insights into (a) the current state of accessibility programs in ISI
venues nationally, (b) how PD can be leveraged to help institutions reach true
inclusion, and (c) initial evidenced-based approaches for inclusion of
individuals on the Autism spectrum in mainstream informal environments. In
addition to the research findings, deliverables include an ASD PD model,
national inventory of current practices and programs that support ASD learning
and participation, and the establishment of a Community of
Practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.