* 2005210
* Near atomistic tomographic imaging of PbX quantum-dot superlattices for improved electronic and structural order
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Gergely Zimanyi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 603,757.00

Quantum dots are very small particles whose properties can be changed by
changing the size, shape, or composition of the dot. This research is about
understanding the interactions between these quantum dots that have been
arranged into ordered solids Once the quantum dots are organized into ordered
solids, called a super-lattice, then the solids exhibit new optical and
electronic properties that arise from the interaction between the quantum dots.
The properties of the quantum dot super-lattices are controllable by changing
the coupling between the quantum dots. The electronic coupling is changed by
controlling the distance between particles, by connecting the quantum dots with
bridges, or by filling in the spaces between the dots with another material.
This research seeks to fabricate more ordered quantum dot super-lattices to
explore materials properties with utilization in devices like solar cells,
photodetectors, and thermoelectrics. However, it is hard to investigate
structures that one cannot see. To overcome this roadblock, the use of high-
resolution scanning transmission electron tomography with near-atomic direct-
space imaging will be developed. This new high-resolution tomographic data will
provide sufficient detail to provide feedback between sample fabrication and
resulting superlattice order to enable the fabrication of more perfect samples
with larger super-lattice domains, more evenly distributed bridges, and fewer
defects. The new high-resolution data will also enable new theoretical
approaches to model the interaction between quantum dots in the solid so that
increases in super-lattice order can be tied to specific changes in the optical
and electronic properties. The long-term goal is to develop solids from quantum
dots that are perfect enough to increase the charge mobility by about ten times.
This research will be shared with the public by publishing the scanning
transmission electron tomography data on a publicly downloadable forum and
creating non-technical educational videos about the materials to be published on
the internet. Outreach and education to underserved communities will provide
hands-on STEM training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal quantum-dots (QDs),
organized in a super-lattice, have demonstrated collective electronic and
excitonic behavior across mesoscale dimensions. The specifics of how small
degrees of spatial disorder, surface chemical defects, and epitaxial defects
affect this collective behavior or how to fabricate more perfect super-lattice
structures are not understood. This project will use tomographic imaging with a
resolution of 4-5 Å over 1000s of QDs to measure these small degrees of
structural disorder in real space. This research has a strong emphasis on
improving the imaging technique to enable higher resolution and to improve the
reconstruction technique to increase the image volume. These improvements to the
image quality will enable near atomic mapping of all QDs, necks, and defects,
driving improvement in fabrication, structural control, and understanding of
electronic structure/property relationships. The feedback of near atomic
resolution imaging will enable improved fabrication with the goals of 100% neck
connectivity and uniformity with super-lattice grain sizes of at least 10 µm and
charge mobility approaching 50 cm2 V-1 s-1. The improved sample quality and
high-resolution 3D real-space imaging will facilitate theoretical approaches
that can study hopping vs. charge transport through delocalized “mini-bands” and
will be validated by variable-temperature Hall-effect measurements. The proposed
tomography pushes the limits of resolution/volume achieving reconstructions of
large mesoscale samples with high spatial resolution. The expected outcome is
multiple ultra-high-resolution tomograms that inform the structure formation
mechanism, improved fabrication, mass transport to form QD-QD necks, and spatial
resolution to inform realistic electronic modeling based on data. The research
goals are multi-pronged with focus on fabrication design rules that can be
applied to other QD super-lattices, improved scanning transmission electron
tomography techniques to enhance tomogram spatial resolution and data
interpretation, and mesoscale modeling of delocalized transport using real
spatial data. By combining these approaches this project connects between
nanoscale structure, mesoscale order, and bulk materials
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.