* 2005860
* Collaborative Research: The Notion of Failure and Maker Programming for Youth: Supporting the Professional Development, Reflection, and Learning of Informal Educators
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Adam Maltese, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 255,070.00

Interest in making and makerspaces -- collaborative workspaces where people can
engage in a process of creating something from separate elements (using high and
no tech tools) -- has grown steadily in recent years. While these spaces offer
opportunity for individuals and multi-generational groups to work together,
there is also more broad interest in structured youth programming that involves
maker-related activities and content. Yet, research-informed professional
development that focuses on how informal educators implement, plan, and handle
ongoing, just-in-time support during moments of failure is scarce. Prior
research supports the important role of failure in maker programming to increase
learning, resilience, self-efficacy and other skills such as independence. This
project will address the gap through adapting, implementing, and refining a
professional development program for informal educators to productively attend,
interpret, and respond to youths’ experiences with failure while engaged in
maker programs. The contexts for this research are museums that provide maker
programming. This Innovations in Development project uses a train-the-trainer
approach to professional development. Up to two lead facilitators at each
partnering institution experience an initial three-day workshop and ongoing
support meetings during the first phase. In the second phase, the lead
facilitators support other informal educators at their institution implementing
making programs for youth. This project will enhance the infrastructure for
research and education as collaborations and professional learning communities
will be established among a variety of informal learning institutions. Core
partners include: The Tech Museum of Innovation, The Bakken Museum, Montshire
Museum of Science, The Minneapolis Institute of Art, Thinkery, and Amazeum
Children’s Museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis framing the work
is that a professional development program focused on supporting informal
educators' instructional practices on ways to respond to youths' experiences
with failure will have a positive impact on developing participants developing
pedagogical practices around failure, as well as developing youths' affinity for
resilience during making tasks and a strong sense of self as a maker. The
project utilizes a strengths-based perspective of the resilience that allows the
team to consider promotive factors or variables that help youth overcome
negative effects of failures. The project draws from research highlighting the
positive impact of professional development on teacher knowledge and beliefs,
classroom practice, and student outcomes adapting the Problem-Solving Cycle
model of Borko, Koellner, and Swackhamer to the context of museums. The specific
R&amp;D aims are to: (1) Investigate features of the professional development
models that best support lead facilitators in supporting informal educators in
attending, interpreting, and responding to youths' experiences with failure
while engaged in making tasks; (2) Investigate changes of informal educators'
pedagogical practice around youths' experiences with failures through engaging
in the professional development models; and (3) Examine shifts in youths'
resiliency and perception of failure. A goal of the work is to raise the
importance of failure in the overall learning process. The iterative nature of
this project will be informed by the collection and analysis of video data of
professional development sessions and informal educators facilitating maker
programs, reflective journaling, surveys regarding the professional development,
and pre-post surveys from youth engaged in the maker programs. Dissemination
will address multiple stakeholders, including informal educators, program
developers, evaluators, researchers, and public
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.