* 2005975
* Fostering Joint Parent/Child Engagement in Preschool Computational Thinking by Leveraging Digital Media, Mobile Technology, and Library Settings in Urban and Rural Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Marisa Wolsky, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,074,814.00

This project will teach foundational computational thinking (CT) concepts to
preschoolers by creating a series of mobile apps to guide families through
sequenced sets of videos and hands-on activities. To support families at home it
would also develop a new library model to build librarians’ computational
thinking content knowledge and self-efficacy so they can support parents’
efforts with their children. Computational thinking is a an increasingly
critical skill for learning and success in the workforce. It includes the
ability to identify problems, brainstorm and generate solutions and processes
that can be communicated and followed by computers or humans. There are few
projects that introduce computational thinking to young children. Very little
research has been done on the ways that parents can facilitate children’s
engagement in CT skills. And developing a model that trains and supports
librarians to become virtual coaches of parents as they engage with their
children in CT, will leverage and build the expertise of librarians. The
project’s target audience includes parents and children living in rural areas
where access to CT learning may be very limited. Project partners include the
EDC, a major research organization, the American Library Association, and BUILD,
a national association that promotes collaborations across library, kindergarten
readiness, and public media programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formative
research study asks: 1) What supports do parents of preschoolers in rural
communities need in order to effectively engage in CT with their children at
home? and 2) How can libraries in rural communities support joint CT exploration
in family homes? The summative research study asks: 3) how can an intervention
that combines media resources, mobile technology, and library supports foster
sustained joint parent/child engagement and positive attitudes around CT?
Researchers will develop a parent survey, adapting several scales from
previously developed instruments that ask parents to report on children’s use of
CT-related vocabulary and CT-related attitudes and dispositions. Survey scales
will assess librarians’ attitudes towards CT, as well as their self-efficacy in
supporting parents in CT in a virtual environment. During the formative study,
EDC will pilot-test survey scales with 30 parents and 6 librarians in rural MS
and KY. Analyses will be primarily qualitative and will be geared toward
producing rapid feedback for the development team. Quantitative analyses will be
used on parent app use, using both time query and back-end data, exploring
factors associated with time spent using apps. The summative study will evaluate
how the new media resources and mobile technology, in combination with the
library virtual implementation model, support families’ joint engagement with
CT, and positive attitudes around CT. The researchers will recruit 125 low-
income families with 4- to 5-year-old children in rural MS and KY to participate
in the study. They will randomly assign families within each library to the
“full” intervention condition, including media resources, mobile technology, and
library support delivered through the virtual implementation model, or the
“media and mobile-technology-only” condition. This design will allow researchers
to understand more fully the additional benefit of library support for rural
families’ sustained engagement, and conversely, see the comparative impact of a
media- and mobile-technology only intervention, given that some families might
not be able to access virtual or physical library
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of its overall strategy to enhance
learning in informal environments, the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants. This project is co-funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.