* 2006753
* FET: Small: Collaborative Research: A Probability Correlator for All-Magnetic Probabilistic Computing: Theory and Experiment
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Jean Anne Incorvia, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 258,000.00

Probabilistic computing is a computing paradigm that can solve certain problems
more efficiently than traditional digital computing. While digital computing
deals with deterministic binary bits that are either 0 or 1, probabilistic
computing deals with probabilistic bits (p- bits) that are sometimes 0 and
sometimes 1. This is distinct from quantum computing that deals with quantum
bits (q-bits) which are a superposition of 0 and 1 (and hence a mixture of both
0 and 1 all the time). Quantum computing usually requires the most hardware
resources and digital computing the least, with probabilistic computing between
the two. Most of the hardware resources in probabilistic computing are devoted
to generating specific correlations between two or more p-bit streams. This
project will study and demonstrate a system that will greatly reduce the
hardware burden associated with generating correlations. The results will make
probabilistic computing much more efficient than it currently is. The project
will educate K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students in this field to
increase the pool of skilled scientists and engineers while advancing the field
of computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major challenges in probabilistic
computing is the complex hardware needed to generate required correlations
between probabilistic bit streams. This hardware usually consists of
microcontrollers, analog-to-digital converters, shift registers, etc., that
consume significant power and vastly expand the systemâ€™s footprint on a chip. In
this project, an ultra-compact and extremely energy-efficient correlator or
anti-correlator will be studied and demonstrated that can generate tunable
degrees of anti-correlation between two p-bit streams. The approach is
implemented with two magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) whose soft layers are in
close proximity and hence dipole-coupled. Bit states are encoded in the
resistance states (high or low) of the MTJs. One MTJ generates a p-bit when
driven by a spin-polarized current delivering a spin-transfer-torque. The
current sets the resistance state high or low with a probability determined by
its magnitude, while the bit state of the other MTJ is determined by dipole
coupling with the first. Very strong dipole coupling will result in perfect
anti-correlation, while very weak dipole coupling will result in no correlation.
The effect of dipole coupling will be controlled by applying (electrically
generated) local strain to the second MTJ, which modulates its internal energy
barrier, thereby modulating the degree of anti-correlation between the p-bits
from 0% to 100%. This project will result in new understanding of devices that
use emerging nanomagnetic physics for the next generation of
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.