* 2006504
* Connecting Dynamics and Thermodynamics to Predict Mobility and Glassiness
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Jane Lipson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2023
* USD 349,999.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to new
understanding of how certain very widely-used materials behave and why they
sometimes misbehave. Some solid materials are crystalline; table salt and sugar
are two familiar examples. In these cases the atoms or molecules that make up
the solid are regularly positioned and highly organized, and their structure and
properties do not change with time - they are at equilibrium. In many other
cases the solids are glassy, as if the particles in the liquid state were stuck
in place. Window glass is just one example; it is made of small molecules
containing silicon and oxygen. A large fraction of specially designed materials,
which often involve very large molecules known as polymers, are also in the
glassy solid state. Although glassy solids have been part of our surroundings
for centuries, there are still aspects of their behavior that are not well
understood. Examples from daily life include protective coatings, photoresists,
polymers reinforced with nanoparticles, membranes, and filters. In each of these
cases a significant fraction of the glassy solid molecules are near an
interface; different kinds of experiments have led to the conclusion that these
molecules can behave very differently from neighboring molecules ensconced in
the bulk. A related problem is that, where glassy solid properties are carefully
designed to optimize performance, as the material ages its properties can change
in undesirable ways. These situations reflect the fact that glassy solids,
unlike crystalline solids, are not at equilibrium; and their properties can
shift over time. These changes can affect their performance, and therefore cause
problems. This project will produce new ways of modeling glassy solids that will
account for the influence of a neighboring surface on how molecules pack. The
models will work together with experimental data and lead to new methods for
understanding and predicting the ways that glassy material behavior can change
when interfaces are present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic relaxation of material begins locally
through segmental motion; its progression over short time and length scales
drives the longer and larger response. Dynamic behavior also reflects the local
structural and energetic characteristics that determine thermodynamic
properties. The research proposed here will reveal deep connections between
these realms by using and advancing thermodynamic (Locally Correlated Lattice)
and dynamic (Cooperative Free Volume) models originated in the PI's research
group. This new set of tools will be applied to predict glassy material behavior
over a wide range of conditions. Two areas of particular focus involve the
presence of interfacial regions and the effect of different experimental
pathways used to mimic the effects of long-time aging. This research involves
interrelated projects:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a) A model will be developed for
the interfacial region from very near (nm) the surface to distances where bulk
behavior is recovered. It will lead to predictions for local density, mobility
(mobile layer thickness), segmental relaxation times, and the changing
lengthscale of cooperative motion, as functions of distance from the interface,
temperature, and film thickness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(b) A new model will be
introduced for nanocomposites that reflects differences between the interfacial
region (next to the particles) and the matrix. This model, informed by
thermodynamic properties, will lead to predictions for segmental dynamics and
changes in cooperative length scales as functions of temperature, pressure, and
nanoparticle loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(c) Advances from (a) and (b) will
lead to new ways for connecting the thermodynamic and dynamic properties of
glass formers to their long term stability. This work will also lead to insight
about how those connections depend on the experimental path to
glassiness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials targeted by this project serve an
extremely wide range of functions, and this research will lead to new insight
about how their molecular nature links to the particular properties that make
them uniquely suited to their applications. The new models resulting from this
research will be accessible and generally useful for linking thermodynamic
properties to dynamic behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will further
successful efforts to involve and encourage STEM participation among women and
will continue working with graduate and undergraduate students to add new
resources on polymer-related science to the public knowledge base. The PI will
also continue energetic efforts to introduce fundamental concepts in physical
science to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.