* 2006662
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: UAV-NetSAFE.COM: UAV Network Security Assessment and Fidelity Enhancement through Cyber-Attack-Ready Optimized Machine-Learning Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Vijaya Kumar Devabhaktuni, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) find widespread uses in civil, healthcare, and
other scientific applications, such as climate monitoring, disaster and pandemic
management, merchandise delivery, search and rescue operations, and space
exploration. The project UAV-NetSAFE.COM promotes cyber-awareness of UAV
networks, pioneers innovative security solutions, and serves the US national
interest by directly mitigating the severity of cyber-attacks that could
otherwise lead to human causalities, leakage of sensitive data, and degraded
quality-of-service. This collaborative project promotes science advancement by
investigating a multilayer security framework for the prevention, detection, and
mitigation of UAV-oriented cyber-attacks. Also, this project will also impact
other areas of high societal interest, such as Internet-of-Things and smart
grids. It supports broader education in the areas of cyber-security, machine-
learning, and UAV networks by engaging students in educational and research
activities such as developing cyber-attack models, evaluating cyber-attacks
using machine learning, and designing hardware as well as software solutions for
trustworthy networking. Every year, the outcomes of this project will be
integrated into existing and new curricula and showcased to attract high school
students into STEM degrees. Led by a female lead PI from UND, this collaborative
project's educational activities and interdisciplinary research endeavors will
benefit Native American students from the state of North Dakota and economically
disadvantaged minority and underrepresented students from Chicago metropolitan
and NW Indiana. This project is jointly funded by Secure and Trustworthy
Cyberspace Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this NSF SaTC
collaborative project is to investigate the impacts of cyber-attacks on UAV
networks and pioneer cyber-attack-ready platforms. From a software perspective,
UAV networks' cyber-attack models will be derived to facilitate UAV-distinctive
datasets that aid in the comprehensive assessment and aftermath evaluation of
cyber-attack impacts on UAV networks employing qualitative risk investigations
and quantitative measures. The resulting datasets will be used to empower UAV
networks with both attack detection and decision-making protocols for a range of
cyber-attacks by adopting advanced probabilistic and statistical machine-
learning algorithms. From a hardware perspective, the PIs will explore software-
defined radio setups that intertwine radio frequency beamforming circuit modules
with software-based localization and path rescheduling techniques while
considering practical constraints such as size and structural complexity.
Therefore, the project's key contribution is to pioneer a unified framework that
entails cyber-attack evaluation, detection, and countermeasures of software and
hardware setups. The PIs will maintain an all-inclusive project website that
will help easily disseminate the datasets of cyber-attack models and
countermeasure methods to industry and research community to ensure that the
proposed framework promotes UAV communication and network security. This project
is jointly funded by Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.