* 2006176
* Forming the First Massive Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Zoltan Haiman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2024
* USD 766,826.00

The existence of supermassive black holes within the first billion years after
the big bang is a puzzle. This project will explore one proposed pathway to
their formation. The project will use computer modeling to simulate the
formation of smaller black holes from the direct collapse of cold gas clouds in
the early universe and will trace the evolution of these seed black holes into
the larger supermassive black holes. The project will incorporate the
interaction of radiation with the matter in the early universe in their models
and will follow the dynamics of early dark matter halos to the epoch of
reionization. The models will be used to determine observational signatures of
this process so that it can be tested with future observations. The project will
support a post-baccalaureate student from the Columbia Bridge program within
their research and will restructure a graduate course on computational
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use ENZO, a high-resolution 3D
hydrodynamic code that incorporates radiative transfer, to model the
fragmentation and collapse of atomic-cooling halos into supermassive stars or
directly into seed black holes. The project will include the effects of
radiative feedback into the growth and collapse of cold gas clouds within dark
matter halos. The results of their simulations will be used to make predictions
for electromagnetic signatures of this black-hole seed scenario that will inform
future observations. The project team will recruit a post-baccalaureate student
from the Columbia Bridge program, who will be directly included in the research
and who will receive mentoring by the principal investigators. One of the
investigators will modify his existing graduate course in astrophysical
computational modeling to better include students with a wide variation in
computational preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.