* 2006194
* Collaborative Research: Biological and geochemical controls on phosphorus bioavailability in arctic tundra
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* Lauren Kinsman-Costello, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 10/31/2024
* USD 907,462.00

Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for life, but in some environments it is in
short supply, putting limits on plant growth and decomposition. Plants and
microorganisms take up phosphorus from the water in soil in the form of
dissolved phosphate, which can also be removed from solution by binding to soil
minerals. In particular, iron oxide minerals strongly bind phosphate and may
regulate its availability to plants and microorganisms. This project will
investigate how geochemical and biological systems compete for phosphate in
arctic tundra soils near Toolik Field Station, Alaska, where soil warming and
permafrost thaw are altering carbon and water budgets, which in turn affect soil
moisture and nutrient availability. This research will determine how soil
properties can affect this competition for phosphate, with broad consequences
for plant growth and carbon dynamics in Arctic terrestrial ecosystems. This
project also supports two early career scientists, a postdoctoral scholar, and
multiple graduate and undergraduate students. Furthermore, all participants will
design data-driven educational activities (DataNuggets), which will be used to
communicate scientific results across multiple
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of terrestrial ecosystems to store
carbon depends largely on nutrient availability, which affects both plant growth
and decomposition rates. Phosphorus (P) is often a limiting nutrient, and P
cycling in tundra ecosystems is widely assumed to occur primarily through
biological pathways, in which biological P demand is met by enzymatic release of
phosphate from organic molecules. However, this conceptual model does not
account for iron (Fe) oxides, which may serve as nutrient traps that regulate
phosphate solubility and serve as P sources or sinks under different redox
conditions, even in organic soils. The processes controlling the quantity and
bioavailability of oxide-bound P under different environmental conditions remain
unclear, limiting our ability to predict how P availability might change with
expected hydrological changes. Fluctuating redox conditions drive microbial
transformation of Fe oxides and may also regulate P bioavailability. Thus,
biological and geochemical controls over P dynamics may vary as a function of
hydrology and redox regime across arctic landscapes. This project will use a
sensor network to characterize redox and pH patterns in environments typical of
low-arctic tundra and investigate biological and geochemical P competition
across these gradients. The investigators will quantify competitive partitioning
of P between abiotic (Fe oxides and other minerals) and biotic (microbial and
plant) sinks. They will test the hypothesis that geochemical sorption and co-
precipitation processes effectively compete with plant roots and microorganisms
for phosphate in tundra soils. The study will provide the first assessment of
the importance of geochemical versus biological controls on P bioavailability
and how they might be altered by hydrological changes in these sensitive
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.