* 2006806
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Fine- Grained Complexity of Approximate Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Arturs Backurs, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 114,602.00

Classically, an algorithm is called "efficient" if its running time is
polynomial in the input size (i.e., as the input size doubles, the runtime is
multiplied by some constant term). As the data becomes large, however, many such
algorithms are no longer efficient in practice. For example, a quadratic-time
algorithm (whose runtime grows fourfold after doubling the input size) can
easily take hundreds of CPU-years on inputs of gigabyte size. For even larger
inputs, the running time of a practically efficient algorithm must be
effectively linear in the input size. For many problems such algorithms exist;
for others, despite decades of effort, no such algorithms have been discovered
yet. A recently developed theory of "fine-grained complexity" attempts to
provide an explanation to this phenomenon, by identifying natural assumptions
that imply that some of the existing algorithms cannot be improved. The goal of
this project is to make progress on some of the key directions in this area, by
developing new algorithms where possible, and showing limitations
otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on approximate
algorithms, because such algorithms are often very useful in practice, and their
existence is often not precluded by the existing hardness results. On a high-
level, the project will investigate the following topics: (1) approximate
algorithms, limitations, and limitations-inspired algorithms, and (2) new
hardness assumptions for improving existing hardness results. The specific goals
include key computational problems over graphs, sequences and
kernels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.