* 2006885
* RI: Small: Domain-robust object detection through shape and context
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Adriana Kovashka, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 461,846.00

Computer vision has made great advancements in object recognition and detection,
but performance drops significantly when the data used at training and
deployment time are very different. This is problematic because in many
situations, it may be infeasible to retrain the models on a large example set in
the domain of interest. For example, artificial intelligence (AI) tools may be
developed in one country or region, using that region’s training data, and
exported to regions with limited resources to collect new data and retrain
models. Unfortunately, the visual environment in the user region may be
different from the developer region: some vehicles in India look different from
common vehicles in the US; houses often feature bricks on the US East Coast but
less frequently on the West Coast; environmental factors (e.g., foliage and
smog) may cause models to behave differently. Being robust to domain shifts is
important for interpretability and trust when computer vision systems are
employed in practice. This project leverages the observation that while the
pixels of captured objects change when these objects are shown in different
domains (e.g., photographs vs paintings), the overall shape of the objects
remains the same. Further, the set of objects that co-occur with the object of
interest is also relatively consistent across domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops new visual representations that
capture two global cues: shape and context. While numerous domain adaptations
and generalization techniques exist, they have overlooked global cues that can
potentially be more robust to domain shifts, based on preliminary experiments.
The first proposed representation adapts the medial axis transform (MAT) into a
hierarchical, learnable, convolutional representation. MAT computes the
"skeleton" of an object, and a representation is developed using a dense feature
map to ensure there is enough information for the convolutional network to
capture, as well as to build robustness to small shifts. Second, context is
represented through graphs containing functionally or semantically related
objects, and ambient cues (such as co-occurring text or speech) to improve the
model's ability to recognize objects in novel modalities. Techniques for making
weakly-supervised techniques more robust to domain shifts are explored, as a way
of capturing non-semantic context. Next, these global representations are
combined with standard appearance-based ones and are adapted to novel domains or
made domain-invariant through domain generalization techniques. The domain
robustness of the resulting representations is tested in a variety of domain
shift scenarios, including photorealistic and artistic datasets, different
capture conditions, and controllable shift scenarios (e.g., blurring and
masking), for both object recognition and detection. Code, any artificially
created situations (data), clear protocols for how to train models for existing
techniques, and detailed benchmarking results (quantitative and qualitative)
will be released to ensure reproducibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.