* 2006263
* Collaborative Research: Synchronous Online Video-Based Development for Rural Mathematics Coaches
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Cynthia Callard, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,359,883.00

Mathematics coaching is a research-based method to improve teacher quality, yet
there is little research on teaching and coaching mathematics in rural contexts.
In addition, mathematics coaches in rural contexts frequently work in isolation
with little access to professional learning opportunities to support their
coaching practice. This project will create a fully online video-based model for
mathematics teacher professional development focused on supporting mathematics
coaches in rural contexts, building on the investigators' previous work focused
on online professional learning opportunities for mathematics teachers in rural
contexts. Results from the previous project focused on rural teachers and their
coaches show that the professional development model increased connections
between what teachers notice about student thinking and broader principles of
teaching and learning, that teachers were able to enact stronger levels of
ambitious mathematics instruction, and that teachers who received coaching
showed a stronger focus on math content and instructional practice. This
extension of the model to coaches includes an online content-focused coaching
course, cycles of one-on-one video-based coaching, and an online video club to
analyze coaching practice. The video clubs will be structured as a graduated
model that will begin with facilitation by mentor coaches and move into coach
participants facilitating their own sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three cohorts
of 12 coach participants will be recruited, with one cohort launching each year.
In the first year, coaches will participate in four 2-hour synchronous content-
focused course meetings, two coaching cycles with a mentor coach, and four video
club meetings. In the second year, cohorts will conduct and facilitate four
video club meetings. Research on impact follows a design-based model, with
iterative cycles of design and revision of the online model. An ongoing analysis
of 15-20% of the data collected each year will be used to inform revisions to
the model from year to year, with fuller data analysis ongoing throughout the
project. Participating coaches will be engaged in a noticing interview and
surveys to assess changes in their perceptions and practices as coaches. Each
coach participant will record one coaching interaction as data to assess changes
in coaching practices. Patterns of participation and artifacts from the online
course will be analyzed. Coaching cycle meetings and video club meetings will be
recorded and transcribed. The Learning to Notice framework will be used as an
analytical lens for describing changes in coaching
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.