* 2006683
* CNS Core: Small: Directional Software-Defined Radio
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Xun Gong, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Internet-of-things (IoT) is becoming a reality as our surroundings are getting
evermore connected. The International Telecommunication Union is forecasting 100
times increase in the aggregate wireless demand by 2030 relative to 2020. The
increasing density of IoT devices in civilian life imposes more stringent
efficiency requirements on the use of radio frequencies, also called spectrum.
The wireless community has made excellent spectrum efficiency innovations by
solving interference challenges of omni-directional radios that propagate in
every direction. However, it is questionable if these innovations alone will
suffice as cost-effective and secure solutions for future wireless needs. As a
promising solution, by transmitting in certain directions, directional radios
offer high-speed wireless access, as well as wireless transmissions with lower
energy consumption and probability of being intercepted by intruders. However,
radio directionality has disadvantages in terms of tolerance to mobility and
antenna size; and requires transmitter and receiver to be facing each other,
a.k.a. line-of-sight (LOS) alignment, and larger antenna size. This project
adapts Software-Defined Radio (SDR), i.e., radio components implemented in
software that enable dynamic programmability, to handle the challenges in
mobility and LOS alignment of directional transceivers, and to attain practical
antenna sizes. The project takes the first steps in making directionality of
transceivers a programmable element of SDR platforms. Broader impacts include
technical contributions to the 5G-and-beyond vision, the radio infrastructure
needed for future smart cities and connected communities, and further
proliferation of wireless technology into civilian life. The project offers
research opportunities to UCF undergraduate and graduate students, including
under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is making directionality a mainstream wireless design component. The
project enhances directional antenna design and angular diversity packaging in
the higher frequency spectrum bands, progresses the theory of interference and
power management for highly directional links, and provides energy efficient and
seamless LOS detection and maintenance of mobile directional links. In
particular, the project explores Directional SDR designs that (1) introduce low-
cost reflectarray antennas with beam-steering capability, (2) utilize low-power
directional transceiver packages with angular diversity in circular or spherical
shapes, (3) discover, establish, and maintain directional and/or LOS-requiring
links under mobility, (4) perform software-defined beamforming by using highly
directional links under mobility, and (5) employ fast heuristics to
directionally sense the spectrum and optimize the directional communication link
parameters on-the-fly. Focusing on the emerging high frequency bands at 60 GHz
and above, the effort explores new methods and technologies for operation at
short ranges representing an urban or indoor setting. The overarching goal is to
investigate wireless link management and optimization regimes where
directionality is the new norm and a mainstream design
parameter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.