* 2006664
* AF: Small: Sparsity in Local Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Ronitt Rubinfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Consider a setting in which inputs to and outputs from a computational problem
are so large that there is not enough time to read them in their entirety.
However, if a user is interested only in small parts of the output at any given
time, it may be possible to provide partial answers to the user in much less
time than it would take to compute the whole answer, and even, perhaps, less
than the time necessary to read the whole input. Such fast algorithms that
compute only the specific parts of the output needed by the user are referred to
as "local computation algorithms" (LCAs). There have been many successes at
designing such algorithms for a variety of problems. However, most of these
successes have been for inputs that are in some sense "sparse" -- for example,
for social networks in which the average number of "friends" is small, or
optimization problems in which at each decision point there are few
possibilities to choose from. This project aims to broaden the scope of these
techniques to the more common "dense" scenario. This project will include the
organization of a regular workshop "Workshop on Local Algorithms (WOLA)," as
well as incorporate training for graduate students, research opportunities for
undergraduates, and produce material that is incorporated into the
investigator's "Sublinear Time Algorithms" course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
detail, the goal of the proposed research is to develop new tools for designing
LCAs. A main focus of this project is on techniques for designing LCAs for dense
problems via sparsification techniques. One success of the field of algorithms
has been to show that many computations on dense graphs can be performed by
first finding a sparse graph which has approximately the same solution as the
dense graph, and then solving the problem on the sparse graph. This project
investigates such techniques in the setting of LCAs. Furthermore, this project
studies how to do such sparsification in a local manner -- without solving the
whole problem up front. For example, this project will develop fast LCAs which
allow a user to determine which edges are part of a sparse approximating
subgraph of the original graph. The research will mine rich sources of
techniques from distributed algorithms, massively parallel computation, and
sublinear algorithms. A wide range of optimization problems will be considered,
including problems related to finding sparse subgraphs which capture the
essential connectivity features of the input graph, coloring, and the class of
problems captured by covering and packing linear
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.