* 2006524
* CHS: Small: Developing Novel Surface Computing Technologies and Learning Experiences to Engage Underrepresented Youth in STEM
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Leah Buechley, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,451.00

This project will integrate computation and electronics into murals to explore
new paradigms for expression and interaction, while developing new pathways into
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) for diverse youth.
Murals—a wide diversity of artworks including ancient cave paintings, frescos in
European churches, the work of Mexican muralists, and contemporary graffiti—are
richly expressive of a community’s values and heritage. This project will
leverage the cultural and expressive affordances of murals to develop a new
interactive surface computing medium and a new culturally relevant introduction
to computing. Community-based arts provide a natural context for compelling
introductions to computing and STEM. They provide outlets for personal
expression along with unique opportunities for students to explore their own
cultural heritage and identity. Murals offer particularly fertile terrain, as
highly visible artworks that involve cultural celebration. To engage a diverse
student population, this project will be grounded in traditions of mural making
with deep roots in the American West and Latin America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team of researchers, working with a local mural artist and community partners,
will develop technologies to make durable outdoor interactive murals and explore
the interaction potential of this new medium. The team will use the new surface
computing technologies / medium to introduce diverse young people (particularly
Latinx and Native American youth) to computing and electronics, by engaging them
in designing and creating their own interactive murals. This project will
develop: (1) new theories and methods for HCI that integrate community and
cultural engagement, novel technology creation, and educational outreach; (2)
new frameworks for participatory design, based on new alliances among
underrepresented communities and technology developers, which are grounded in
existing community practice and new co-design experiences; (3) new technologies
for creating durable outdoor interactive surfaces; (4) new interaction
techniques and design frameworks for very-large-scale interactive surfaces that
are neither screen- nor projection-based; and (5) a new culturally relevant
approach to engaging underrepresented youth in computing and insights into the
effectiveness of engaging underrepresented youth in STEM by blending culturally
relevant art practices with computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.