* 2006154
* NSF-BSF: Paramagnetic metal-ion labeling methods to measure mechanism of transcriptional activation in  P. aeruginosa
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sunil Saxena, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2024
* USD 921,912.00

This project will develop experimental and simulation methodology to elucidate
the sensing and transcription mechanism of protein CueR from P. aeruginosa. CueR
binds to cellular Copper ions with very high affinity that leads to the binding
of this protein to a specific site on DNA. This, in turn, activates the
transcription of proteins that take the metal ion out of the cell to prevent
toxicity and cell death. The results of this study will provide atomistic
details of protein and DNA structure and conformational dynamics that enable the
regulation of copper levels inside the cells of bacteria. The project will also
firm up an international collaboration and allow the continuation of a multi-
pronged effort to enhance opportunities for under-represented groups to
participate in science. These include outreach to high-school students,
providing access of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (EPR)
instrumentation to two primarily undergraduate institutions, the creation of new
labs for undergraduate curriculum, and the graduate and undergraduate research
training of a diverse group of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
generate a holistic understanding of the sensing and transcription mechanism of
the copper metal sensor in bacteria. The project will develop methodology to
site specifically label and model DNA with Cu2+-ions and develop techniques to
measure site-specific dynamics using a novel Cu2+ label for proteins. In
addition, point to point distances, elastic network modeling and molecular
dynamics will be used to obtain structural information on the P. aeruginosa CueR
protein and DNA in different functional states during the transcriptional cycle.
Another centrally innovative aspect of this project is that the work will
provide the wider biophysical community with new spin labeling and simulation
approaches to measure structural constraints and flexibility in both DNA as well
as proteins. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics and Genetic
Mechanism Clusters of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in
Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.