* 2006684
* Understanding the Long-term Evolution of Tidal Disruption Events
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Eric Coughlin, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 322,621.00

Supermassive black holes (SMBHs) are fundamental to the evolution of the
Universe and reside at the center of nearly every galaxy, but their statistics
(e.g., distribution of masses) are not well constrained due to observational
difficulties. Tidal disruption events (TDEs) – which occur when a star is
destroyed by the immense gravitational field of a SMBH – illuminate the central
regions of an otherwise-quiescent galaxy and provide a unique means of
overcoming this difficulty. Nevertheless, our theoretical understanding of the
long-term evolution of the debris from TDEs is underdeveloped, which restricts
our ability to infer SMBH properties from TDE observations. A research group at
Syracuse University will use state of the art numerical simulations and develop
new models to study the long-term evolution of TDEs. The principal investigator
will also work with a professional artist and teacher at a high school in New
York to create new and innovative teaching and learning tools, which combine art
and science to teach both of these subjects. These science and art modules will
be developed and taught initially at the high school level, and will be
transformed into complete and standalone units, which can be downloaded by any
teacher across the globe. This work will significantly advance the teaching of
science and art in underdeveloped and underfunded schools, and will thereby
offer students in those areas a unique opportunity to learn and succeed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Black holes form the basis for many of the well-
established theories governing, for example, the formation of the first
galaxies, the reionization of the Universe, and the hierarchical model of galaxy
growth. These theories will remain largely unconstrained, however, until the
properties of black holes can be firmly established. By simulating tidal
disruption events and tying the results to observations, the group will enhance
the understanding of variability in TDEs, better constrain the salient features
of TDE light curves, and provide direct insight into the nature of stellar cores
from partial TDEs. The results of this analysis are essential for understanding
the thousands of tidal disruption events that will be observed by the Vera Rubin
Observatory. In addition, the physical evolution of tidally disrupted stars
shares many similarities with other astrophysical systems, including compact
object mergers and rapidly rotating stars. The results of these analyses and the
research methodologies are therefore directly applicable to a broad range of
astrophysical problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.