* 2006929
* III: Small: Randomized Matrix-Sketching Approaches for the Analysis of Massive Human Genomics Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Peristera Paschou, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,533.00

Researchers in human genetics have now access to unprecedented amounts of
genetic information characterizing how truly different we are from one another.
From a Computer Science and Applied Mathematics perspective, the resulting
datasets can be thought of as matrices, with the rows representing individuals
and the columns representing loci in the genome that correspond to common or
rare polymorphisms. Analyzing such datasets, Genome Wide Association Studies
(GWAS) have reported over 10,000 strong associations between genetic variants
and complex traits. However, tools that allow efficient analysis of very large
scale datasets are still missing. Extracting useful information from such
datasets promotes the progress of science and, at the same time, advances public
health, prosperity, and welfare. This project will bridge the gap between state-
of-the-art algorithms developed in the theoretical computer science community
and the application of such algorithms to the analysis of the increasingly
larger volume of datasets in the human genetics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how randomized linear
algebra, from a theoretical and practical standpoint, can be used to speed human
genetics data analytics. The first research direction will investigate Linear
Mixed Models or LMMs: LMMs form a linear model of the genetic effects on the
phenotype of interest. Randomized linear algebra tools will be used to speed up
the solution of the resulting optimization problem, without sacrificing
accuracy. The second research direction will investigate Polygenic Risk Scores
(PRS), which typically operate by first selecting a large number of genetic
markers (often in the tens of thousands) out of all available markers (often in
the many millions) using single marker significance tests. This feature
selection stage is followed by building regression models on the selected
markers to predict phenotypes. Randomized linear algebra tools will be used to
speed up PRS approaches, while preserving generalization accuracy. Finally, the
third research direction, will explore how the particular structure of
population genetics datasets can be leveraged in order to design improved
randomized linear algebra tools for the analysis of human genetics datasets. The
investigators will disseminate their results to a broad community of applied
mathematicians, theoretical computer scientists, and population geneticists.
They both participate in population genetics conferences and workshops and
publish in high-profile journals in population genetics, as well as in
conferences and workshops in Computer Science. The investigators will
additionally disseminate this knowledge to graduates and undergraduates. They
will involve under-represented groups in their research activities, leveraging
their prior track record of involving such groups in cutting-edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.