* 2006785
* Extreme Galaxies: The Physical Nature of SMUDGes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dennis Zaritsky, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,694.00

Galaxies consist of normal matter embedded in a larger halo of dark matter.
Understanding how normal matter distributes itself within the dark matter halo
is important to understanding how galaxies grow and evolve. This project will
study ultra-diffuse galaxies (UDGs), a class of galaxies that are comparable in
size to the Milky Way, but seem to have very few stars. The project will combine
data from a previous survey (SMUDGes) with existing data from other sources and
new data to catalog physical characteristics of UDGs. These characteristics
include sizes, ages, masses, and metallicities. By building a large enough
catalog, this project will be able to better understand UDGs and where they fit
into the general class of galaxies. The project will also support the Sky
Ambassadors program that trains teachers to present astronomy in their
classrooms. It will initiate a Spanish language public lecture series at the
Steward Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use galaxies found in
the SMUDGes survey to build a statistically meaningful catalog of UDG physical
properties. The project will use clustering data from SMUDGes to determine
distance measurements to UDGs in dense environments, they will also use
spectrographic observations taken on the Large Binocular Telescope to obtain
redshift distances for interesting targets such as those that appear to be very
large or are in quiescent fields. They will use archival UV data to determine
color of UDGs and the more physically interesting ones may be flagged for
follow-up spectroscopy. The resulting catalog will provide a large sample of UDG
characteristics that can be used to better understand if these objects are a
separate class or if they are an extended tail of a broad distribution of
galaxies. The project will also continue a program that trains elementary
through high-school teachers to use astronomy in their classrooms. They will
also initiate and sponsor Spanish language lectures as part of the Steward
Observatory Public Lecture Series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.