* 2006148
* Ocean Gateways and Choke Points: Progress and Challenges
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2020,07/31/2020
* Janet Sprintall, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 34,063.00

The global ocean circulation affects our climate in myriad ways and plays a
central role in mediating the planet's response to climate change. A key aspect
of this circulation is the importance of specific localized gateways (or choke
points) which control the strength, structure and basin connectivity of the
circulation. Examples of such gateways are the Indonesian Throughflow, the
Agulhas retroflection, and outflows from the Ross and Weddell Seas to name a
few. These systems often consist of multiple strong jets that vary over a range
of space and time scales and so remain extremely challenging to observe, model
and predict. Professor Arnold Gordon's singular research career, spanning over
50 years, has transformed our understanding of ocean gateways and their role in
climate, biogeochemistry and ecosystems. Given the rapid development of new
observing technologies, and the emergence of a new class of high-resolution
global ocean models that are critical for understanding the accelerating rate of
climate change, the time is ripe to assess the state of knowledge in the field
of ocean gateways and define key challenges for future research. This two-day
workshop to bring together distinguished and early-career researchers from
across the world, including observationalists, theoreticians and modellers to
address these topics. The workshop, to be held at Scripps Institution of
Oceanography in San Diego in February 2020, will coincide with Arnold Gordon's
80th birthday and occur in the week prior to the 2020 Ocean Science meeting to
minimize time and money spent on travel. This grant will support the
participation of 15 early career researchers, who will gain exposure to the
opportunities and challenges in the field of ocean gateways. Extensive web-based
outreach will be used to ensure a broad, diverse pool of participants in
addition to those present at the symposium. Results will be shared via an
article in EOS and incorporated in the various national and international
science agendas.

Contemporary global ocean observing programs like Argo do not sample ocean
gateways with sufficient spatial and temporal detail to uncover their physics.
Monitoring these gateways requires specialized, dedicated observational
campaigns and sustained moored observatories. Many fundamental questions about
the pathways, structure and variability of these gateways on climate time scales
remain unanswered. It is crucial that the knowledge garnered from the past of
how to successfully collect these observations is passed on to the next
generation of oceanographers, to maintain the impetus from earlier studies and
to advance new observing technology. Numerical models have traditionally
struggled to realistically represent ocean gateways, but advances in
computational power and numerical techniques have recently led to major
improvements. Bringing together the observational and modeling communities at a
single workshop will catalyze rapid progress and provide a unique forum for
identifying knowledge gaps in the system so as to build a better integrated
strategy for a gateway observing system of the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.