* 2006067
* Motivating interest and academic choices in mathematics through near-peer interactions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sergey Grigorian, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,643,385.00

Mentoring is a widely accepted strategy for helping youth see how their
interests and abilities fit with education and career pathways; however, more
research is needed to better understand how different approaches to mentoring
impact youth participants. Near-peer mentoring can be a particularly impactful
approach, particularly when youth can identify with their mentors. This project
investigates three approaches to near-peer mentoring of high-school-aged
Hispanic youth by Hispanic undergraduate mathematics majors. Mentoring
approaches include undergraduates’ visits to high school classrooms, mathematics
social media, and a summer math research camp. These three components of the
intervention are aimed at facilitating enjoyment of advanced mathematics through
dynamic, experiential learning and helping high school aged youth to align
themselves with other doers of mathematics on the academic stage just beyond
them, i.e., college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a Design-Based Research
approach that involves mixed methods, the research investigates how the three
different near-peer mentoring approaches impact youth participants’ attitudes
and interests related to studying mathematics and pursuing a career in
mathematics, the youth’s sense of whether they themselves are doers of
mathematics, and the youth’s academic progress in mathematics. The project
design and research study focus on the development of mathematical identity,
where a mathematics identity encompasses a person’s self-understanding of
himself or herself in the context of doing mathematics, and is grounded in
Anderson (2007)’s four “faces” of identity: Engage, Imagine, Achieve, and
Nature. The study findings have the potential to uncover associations between
informal interactions involving the near-peer groups of high school aged youth
and undergraduates seen to impact attitudes, achievement, course selection
choices, and identities relative to mathematics. It also responds to an
important gap in current understandings regarding effective communication of
mathematics through social media outlets, and results will describe the value of
in-person mathematical interactions as well as online interactions through
social media. The study will result in a model for using informal near-peer
mentoring and social media applications for attracting young people to study and
pursue careers in STEM. This project will also result in a body of scripted
MathShow presentations and materials and Math Social Media content that will be
publicly available to audiences internationally via YouTube and
Instagram.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.