* 2006881
* Acoustic Inverse Problems with Single and Multiple Measurements
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Yang Yang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,624.00

The project addresses fundamental scientific challenges in non-destructive
testing techniques. These techniques are widely used in medical imaging for
tumor detection, in seismic imaging for oil prospecting, and in military
applications for weapon defect inspection. This project facilitates resolution
of these challenges by developing innovative theory and algorithms for the
underlying mathematical problems. The theory will promote the domain knowledge
in mathematics and relevant scientific areas. The theoretically consolidated
algorithms will open new avenues for scientific computing in non-destructive
testing techniques, consequently leading to innovation in medical imaging,
seismic imaging, and military application that will advance the societal welfare
and national security. Implementation of the project will be integrated with the
educational mission to involve undergraduate and graduate students majoring in
mathematics and engineering, especially those from underrepresented groups.
Students will receive rigorous scientific training in mathematical theory and
programming to prepare them as the next generation of the STEM workforce that
can continue to promote science and technology in future
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is determination
and reconstruction of multiple acoustic parameters from single or multiple
boundary measurements. In the first major topic, the investigator will devise
novel algorithms to reconstruct the wave speed and potential from multiple
boundary measurements using the boundary control method. The algorithms give
direct reconstruction to the nonlinear inverse problems as opposed to
traditional iterative algorithms. In the second major topic, the investigator
will study uniqueness and stability for joint determination of a source and a
coefficient from single boundary measurements. Novel sufficient and necessary
conditions will be derived from the viewpoint of microlocal
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.