* 2006465
* SHF: Small: Formal Verification of SQRT and Divider Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Maciej Ciesielski, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 399,998.00

The goal of the project is to develop efficient techniques to verify integrated
circuits that implement complex arithmetic operations, such as division and
square root functions. These functions play a major role in many engineering and
scientific applications, such as computer arithmetic, cryptography, artificial
intelligence, and other special-purpose computations. They are some of the most
complex arithmetic operations to implement and to verify, and proving that such
circuits correctly implement the desired arithmetic operations is of prime
importance. Traditional verification methods based on simulation cannot keep up
with the complexity of those circuits that are composed of tens of millions of
transistors. The most promising approach advocated for such designs is formal
verification, where properties of the circuit are proved globally by
mathematical reasoning. While there is a host of formal methods that can verify
correctness of the division algorithms and the resulting architectures, there is
a need to verify actual hardware implementation of such circuits. This project
develops efficient verification techniques that combine advances of symbolic
computer algebra and logic synthesis. Successful implementation of the project
will contribute to the development of the state-of-the-art electronic design
automation (EDA) tools for hardware analysis and verification. It will help
increase design productivity and will further the collaboration between academia
and industry. The project will have an important educational impact by educating
students and emphasizing the importance of formal methods in engineering
practice. It will also educate engineers how to model complex problems and apply
formal-verification techniques to large-scale system
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the verification of gate-
level dividers and square-root circuits, designed to operate in both integer and
fractional arithmetic. The fractional dividers are of particular interest since
they are essential components of the floating point division used in most
scientific computations. The verification approach proposed for this project is
an extension of the algebraic-rewriting model developed earlier by the
investigator and already successfully applied to integer and Galois-Field
multipliers. This novel method is termed hardware rewriting: the circuit is
appended with a hardware component that implements the inverse of the desired
function and with the circuit that emulates additional arithmetic constraints
that must be satisfied by the circuit. Such a constructed circuit is then
subjected to logic synthesis using standard synthesis tools. If the original
circuit correctly implements the required arithmetic function, the synthesized
hardware reduces to a redundant state. When the synthesis tool is not able to
reduce the circuit to such a state, the redundancy can be proved or disproved
using standard Boolean satisfiability (SAT) techniques. The method can be
extended to other arithmetic functions with known functional
specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.