* 2006788
* FET: Small: Design Optimization of Silicon Photonic Integrated Circuits under Fabrication Process Variations
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Sudeep Pasricha, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Silicon photonics technology has made it possible to realize fully integrated
photonic circuits with sub-micron silicon photonic devices. As a result, small
and mobile photonic circuits can be developed that can perform a variety of
optical functions for different applications, but with much lower cost and
energy consumption. However, there is a fundamental issue that has limited the
emergence of silicon photonic integrated circuits: the underlying silicon
photonic devices in these circuits are extremely sensitive to fabrication-
process variations. Indeed, nanometer-scale variations in the critical
dimensions of silicon photonic devices considerably degrade the performance of
the resulting circuits and even cause circuit failures. Unfortunately, the
inability to efficiently characterize and compensate for fabrication-process
variations have so far limited the development of cost-effective silicon
photonic integrated circuits capable of delivering the true potential of silicon
photonics. To combat this, the project involves research to realize energy-
efficient and complex silicon photonic integrated circuits for different real-
world applications that will be fully functional even in the presence of
variation-plagued components. In addition, this project will create training
opportunities for industrial participants and students at different levels to
work on real-world problems while emphasizing the inclusion of underrepresented
groups, thereby improving the education infrastructure and training highly
skilled practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributions will
involve developing: 1) comprehensive models of systematic and stochastic process
variations in silicon photonics while incorporating both the probabilistic and
non-probabilistic nature of uncertainties; 2) a framework to optimize silicon
photonic sub-circuits and circuits under fabrication-process variations during
design-time; and, and 3) energy-efficient circuit-level solutions to efficiently
compensate for the impact of fabrication-process variations during run-time. For
characterizing different variations, novel silicon photonic test structures and
analytical algorithms will be designed to model different sources of
fabrication-process variations and their impact. Efficient and compact
stochastic analytical models will be developed to extensively explore and
optimize silicon photonic sub-circuit and circuit performance under variations.
For design-time optimization, the silicon-photonic integrated-circuit design
problem will be modeled as a formal optimization problem to realize energy-
efficient and robust circuits under fabrication-process variations. The
performance under fabrication-process variations will be further improved by
developing run-time self-correction mechanisms based on adaptive photonic signal
multiplexing, robust signal routing and contention-management schemes, and
dynamic adaptations for inexact circuit behavior under
variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.