* 2006570
* CHS: Small: Novel methods for material point method simulations of multiphase fluids
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Tamar Shinar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,997.00

The material point method (MPM) is a versatile computational tool for simulating
solids, fluids, granular and complex materials in scientific and engineering
applications where interactions between separate fluid phases, or between solids
and fluids, play an important role. Cascading avalanches, solidifying lava,
sandy pools, and gooey toothpaste are among the many physical phenomena that can
be simulated with MPM, which is therefore used extensively for engineering
applications and physics-based animation. But the method suffers from problems
of nonphysical particle mixing and thus presents challenges in the simulation of
multiphase fluids and solid-fluid interaction phenomena. This research will
alleviate these issues by enabling the coupling of fluids with granular
materials (sand, snow, soil liquefaction) as well as complex materials that
exhibit solid-like and fluid-like properties (gels, foams), combinations that
are common in civil engineering where sedimentation and wind and water erosion
are major concerns for bridge and dam constructions. Similarly, air-snow
coupling is important for modeling avalanches and pyroclastic flows, where it
can be used to make life-saving predictions. The algorithms produced as part of
this project will be publicly released to encourage adoption, reproduction, and
further advancements. Additional broad impacts will derive from integration of
the research into the team's training, educational, and outreach efforts to
students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels in their university,
which is a research-intensive Hispanic Serving
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the hybrid particle/grid framework of
MPM underpins its strengths, it also leads to a major downside: particles from
different materials tend to mix and stick together in ways that are physically
impossible. This limits the accuracy of MPM in simulating multiphase fluid and
solid-fluid coupling phenomena. To alleviate this deficiency, three novel
algorithms will be developed. First, a novel buoyancy force correction on
particles will allow for unmixing of multiphase fluids based on density
differences. Second, a surface tension algorithm for multiphase fluids based on
particle interactions will encourage unmixing by decoupling constitutive models
of materials from interaction forces between different materials. The third
algorithm will extend the second to general constitutive models, to simulate
problems of solid-fluid coupling where particles interact with solids, thereby
allowing MPM to be used for multiphase fluids and solid-fluid coupling without
the need to maintain or construct a separate surface representation; notably,
the unmixing forces are purely meshless and do not rely on any explicit
representation for the boundary, which avoids the difficulties of computing
accurate curvature from the reconstructed surface. Compared with existing
pairwise formulations of surface tension forces, this work will use a
statistical formulation for an equation of state to avoid pairwise interactions
except near the interface, thereby drastically reducing the computational cost
and allowing accurate results to be obtained even with heavily mixed particle
configurations where no meaningful surface representation exists, something
existing formulations cannot do without violating conservation laws. It is
furthermore expected that this approach will automatically capture wetting due
to surface tension without any special modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.