* 2006031
* Guardians of the Living Water: Advancing STEM Learning in Informal Settings Across Apsaalooke Communities in the Western United States
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Vanessa Simonds, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,417.00

The Apsáalooke (Crow Indian) Nation in Montana, as well as other Indigenous
communities across the United States, disproportionally experience negative
consequences from water-related environmental hazards, such as contaminated
water. In this project, fifth- and sixth-grade Apsáalooke youth will act as
change agents through investigating water issues in their communities and
presenting findings to their communities. They will conduct this water-related
research in the context of an informal summer program designed to integrate
Indigenous and Western perspectives on science. For example, youth will learn
the cultural significance of water sites while also practicing methods for
collecting and analyzing data relative to those sites, guided by Apsáalooke
elders and science professionals. During the summer program, Indigenous high
school students and tribal college students will mentor the youth. To develop
this program, the project team will conduct interviews with elders and
Apsáalooke community members in scientific fields to determine the desired
features of a program that integrates Indigenous and Western science. They will
use the findings from these interviews to develop a multimedia toolkit, which
includes a set of comprehensive materials that will enable other researchers and
informal educators to implement similar programs. This toolkit will include
information about water science and water quality, lesson plans and related
resources for the summer program, professional development materials to prepare
the high school youth to act as mentors, handouts for family members to
facilitate at-home engagement with their children, and more. The project team
will research how the implementation of the toolkit influences the participants’
water-related knowledge and attitudes toward science. The toolkit, and the
associated empirical findings, will be disseminated widely through local,
regional, and national professional networks that serve American Indians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Montana State University, in partnership with Little Big
Horn College, will implement and research an informal summer program for
Apsáalooke youth in the fifth and sixth grades, as well as a mentorship program
for Indigenous high school students and tribal college students. The older
students will participate in a four-week internship program in which they learn
about conducting water research and facilitating science activities that
foreground Apsáalooke perspectives and cultural practices. The high school and
tribal college students will partner with Apsáalooke elders and science
professionals to facilitate and implement a two-week summer program for the
fifth- and sixth-grade youth. This program will use the toolkit materials that
were previously developed in consultation with elders and other community
stakeholders. Regression analyses of validated pre- and post-surveys, as well as
inductive analyses of interviews with stakeholders, will be used to study how
the mentoring program affects the high school and tribal college students’
attitudes toward science and career interests, and how the summer program
affects the fifth- and sixth-graders’ water-related knowledge. The research team
will also study how youth participation in the program affects their family and
community members’ water-related knowledge. This project will result in a
multimedia toolkit, freely available to the public and widely disseminated
through professional networks, which specifies how other informal educators and
researchers can implement similar mentorship programs and summer programs for
Indigenous youth. Ultimately, this project will broaden participation through
resulting in empirically-tested materials that advance practice in informal
education for Indigenous youth and their communities. This project is funded by
the Advanced Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program. As part of its overall
strategy to enhance learning in informal environments, the AISL program seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.