* 2006587
* AF: Small: Complexity of convex optimization with integer variables
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Amitabh Basu, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 402,931.00

Mathematical optimization is a key ingredient in quantitative decision making. A
wide range of decision-making problems ranging from designing vehicle routes by
delivery companies to minimize CO2 impact, to finding most efficient deployment
of resources for national security and defense, use mathematical optimization
tools. The field of optimization, studied from the times of Newton and Lagrange,
has constantly encountered new challenges coming from problems in the natural
and social sciences, as well as engineering and technological applications.
Broadly speaking, one wishes to find the optimal values of certain parameters
that minimize or maximize some objective function of those parameters, while
respecting certain constraints on those parameters. In the 20th century, it has
become increasingly important to handle constraints that impose the restriction
that the parameters can only take discrete values. For example, when designing
an optimal inventory plan for a retail store, one must decide on the number of
units to stock for a certain product (say a particular type of bottled beverage)
which must be a whole number (e.g., one cannot stock 10.5 bottles). While the
theory and computational aspects of optimization with continuous valued
parameters is very well-developed, handling constraints that model discreteness
are notoriously hard. The project will aim to address some of the outstanding
questions in this context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large class of such discrete
optimization problems can be modeled by using convex objective functions and
constraints, apart from the restriction of integrality on the variables. The
algorithmic complexity of this problem is not as well-understood as the
complexity of convex optimization with continuous variables, in spite of several
breakthroughs since the 1950s. In particular, an outstanding open question is
nailing down the precise dependence of the running time for the best possible
algorithms, on the number of integer constrained variables. This would involve
not only designing an algorithm with provable complexity guarantees, but also
establishing lower bounds on any algorithmic approach for the problem. The
project will explore both information-theoretical lower bounds, as well as
bounds that can be established under standard computational complexity
hypotheses. Moreover, the analysis of algorithms that are currently deployed in
practice will be undertaken from a rigorous perspective. There is ample scope
for strengthening the algorithmic foundations of these methods even though they
have received a lot of attention in the literature from a structural and
empirical perspective. All of these questions are also known to have intimate
connections with computational logic and proof complexity. The resolution of
these questions will thus require bringing together techniques from areas like
proof complexity, logic, computational complexity and ideas in convex geometry,
geometry of numbers and polyhedral theory. Successful resolution will completely
or partially resolve questions open for decades in the area, build new
connections between pure mathematics and computer science, and contribute to the
theoretical foundations of optimization over integers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.