* 2006778
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Combinatorial Optimization for Stochastic Inputs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Viswanath Nagarajan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,967.00

A central theme in algorithm design is that of making decisions in the presence
of uncertainty. In contrast to the usual setting where all the information is
available up-front, often the input is not known precisely when we have to make
the decisions, but is revealed along the way. We face such decision-making
situations all the time, e.g., when deciding on driving routes in the presence
of traffic, or dividing our time between chores that take uncertain amounts of
time. This project aims to design algorithms for a wide class of such problems
using only predictions about the future input. Research on decision-making under
uncertainty started nearly seventy years ago, but it has gained much momentum in
recent years. This is partly due to numerous applications in scheduling,
transportation, electronic commerce etc., and partly because of the vast amounts
of data that allow us to make good predictions about the future. This project
will model a collection of fundamental and practically relevant problems in this
area, and develop techniques to obtain algorithms with provable guarantees on
their performance. Research results from this project can bring together
communities in computer science with those in operations research, stochastic
control and machine learning. The educational component of this project includes
the engagement of graduate and undergraduate students in research, and the
development of a new graduate course in this subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will model predictions about the uncertain input using probabilistic
models. This approach, called stochastic optimization, is one of the most
widely-used approaches to model uncertainty. This project aims to make progress
on basic problems in scheduling, path-planning and routing, packing and
covering, and submodular maximization, in this stochastic setting. The focus of
this project will be on two kinds of algorithms for optimization in these
settings: non-adaptive algorithms (where all decisions are made in one shot),
and adaptive ones (where the decisions are made incrementally, based on random
outcomes observed along the way). One of the goals is to broaden the scope of
investigation further by considering settings where the underlying random
quantities exhibit correlations; this is in contrast to the usual assumptions of
independence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.