* 2006012
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: A Graph-Based Data Fusion Framework Towards Guiding A Hybrid Brain-Computer Interface
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yalda Shahriari, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 309,846.00

Major advances in non-invasive brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have enriched
the lives of persons with certain disabilities by providing them with
alternative means of communication. However, current systems rely heavily on
unimodal techniques that limit both their performance and our understanding of
the integrated neural dynamics essential to properly explain multiscale neural
functions. To address this issue it has been proposed to employ hybrid
(multimodal) BCIs, but attempts to date to utilize the complementary benefits of
multiple modalities through simple combinations (e.g., concatenation of feature
sets from two neuroimaging modalities) have yielded only incremental advances;
generalizable computational data-driven approaches for the fusion of multimodal
signals to efficiently and simultaneously extract complementary information from
multiple signals of interest remain lacking. This research will explore an
innovative approach to a hybrid non-invasive BCI system that capitalizes on the
complementary physiological features that can be obtained from electrical and
hemodynamic neural signals using EEG and fNIRS respectively, with the help of a
graph-based data fusion framework. Project outcomes will include novel signal
processing pipelines and lay the foundation for practical BCI techniques for
mainstream user applications. In addition to the project's potential societal
impacts, the team will focus on broadening participation in STEM and will also
engage students from K-12 through the graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will involve three main thrusts. A novel graph theoretical multimodal
data fusion framework will be developed to systematically capture complex
topological features of hybrid patterns and user intentions during a dual-task
interaction that concurrently modulates electrical and hemodynamic responses of
interest. Because multimodal techniques create inherently complementary
attributes in terms of both spatiotemporal resolution and information content,
the framework will aim to capture the corresponding complementary synergistic
topological features from the complex hybrid patterns hidden in EEG and fNIRS
signals for the high-level abstraction of user intentions. The framework will be
evaluated on non-communicative individuals by optimizing parameters and channels
containing the highest mutual information, in real-world settings. Finally, a
conceptually new hybrid subspace-based filter will be proposed to maximize the
distance between two classes of hybrid data and enhance classification
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.