* 2006604
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: AirEdge: Robust Airborne Wireless Edge Computing Network using Swarming UAVs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yu Wang, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 166,561.00

Unmanned aerial vehicle-aided networks have been widely recognized by both
cellular and internet industry and academia as an emerging technique to enhance
current networking infrastructure. The research objective of this project is to
design, analyze, and evaluate AirEdge, which is an innovative robust 3D airborne
computing and networking system that exploits a swarm of aerial mobile radio
access points and edge servers carried or deployed by unmanned aerial vehicles.
The unique feature of AirEdge is to enable fast-deployable highly efficient on-
demand edge computing and networking services. AirEdge will enable a series of
applications in the areas of disaster rescue, public safety, anti-terrorism,
battlefield assistance, and mobile entertainment. For example, AirEdge can be
rapidly deployed to the area impacted by the disaster and allows first
responders to locate and identify injured people using face recognition and
provide their corresponding health information for first aids. This project also
fosters interdisciplinary research and provides a unique training program for
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
realize AirEdge through the communication-motion co-design principles for 3D
airborne networking and communication-computation co-design principles to enable
reliable and energy-efficient airborne edge computing. Toward this end, two
fundamental research problems are investigated: 1) how to dynamically establish
edge computing networks to enable flexible edge computing and 2) how to
integrate dynamic computing resource deployments with the communication network
provided by unmanned aerial vehicle (UAVs) to enable low-latency and high-
performance edge computing on resource-constrained computing platforms. To
address these problems, 1) a new edge-assisted optimal motion control scheme is
designed to exploit the abundant computation power of the ground edge server and
high-fidelity ray-tracing simulations to perform site-specific Air-to-Ground
channel modeling; 2) a new energy-efficient motion planning strategy is
developed for the UAV swarm with an objective to simultaneously enhance the area
spectral efficiency of the entire serving site and satisfy the time-varying data
rate requirements of the edge computing applications; 3) a novel multi-agent
actor-critic (MA-AC) reinforcement learning method is developed to realize a
more adaptive and robust model-free control scheme under the uncertainties of
the deployment environment; 4) a new context-aware adaptive edge computing
deployment solution is designed to optimally integrate the airborne edge
computing with the airborne communication network; 5) a novel dynamic edge
analytics framework is engineered for the airborne communication and computing.
The framework leverages approximate computing to mitigate the tradeoff between
computation quality, service latency, and energy efficiency in
AirEdge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.