* 2006150
* Continuous Assessment of the Response of Deep-Seated Landslides by Monitoring Basal Temperature (CoRDeaL)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Tomasz Hueckel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 165,772.00

Deep-seated landslides represent one of the most devastating natural hazards on
earth, typically creeping at inappreciable velocities over several years, before
suddenly collapsing often with high velocity movement and catastrophic results.
They can have detrimental consequences to society, as they involve large-scale
collapse, causing fatalities and often affecting transportation infrastructure.
Notable examples of such catastrophic failures include, among others, the 1963
Vaiont landslide in Italy, which devastated an entire valley causing around 2000
casualties and rendering inactive the largest hydro-electric dam of Italy, the
1999 Jiufengershan Landslide in Taiwan and the 2014 Oso landslide in the U.S.
What determines the stability of these landslides and the time of final collapse
remains a key problem in landslide mechanics and natural hazard prediction and
prevention. This project will investigate the physical processes that are
thought to drive deep-seated landslides to catastrophic collapse, particularly
focusing on whether the response of these landslides can be continuously
assessed by monitoring the temperature of the sliding surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess potential for failure plane
temperature to affect stability, and collect in-situ temperature data. It will
focus on testing the hypothesis that the response of deep-seated landslides can
be continuously assessed by enriching models with the material's thermal
response, and monitoring the temperature of the sliding surface. This is
envisioned to be achieved by combining theoretical and numerical approaches,
experiments on material from an active landslide in Andorra, Europe, together
with field data of displacement, piezometric level and temperature at the base
of the landslide. The project aims at offering unique and transformative
knowledge and technology on how deep-seated landslides would respond in long-
term, multi-physical loading (i.e. including elevated temperatures, pressures,
and deformation rates). The long-term objectives of this work would be to
quantify the dominant processes driving deep-seated landslides to instability,
and develop an operational protocol for this type of hazard. It is, therefore,
envisioned that the outcomes of this pilot project could fuel a new approach in
modeling, monitoring and assessing deep-seated
landslides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.