* 2006737
* AF: Small: Beyond Worst-Case Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Tim Roughgarden, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With algorithms increasingly dominating our world, the need to understand when
and why they work has never been greater. The goal of the mathematical analysis
of algorithms is to provide guidance about which algorithm is the “best” for
solving a given computational problem. Worst-case analysis summarizes the
performance profile of an algorithm by its worst performance on any input of a
given size, implicitly advocating for the algorithm with the best-possible
worst-case performance. Strong worst-case guarantees are the holy grail of
algorithm design, providing an application-agnostic certification of an
algorithm’s robustly good performance. However, for many fundamental problems
and performance measures, such guarantees are impossible, and a more nuanced
analysis approach is called for. This project investigates several alternatives
to worst-case analysis, with applications to machine learning and social-network
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three research thrusts. The
first thrust concerns "smoothed analysis," where an adversarially chosen input
is perturbed by nature, and focuses on two different application areas, both
with striking open questions: regret-minimization in online learning, and the
running time of local-search algorithms for combinatorial problems. The second
thrust investigates structured prediction problems in machine learning, where
the goal is to label jointly a collection of objects, using information about
relationships between the objects (for example, identifying regions in an image
of parts-of-speech in a sentence). Here, the questions concern to what extent a
ground-truth labeling can be recovered, as a function of the combinatorial
structure of the object relationships and the amount of noise in the data. The
final thrust concerns distribution-free models of social networks, motivated by
triadic closure. The goal here is to investigate novel graph classes that are
tailored to social networks, and to prove structural and algorithmic results for
them. Together, these research thrusts both deepen the state-of-the-art in
"beyond worst-case analysis" and also extend its reach to important new
application domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.