* 2006844
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Demystifying Deep Learning on Graphs: From Basic Operations to Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jundong Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 268,732.00

Graphs are ubiquitous in myriad high-impact domains, e.g., social media
platforms, collaboration networks, biological networks, and critical
infrastructure systems. Recent years have witnessed a surge of research
interests in developing deep learning algorithms (in particular graph
convolution networks - GCNs) for graph data. By stacking multiple layers of
neural network primitives, GCNs learn high-level feature representations and
address graph-related applications in an end-to-end manner, achieving superior
performance in various learning tasks. In particular, the graph convolution and
graph pooling operations are considered as fundamental building blocks of GCNs.
However, a vast majority of existing graph convolution and graph pooling
operations are simple extensions of the corresponding operations from
convolution neural networks. Therefore, they are insufficient to tackle the
fundamental challenges brought by real-world graphs and advance high-impact
graph mining applications. The primary goal of this project is to develop novel
operations to improve the essential building blocks of deep learning algorithms
for graphs, propelling the state-of-the-art graph mining and deep learning
research to a new frontier and advancing graph-related applications from
different disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a class of
novel graph convolution and pooling operations that can faithfully characterize
the properties of real-world graphs from different perspectives, and build more
tailored and powerful deep architectures in handling high-impact graph
applications from different domains. First, it develops a family of trainable
graph convolution operations that can integrate properties of real-world graphs
from different aspects at the feature-level, edge-level, and node-level. Second,
it investigates the problem of graph pooling to support graph-level analytical
tasks and develops novel topology-aware graph pooling operations based on node
sampling and node clustering. Third, it assesses the impact of proposed graph
convolution and graph pooling operations by building more powerful and
customized deep learning architectures for various common graph applications,
such as graph anomaly detection and graph alignment. This project will be
tightly integrated with newly developed undergraduate and graduate courses. The
results and findings of this project will be disseminated through public
datasets, open-source software repositories, journal and conference
publications, special-purpose workshops or tutorials, as well as education and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.