* 2006179
* A Quantitative Synthesis of Research on Elementary Science Programs
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Steven Schneider, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,931.00

The success of all students in science has become a priority, as the economic
future depends on a workforce that is capable in science, mathematics,
technology, and engineering. One area of emphasis has been on elementary
science, where childrenâ€™s early attitudes and orientations about science are
formed. Given the growth of high-quality evaluations of elementary science
programs in recent years and the need to know what works in science education,
an up-to-date review identifying effective programs and malleable factors in
elementary science is needed. The goal of this project is to conduct a meta-
analysis to assist in establishing a solid base of evidence to inform further
research, practice, and policy in the area of early science education. The
previous meta-analysis completed by this team published findings from
approximately ten years ago. This project will bring up-to-date the meta-
analysis literature in the area of early science education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The review methods in the proposed quantitative synthesis on
elementary science programs will be similar to those used by the What Works
Clearinghouse. The focus of the review procedures is on timeliness,
comprehensiveness, transparency, and minimizing bias. The goal of the project is
to obtain and synthesize the entire literature evaluating elementary science
programs to discover what works, for whom, and under what conditions. The team
will systematically review the literature available in English between 2010 and
2021 to locate every study that meets well-established and accepted standards.
Second, studies are grouped by categories, to look for patterns among effect
sizes across studies. The team will use meta-regression techniques to test
statistical significance of the categories and will explore cross-cutting
substantive and methodological factors, as well as key moderators and mediators.
The team will communicate findings to many audiences, including scholarly
journals, practitioner journals, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by pre-K-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program
build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.