* 2006446
* Collaborative Research: Nanoscale Heterostructures and Defects in Two-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* ZhiFeng Huang, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2025
* USD 308,904.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for materials with
applications in various types of technologies is driven by the need to increase
speed, improve efficiency, and reduce power consumption. This search has led
many researchers to consider atomically thin two-dimensional systems. Such
systems have novel properties with many possible applications in electronic and
photonic devices as well as in sensing and catalysis. Recently, researchers
found that combining various two-dimensional materials in the same plane or in
stacks of layers opens the door to targeting and enhancing specific material
properties for applications. The PIs plan to develop computationally efficient
models to study and predict the growth and properties of such systems. More
specifically, the research will involve determining how defects in these systems
alter material properties, as it is well known that defects play a significant
role in determining functionality. This research will also involve understanding
how defects naturally occur during the growth and manufacturing processes, in
order to determine the best methods for producing defect-free structures that
would be needed in high-quality material systems and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the training and
education of graduate students in cutting-edge materials-physics research and
contributes to a globally competitive and diverse workforce through these
educational activities. The project will involve broad international
collaborations across different scientific disciplines. Outreach activities will
be conducted in an all-girls Detroit public school, to provide much-needed
enhancement of K-12 science education for female underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the integration of
theoretical and computational research and education to model and predict novel
heterostructures and complex defects in two-dimensional (2D) materials and
understand underlying fundamental mechanisms. The focus of this research is on
the study of both in-plane 2D and out-of-plane quasi-2D heterostructures,
nanoscale patterns, and complex topological defects that emerge during the
growth and assembly of single- and multi-component 2D materials. Of particular
interest are graphene, hexagonal boron nitride, and transition-metal
dichalcogenides, among many others. Predictive models, based on the phase-field-
crystal method and its amplitude formulation, incorporating both microscopic and
mesoscopic scales, will be developed to study the structural and dynamical
properties of these fundamentally important nanostructures and defects. These
approaches incorporate material elasticity, plasticity, and atomistic details
such as dislocations, grain boundaries, and triple junctions on large length and
time scales inaccessible to traditional atomistic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models developed will be used to predict
microstructure formation and dynamics of morphologically and compositionally
modulated interfacial nanopatterns as well as the formation, motion, and
influence of complex defects. Examples include in-plane lateral heterojunctions
composed of different types of 2D materials and out-of-plane heterostructures
with effects of the third dimension and of deformations. Growth mechanisms will
also be investigated to identify the optimal conditions for the controllable
synthesis of the predicted nanoscale heterostructures. This research will
provide new insights into the fundamental mechanisms governing the development
of these low-dimensional material structures, particularly the coupling
mechanisms between micro and meso scales and effects of various growth and
processing conditions. The study will also enable the investigation and
prediction of new thermal and electronic properties of these novel 2D systems,
with the goal of linking microstructures to material properties and in turn to
processing conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to a
globally competitive and diverse workforce by training and educating students in
cutting-edge research and will involve broad international collaborations across
different scientific disciplines. In addition, outreach activities will be
conducted to enhance K-12 science education for underrepresented minority
students in an all-girls Detroit public school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.