* 2006854
* CHS: Small: Investigating and Designing for Behavioral Improvement in Online Community Moderation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yubo Kou, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2024
* USD 265,420.00

This is a study of human implications of online moderation systems that deal
with disruptive online behaviors, such as offensive language and hate speech, by
issuing penalties such as content removal or account suspension to users they
determine to be disruptive. These moderation systems usually fail to provide
punished users enough support in terms of explaining why they are punished and
suggesting how they can improve. Such severe limitations in fairness,
accountability, and transparency lead to enormous challenges to online
moderation and community wellbeing. Punished users may not understand the
rationale behind penalties, and risk becoming repeat offenders. This is even
more challenging when newcomers are punished for violating community norms which
they were previously not aware of. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study site is a
high-population online community, where the research will document and describe
human-punishment interaction (HPI) in terms of how users experience punishment,
what are users' post-penalty actions, and what support resources users use for a
better understanding of community behavioral standards and behavioral
improvement. The research has two goals. First, empirical methods such as
interview and survey will be used to investigate and theorize major
sociotechnical dimensions of HPI. This will extend the existing moderation
literature by articulating interactions and experiences associated with
punishment and punished users. Second, more concentrated empirical methods such
as narrative interview and focus group will be used to identify user-initiated
ways of understanding community norms and behavioral improvement, with a focus
on existing support resources that users have drawn from. Cognitive and social
theories of behavior change will be used to understand existing, user-initiated
ways of behavior improvement. This prioritizes a dynamic, evolving view of
disruptive behavior, tracing the temporal development of user online behavior
and studying and theorizing critical moments where users internalize community
norms and improve behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.