* 2006152
* CHS: Small: Capturing Multisensory Interactions in Cutaneous Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Lynette Jones, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

There has been growing interest in understanding how tactile displays that
stimulate the skin can be used to expand the avenues available for communication
for users of mobile devices and wearable technology. At present, such devices
rely heavily on vision to communicate. Tactile features are increasingly being
implemented in smart watches and Android devices where they provide greater
opportunities for communication beyond simple alerts and notifications. These
technological developments are supported by an expanding body of research on how
wearable devices such as rings, watches, bracelets and earpieces can be designed
to function as tactile or thermal displays. The appeal of these devices is that
they are always in direct contact with the skin, the cues are private and the
sites are readily accessible if a user needs to make a response. Although much
of the research on incorporating tactile cues in smart devices has focused on
employing vibration to communicate, other sensory cues from the skin such as
pressure, temperature and skin stretch have been explored. This work has
demonstrated the feasibility of incorporating tactile and thermal feedback in a
small device, but has typically focused on comparing single inputs rather than
on understanding how these various signals can be combined to create a richer
sensory experience that also expands the bandwidth for communication. By
selectively combining vibration, pressure, skin stretch and thermal cues in a
display it is anticipated that the information provided to a user can be
augmented and potentially offload the overworked visual and auditory systems.
The advantages of using tactile-thermal signals for communication include the
large area of skin available to present information and the effectiveness of
such stimulation in capturing our attention. The application of this work
extends beyond assisting users of mobile devices and wearable technologies to
providing those with visual or hearing impairments who make use of the sense of
touch to compensate for their sensory loss with additional possibilities for
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There have been few studies that have
systematically explored the benefits and challenges of combining thermal and
tactile feedback in a single display. Much of the previous work with thermo-
tactile displays has evaluated these channels as independent sources of
information, rather than as concurrent, synergistic inputs. The contribution of
thermal displays to multi-sensory systems has not been investigated, although
they show promise in that thermal inputs are known to influence tactile sensory
processing and so the possibility exists that the dimensionality of information
can be enhanced in some situations by the addition of thermal cues. This project
is focused on understanding how cutaneous signals generated by tactile-thermal
interfaces can be designed to communicate efficiently with users, in contexts in
which we know tactile communication is effective. A framework that details how
different tactile and thermal inputs can be combined or used in isolation in
displays should increase the interface designers' ability to choose among
modalities and assign functions and types of information to the channel best
suited for their presentation. Such displays will be mounted at different sites
on the body depending on the particular application and tasks that are being
performed. User performance will be evaluated by measuring the discriminability
of thermo-tactile cues, the information transfer associated with changing the
dimensionality of the cues, their identification with concurrent workload, and
the preference of users for particular cue characteristics (i.e., preferred body
location such as hand, forearm, thigh, etc).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.