* 2006144
* Geological Construction of Rock Arrangements from Tectonics: Systems Modeling Across Scales
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Scott McDonald, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,408,293.00

Plate tectonics is the fundamental theory of geology that underlies almost all
geological processes, including land and rock formation. However, the geologic
processes and immense timeframes involved are often misunderstood. This study
will create two curriculum units that use sophisticated simulations designed for
students in secondary schools. The simulations will integrate the study of the
tectonic system and the rock genesis system. Data from the simulations would be
studentsâ€™ sources of evidence. For instance, the Tectonic Rock Explorer would
use a sophisticated modeling engine that uses the physics involved in geodynamic
data to represent compressional and tensional forces and calculate pressure and
temperature in rock forming environments. This project seeks to overcome the
more typical approaches taken in earth science classrooms where such geologic
processes are treated as discrete and highly predictable, rather than
intertwined and dynamic. In addition, this study would include work on students
with disabilities in earth science classrooms and explore the practices that
seem to be particularly useful in helping understand these systems. By working
with simulations, the researchers intend to engage students in scientific
practices that are more authentic to the ways that geologists work. The
researchers will study if and how these simulations and the computer-based tools
allow students to observe and manipulate processes that would be may otherwise
be inaccessible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work follows on from prior work done
by the Concord Consortium on simulations of earth systems. The design and
development progression in Years 1 and 2 would create two units. The first
module focuses on the relationship between tectonic movement and rock formation.
The second would investigate geochronology and dating of rock formations. The
researchers would work with 3 teachers (and classes), and then 15 teachers (and
classes) using automated data logs, class observations, and video of students
working in groups in Years 1 and 2. Professional development for teachers would
be followed by the creation of educative materials. Researchers will also
develop the framework for an assessment tool that includes understanding of
geologic terms and embedded assessments. The researchers will used a mixed
methods approach to analyze student data, including analyses cycles of analysis
of students pre- and post-test scores on targeted concepts, reports of student
performances on tasks embedded in the simulations, and the coding of videos to
analyze discourse between partners and the supports provided by teachers.
Teacher data will be analyzed using interviews, surveys and journals, with some
special focus on how they are seeing students with identified disabilities
respond to the materials and simulations. The research team intends to make
materials widely available to thousands of students through their networks and
webpages, and pursue outreach and dissemination in scholarly and practitioner
conferences and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.