* 2006290
* FET: Small: Magnonic Active Ring Memory and Logic
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Alexander Khitun, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The size of modern data centers is growing exponentially due to the rapid
development of Big Data techniques, Internet of Things (IoT), and
Bioinformatics. Magnetic storage technology has been proven to be the core
platform for cloud computing and Big Data storage. All magnetic storage devices
can be classified as either sequential-access memory or random-access memory.
For instance, in order to read out one bit in magnetic tape, the tape should be
wound and the reading head placed in contact with the desired bit (sequential
access). In contrast, any bit in magneto-resistive random-access memory (MRAM)
can be accessed immediately at any given time. Regardless of the access process,
the existing magnetic memory devices, including magnetic tape, hard-disk drives,
and MRAM inherit one fundamental restriction: they are based on the magneto-
resistance effect, which limits the number of bits which can be read out at a
time. In turn, this imposes time constraints for a large magnetic database
search. This problem has stimulated search for alternative methods for magnetic
bit read-out (e.g., multi-head multi-track magnetic memory). Overall, there is a
great need for a novel technology for parallel magnetic bit read-out and
processing. The project will also enhance the educational experience of
undergraduate, graduate and underrepresented students by via mechanisms for
including them in the project, and thereby contributing to the much-needed
technological-workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a new
type of magnetic memory using spin waves for information read-out and processing
will be developed. Spin waves — or magnons, the quanta of spin waves — represent
the excitations of the electron spin subsystem in magnetically ordered media and
are observed in ferro- and ferri-magnets, as well as in anti-ferromagnets. The
coherence length of spin waves in ferrite structures may be as large as one
centimeter at room temperature, allowing one to exploit spin wave interference.
The operation of spin-wave devices is similar to optical-holographic devices,
which use coherent optical beams for information retrieval. The uniqueness of
the spin-wave approach is the ability to combine holographic logic units with
magnetic memory. This project aims to explore the feasibility of using spin
waves for parallel magnetic bit read-out, to investigate device immunity to
structure imperfections, and to study a combination of magnonic and electronic
circuits. The result of this transformative research will add to the core
knowledge in the area of material science, signal processing, and computer
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.