* 2006231
* EAGER: Chemical Order/Disorder Enabled Phononic Memory in PbSc0.5Ta0.5O3
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Patrick Hopkins, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This project investigates a new means to store computed information that is not
sensitive to electromagnetic pulses. In this method heat is conducted through a
material that can be in two different states. In one state, the material will
have like atoms arranged in a specific order, while in the other state the atoms
will inhabit random positions. Laser pulses are used to locally heat the
material and transform it from one state to the other, which then serve as
either on-state or off-state memories. It has been computationally predicted
that solid solutions of various atoms will conduct heat differently depending on
the chemical order, but has not been experimentally proven. This hardened
computing method enhances information security and computing resiliency against
unavoidable electromagnetic pulses, such as those resulting from solar flares.
This project also seeks to educate the public on the magnitude of energy wasted
as heat and how it can be harnessed and converted for useful
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project studies the role of chemical
order on thermal conductivity in a material system where heat is carried by
phonons, and will advanced the fundamental understanding of how local chemical
order can be manipulated to achieve a desired phononic or thermal response. The
material studied is lead scandium tantalate, a perovskite oxide that can be
chemically ordered or disordered on the octahedrally coordinated cation site
depending on the thermal history. The project employs epitaxial growth via
pulsed laser ablation on single crystal strontium titanate substrates with an
epitaxial strontium ruthanate conductive oxide electrode. Thermal conductivity
evaluated using time domain thermoreflectance establishes the thermal
conductivity of the lead scandium tantalate with varying degrees of chemical
order. High energy optical laser pulses heat the lead scandium tantalate
material locally resulting in spatial control of chemical order and thermal
conductivity. The perovskite lead scandium tantalate is isostructural with lead
zirconium titanate, which has been previously shown to serve as a phonon
regulating material. This project develops the necessary perovskite thermal
memory to accompany the thermal regulator, which is an important step toward
developing a phonon computer. Furthermore, this research tests computational
predictions that posit a chemically ordered material possesses a higher thermal
conductivity at low temperatures than a disordered counterpart, but that will
exhibit a cross-over in thermal conductivity at elevated temperatures, which is
not yet experimentally validated. The ability to compute and store information
via phonons is a potential path toward electro-magnetic pulse resilient
computing, which is vital for information security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.