* 2006349
* CNS Core: Small: Optimizing Distributed Transactions on Emerging Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Arvind Krishnamurthy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,854.00

Replicated transactional storage simplifies the programming and reasoning about
distributed systems by providing a simple and powerful abstraction: atomic and
durable execution of transactions that can survive node failures. As a
consequence, many datacenter systems using transactional storage as a critical
building block. This project revisits this research topic to address the
opportunities and challenges posed by multiple hardware trends, e.g., large core
counts on processors, programmable network interfaces, and low-latency storage.
The project seeks to build distributed transactional storage systems using
principles that reduce coordination and maximize network and storage
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project seeks to optimize
distributed transactional storage by taking advantage of modern hardware
features ranging from core-heavy servers to programmable network devices and
tiered and highly-parallel durable storage. A key goal is to design distributed
protocols that minimize cross-core coordination traffic to provide multi-core
scalable solutions. Further, the project will distill remote access
communication primitives, enabled by a programmable network interface, in order
to optimize transaction processing. The project will also examine how to support
durable data structures on heterogeneous storage that includes low-latency non-
volatile memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Datacenter applications that require
support for transactional storage are used by literally billions of people
around the globe daily. By improving the efficiency of distributed transactions
and reducing latency/overheads, the project seeks to dramatically reduce the
cost of existing datacenter-based services as well as make it much cheaper for
new public services to be developed. Collaborators at hardware vendors are equal
partners in this effort, providing access to new hardware technologies and
assisting in project execution and technology transfer to the industry. The
developed software will also enrich the distributed systems curriculum at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the broader community of users and the society
at large, the project will periodically release the developed software to enable
a rich set of distributed systems and high-performance datacenter applications.
A public repository will be maintained until at least December 2025 at
https://github.com/arvindkrish/dist-
transactions/tree/master.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.