* 2006628
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Toward a Science of Vehicular Epidemiology: Computing, Control, and Security
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* David Starobinski, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 165,998.00

Vehicle-to-everything communication is a transformational emerging technology
that is poised to enhance transportation safety and traffic management, thereby
saving lives and yielding major economic gains by alleviating traffic
congestion. This technology will enable vehicles to communicate with each other,
as well as with traffic signals, road side units, bikes, wheelchairs, and
pedestrians to augment situational awareness of all these constituents about
road conditions. This project seeks to facilitate the deployment of the vehicle-
to-everything communication technology by providing tools to model, design,
optimize and secure its integral components, through a cross-disciplinary
research effort. The research entails developing novel and computationally
tractable mathematical models for (1) characterizing message propagation between
the diverse road constituents; (2) jointly optimizing transportation and
communication objectives; and (3) thwarting security threats. The educational
plan involves fostering a workforce equipped with cross-domain knowledge in
transportation engineering and management, electrical engineering, and cyber-
security. The project also includes outreach to decision makers in
transportation authorities and programs aimed at broadening the representation
of under-represented minorities in the science and engineering field,
particularly women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vehicle-to-everything communication
intertwines the wireless communications and transportation infrastructures. This
creates cross-dependencies between the infrastructures that both raise unique
challenges and offer new opportunities which the project addresses through
fundamental contributions. Specifically, the project seeks to establish a
science of vehicular epidemiology, which combines, draws from and contributes to
the epidemiology, optimal control, game theory, and vehicular and wireless
communication domains. Towards that end, the project aims to advance theoretical
methods, including clustered epidemiological differential equations, optimal
control based on Pontryagin's Maximum Principle, and dynamic games over
epidemiological formulations, all of which are innovative in the vehicle-to-
everything communication context. The project further includes data-driven
verification of the theoretical findings, including computation and simulation
software that will be shared with the broader research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.