* 2006374
* RUI: Tracking magma accumulation and evolution in the Andean Central Volcanic Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Gary Michelfelder, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 256,246.00

Continental arc volcanoes represent a dramatic surface expression of one of the
most significant and fundamental phenomena in global tectonics: the subduction
of an oceanic plate beneath a more buoyant continental plate resulting in
recycling of crustal material into the convecting mantle, partial melting, and
primary basalt production. Moreover, during passage through thick continental
crust, subduction zone magmas may substantially differentiate and melt crustal
rocks giving rise to the great diversity of igneous lithologies characteristic
of earth. Explosive volcanic eruptions at continental arc can have devastating
global effects and owe their explosiveness to the composition and volume of
magma stored in the crust. The development of large magma storage systems
remains largely unknown and very controversial among volcanologists. This
project will investigate how accumulated magma is stored and evolves over time.
The investigators seek to characterize the processes and timescales of magma
storage in the modern magma chambers beneath volcanoes in the Andean Central
Volcanic Zone of Chile and Bolivia. Growing evidence suggests that the massive
magmatic reservoirs required for largest and most explosive eruptions, such as
those in the Central Andean Altiplano-Puna Volcanic Complex, are built rapidly
in hot crustal environment. Over the 3-year project, graduate and undergraduate
students will expand their research skills by working collaboratively with an
international team of geologists seeking to understand the dynamics of crustal
melting and magma storage leading to volcanic eruptions. The project emphasizes
training in analytical methods in the lab, in the field, and at collaborating
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on young volcanic rocks
from composite volcano complexes in the Andean Central Volcanic Zone of Chile
and Bolivia (Aucanquilcha, Ollag√ºe, Uturuncu, San Pedro-Linzor, Licancabur,
Lazufre and Lascar) linked closely in space and time, to address the processes
and timescales leading to the buildup of magma and eventual volcanic eruption.
The primary intent of this project is to investigate how accumulated magma is
stored and evolves over time. This will be accomplished by characterizing the
processes and timescales of magma differentiation in the modern magma chambers
and determining the influence of regional magma bodies on Central Andes
volcanoes. New and existing samples from each center will be used to address
three basic questions: 1) how long does magma reside at active individual
centers; 2) do magmatic sources and partial melting processes vary
systematically with the geochemical evolution of volcanic products; and 3) what
is the evidence for involvement regional-scale upper crustal magma reservoirs in
controlling eruptive composition? The proposed research will use targeted field
sampling, whole rock geochemistry, 40Ar/39Ar geochronology, high precision
zircon geochronology/geochemistry and trace element diffusion in plagioclase to
address these questions. Ultimately, the dataset produced in this study will
provide insight into the generation and diversity of magmas that form
continental crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.