* 2006616
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Approach to Optimal Morphology and Control of Transformable Soft Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kevin Galloway, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2023
* USD 40,000.00

The overall objective of the project is to leverage the principles of evolution
in order to develop a new type of complex soft robots (robots that are
constructed from compliant material) that can change their shape and mechanical
properties to assume different forms in order to overcome environmental
challenges such as uneven terrain. The motivation comes from the ways animals
achieve efficient locomotion in their habitats by varying body shape and
mechanical properties as a result of evolution over millions of years. Based on
prior numerical results, the investigators hypothesize that highly adaptable
locomotion can be achieved when given enough complexity in terms of shape
deformation and mechanical properties. Current bioinspired soft robots, however,
have limited capability to investigate such hypothesis. One key goal in this
proposal is to develop innovative soft robotic platforms to study, for the first
time, these numerical findings. The planned research has the potential to
significantly enhance the functionality, adaptability, and versality of high-
dimensional soft robots. The broader impact would be significant in several
areas where soft robots have shown promise, particularly in inspection
operations and search-and-rescue missions. The project is also expected to have
a significant educational impact by engaging undergraduate students in the
planned research activities and developing course content and new courses geared
towards soft robots. Outreach efforts focus on workshops, public lectures, and
engagements with elementary, middle, and high schools to foster collaborations
with the local communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research is poised
to unlock the evolutionary secrets of biological systems and open the door for
the next generation of energy-efficient, adaptable, versatile, and human-
friendly robots. To meet these goals, investigators propose to develop novel
transformable and stiffness controllable soft robots and apply evolutionary
computing to generate optimal morphological and stiffness trajectories for
locomotion. The investigators employ evolutionary computing-based learning
models to circumvent the curse of dimensionality associated with complex soft
robotic systems and develop a comprehensive framework for developing optimal and
robust control schemes and testing thereof using a series of rigorous
experimental evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.