* 2006679
* FET: Small: Quantum-secure quantum-enhanced covert networks over generalized bosonic channels
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Saikat Guha, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 557,999.00

Security and privacy are of utmost importance to communications, with standard
cryptography-based approaches well studied in the literature. However, these
approaches are limited to protecting the content of transmissions, which is
insufficient when the detection of the transmission must be prevented in the
first place. Covert, or low probability of detection/intercept (LPD/LPI)
communication is thus necessary in many settings, including military operations.
At the same time, quantum methodology has been demonstrated to benefit
substantially the performance of non-covert communications. This project focuses
on quantifying the fundamental improvements to security and throughput of covert
communication networks offered by quantum information processing, as well as
characterizing the systems for achieving these gains. Additionally, the research
team mentors graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project, and
engages in collaborative efforts to validate the results
experimentally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Covert communication has thus far been
studied largely from the classical viewpoint. This includes both the practical
approaches to system design such as spread spectrum as well as the corresponding
information-theoretic limits. However, quantum, not classical, mechanics govern
the fundamental laws of physics. Leveraging quantum methodology has yielded
encryption systems that are provably secure against the adversary restricted
only by the laws of physics. Quantum phenomena such as entanglement have been
shown to substantially improve the non-covert communication bitrate. This
project takes the quantum perspective to covertness. It looks to determine the
fundamental limits of covert communication in a networked setting that is secure
against the adversary who is only subject to the laws of physics. This
assumption yields mathematically provable covertness against the most powerful
adversary possible. These limits are sought for communication under different
channel conditions (including dynamic links due to platform mobility and time-
varying channel conditions) and resources available to the communicating parties
(including quantum processing of light). Furthermore, transmitter and receiver
structures and algorithms are being devised to achieve these
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.