* 2006269
* Visualizing Photon Induced Dynamics in Polyatomic Molecules using Femtosecond Pump-Probe Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Nora Berrah, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 632,267.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
how light affects and transforms molecules encountered in nature and in living
systems. For example, after shining light on molecules they may transform
through a phenomenon called isomerization. The first step in human vision is
such a transformation. Another light-triggered phenomenon is the ability for
hydrogen atoms, in some molecules, to move from one end of a molecule to
another. This transformation is crucial for biological photo-protection
mechanisms in DNA and melanin. Students will use the ultrafast and ultra-intense
table-top lasers in the PIâ€™s lab to conduct experiments on such light-induced
changes in molecules. They will also study the light-triggered opening of some
ringed shaped molecules, as for example occurs in vitamin D synthesis in the
skin. These types of molecules are being explored for optoelectronic
applications in optical switching and nano-mechanical motors. Furthermore, the
investigation of the breakup of molecules, with many hydrogen atoms, after they
absorb light, is of extreme importance in environmental protection. This
research program provides a comprehensive hands-on education and training
opportunity for undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs, who are the
next generation workforce in STEM fields in academia and are essential in
various industries. The team will collaborate with many theorists, allowing the
development of computational methods for understanding the phenomena being
explored in the lab. The PI is very active in outreach activities to the wider
community. She will continue to invite local teachers with their middle school
and high school students to day camps, giving many students from groups
currently underrepresented in science an early exposure to STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research program is to study,
time-resolved, table-top laser-induced femtosecond dynamics in polyatomic
molecules in order to better understand non-adiabatic molecular dynamics.
Specifically, the PI and her students wish to elucidate how electronic
rearrangement in molecules, subsequent to optical field absorption, at different
laser pulse energies and femtosecond pulse duration induces and affects nuclear
motion. The latter leads to atomic rearrangement, bond elongation,
isomerization, ring opening, bond breaking, bond making, and molecular
fragmentation. Time-resolved non-adiabatic dynamics have been difficult to
observe directly because techniques are often not sufficiently differential to
provide detailed information. Building on their current work, the team aims to
measure infrared- or ultraviolet-induced multi-hydrogen migration, an
isomerization process involving migration of two or more hydrogen atoms in
molecules. The team will also investigate ring opening reaction experiments in
molecules, for which the deactivation mechanism of the photo-excited molecules
along the reaction path crosses conical intersections, which they plan to
characterize. The experiments will be carried out using laser pump-probe
technique,s and the resulting charged fragments will be detected using a
coincidence experimental system, the Cold-Target Recoil Ion Momentum
Spectroscopy (COLTRIMS). The underlying dynamics will be revealed by coincident
ion-momentum imaging. This work is in the regime where the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation breaks down, which needs thorough investigation and
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.