* 2006571
* CCF:SHF: Small: Some New Class of Error Control Codes for VLSI and Computer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Bella Bose, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 359,467.00

Error-control codes continue to play a major role in achieving highly reliable
operations of computers, communications, storage systems, and wireless networks.
Most of the codes are developed under the error model of Binary Symmetric
Channel (BSC), where the probability of a 1 to 0 error is the same as the
probability of a 0 to 1 error. However, the error natures of the recently
developed VLSI systems and memory systems are different. This project considers
two important error models, the limited magnitude error model and the
insertion/deletion of symbol error model. This project will investigate
efficient error-control codes for these error models. The optimal design of
codes and the efficient encoding/decoding algorithms for these codes will be
considered. In addition, noise reduction in VLSI systems using pin-efficient
"balanced codes," where each codeword contains an equal number of zeros and
ones, will be investigated. It is also planned to implement the balanced codes
in silicon and study their performance. The research results can be applied to
broad areas in order to achieve more reliable computing, communications, and
network systems. The project will also help enhance education and outreach
activities of undergraduate, graduate, and underrepresented students at the PIs'
institution by including them in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
balanced-code technique to overcome noise in modern VLSI chip-to-chip
communications is novel. Compared to the currently used "differential-signaling"
techniques the balanced-code technique is efficient in terms of the pin count.
For example, to communicate k data bits between two chips, the differential-
signaling method requires k extra pins, whereas the balanced coding method
requires only log_2 (k) extra pins. This project will investigate balanced codes
with the aim to achieve efficient VLSI implementation. This project will also
advance the design knowledge of all limited-magnitude error-correcting codes,
which are related to the zero-error capacity codes. Since the introduction of
the concept of zero-error capacity of a channel in 1958 by Shannon, this
project, for the first time, proposes the zero-error capacity as a means to
achieving systematic codes for the limited-magnitude error channel. Constructing
codes capable of correcting t insertion/deletion of symbols has been an open
research problem for more than 50 years. Designing limited-magnitude error-
correcting codes based on the concept of elementary symmetric functions is a
novel approach, and the codes are efficient in terms of redundancy used, and
also in terms of encoding and decoding complexities. The elementary symmetric-
function technique investigated in this project can also be used to design codes
correcting the insertion and deletion of symbols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.