* 2006069
* IIBR Informatics: Advancing Bioinformatics Methods using Ensembles of Profile Hidden Markov Models
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Tandy Warnow, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Many steps in biological research pipelines involve the use of machine learning
models, and these have become standard tools for many basic problems.
Elaborations on basic machine learning models ("ensembles" of machine learning
models) can provide improvements in accuracy compared to standard usage, for
various biological questions. However, the design of these ensembles has been
fairly ad hoc, and their use can be computationally intensive, which reduces
their appeal in practice. This project will advance this technology by
developing statistically rigorous techniques for building ensembles of machine
learning models, with the goal of improving accuracy. The project will also
develop methods that use these ensembles for new biological problems, including
protein structure and function prediction. Broader impacts include software
school, engagement with under-represented groups, and open-source
software.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Profile Hidden Markov Models (i.e., profile
HMMs) are probabilistic graphical models that are in wide use in bioinformatics.
Research over the last decade has shown that ensembles of profile HMMs (e-HMMs)
can provide greater accuracy than a single profile HMM for many applications in
bioinformatics, including phylogenetic placement, multiple sequence alignment,
and taxonomic identification of metagenomic reads. This project will advance the
use of e-HMMs by developing statistically rigorous techniques for building
e-HMMs with the goal of improving accuracy and improving understanding of
e-HMMs, and will also develop methods that use e-HMMs for protein structure and
function prediction. Broader impacts include software schools, engagement with
under-represented groups, and open-source software. Project software and papers
are available at
http://tandy.cs.illinois.edu/eHMMproject.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.