* 2006947
* SHF: SMALL: Automated Discovery of Cross-Language Program Behavior Inconsistency
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kathryn Stolee, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,994.00

In the software industry, hundreds of programming languages exist, many of which
programmers are expected to be proficient in. The common assumption has been
that once a programmer knows one language, they can leverage concepts and
knowledge already learned and easily pick up another programming language.
Unfortunately, empirical studies find this process to be error-prone and
ineffective due to imprecise mismatches between concepts and expressions across
programming languages. This project develops techniques to ease the acquisition
of knowledge for new programming languages by identifying and explaining how the
behaviors of code in different languages relate. The anticipated result is that
programmers will learn new languages faster and write code with fewer bugs.
Beyond the general benefit of better-educated programmers, techniques for
teaching computer programming are important in particular because programming is
a crucial skill for a digitally literate society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop techniques to automatically identify incapabilities and
potential misconceptions between two programming languages. Two main research
tasks will be investigated for this project. The first task is to develop an
approach for automatically identifying clusters of similar code based on dynamic
behavior, likely invariants, observed side effects, and performance. Behavioral
clusters are formed from snippets in multiple languages that produce the same
outputs on the same inputs. Likely invariants from observed behavior are used to
describe similarities and differences. The second task is to develop a technique
to identify misconceptions that emerge when a programmer assumes code should
behave the same but it does not. To identify misconceptions, the technique
leverages the behavior clusters and characterizations from the code similarity
analysis; code that looks similar but behaves differently in overt (behavior) or
insidious (performance, side effects) ways are candidates. The technique will
rank misconceptions based on probability of appearing and likely impact.
Finally, the technique will use invariants, behavior, side effects and
performance to form automated explanations of behavioral similarities and
differences. Finally, these techniques and explanations will be applied for the
benefit of two groups of real programmers: transfer students who know one
language and need to learn a new one, and data scientists who work with many
programming languages to complete their tasks. For programmers learning a new
language, in student, professional, or hobby capacities, this work aims to
increase the speed and reliability with which they acquire knowledge of the
programming language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.