* 2006192
* Electronic Fractals in Strongly Correlated Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Erica Carlson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research on refining and extending techniques aimed at maximizing the
information that can be extracted from experiments performed on strongly
correlated electronic materials. The fragility and complexity of ice crystals
and trees have found their counterparts in strongly correlated electronic
materials. Inside conventional metals and semiconductors, electrons are
typically evenly spread out, like liquid filling a container. But in correlated
quantum materials, where electrons interact strongly with each other and with
the atomic nuclei of the material, electrons act more like an exotic gumbo.
Nanoscale images of the surfaces of these materials show that the electrons
clump into complicated shapes, at least at the surface. Understanding the
formation of these patterns is vital to our understanding of the electronic
properties and to our eventual technological control of these materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has defined new paradigms for interpreting and
understanding nanoscale electronic textures observed at the surface of these
materials. These new analysis methods allow conclusions to be drawn about the
inside of a material, based on observations that are made only on the outside of
the material. The key insight is that the geometric structure of fractals
reveals the dimension in which they reside: Fractals have different shapes when
they form only on the surface of a material (like frost on a window), from when
the fractals extend deep inside the material (like a tree whose roots reach deep
underground). This new field of analysis has revealed universal behavior across
several families of strongly correlated electronic materials. The PI proposes to
uncover why these patterns are so ubiquitous at the surface of correlated
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational
and outreach activities. The PI continues to be a popularizer of science. She
has already produced the YouTube channel www.youtube.com/profcarlson (with over
65,000 views) which has made her lectures on introductory electricity and
magnetism freely available, as well as the popular video series, “Understanding
the Quantum World,” with The Great Courses. The PI will start a YouTube channel
for the Purdue Quantum Science and Engineering Instutite, and also produce a
second video series with The Great Courses, on Quantum Materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research that is aimed at refining and extending the geometric
cluster analysis technique pioneered by the PI in the field of strongly
correlated electronic systems, in order to maximize the information that can be
extracted from experiments using the PI's new methods, and to facilitate the
broad application of these techniques to various materials and image probes. In
order to do this, the PI will advance the theory of geometric criticality in
clean and random Ising models, via numerical simulations. At the successful
completion of these calculations, several conventional (and widely available)
experimental techniques will have at their disposal new modes of datataking and
analysis and new methods enabling the detection and characterization of novel
phases of matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies are transformational in
that the PI is importing concepts and techniques from fractal mathematics and
disordered statistical mechanics into the field of correlated quantum materials
in order to better understand fractal electronic pattern formation and its
impact on these materials. The successful implementation of these ideas is
expected to continue to have potentially important impact in several correlated
quantum materials, including cuprate and iron pnictide superconductors,
manganites, nickelates, cobaltates, and vanadium
oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational and
outreach activities. The PI continues to be a popularizer of science. She has
already produced the YouTube channel www.youtube.com/profcarlson (with over
65,000 views) which has made her lectures on introductory electricity and
magnetism freely available, as well as the popular video series, “Understanding
the Quantum World,” with The Great Courses. The PI will start a YouTube channel
for the Purdue Quantum Science and Engineering Instutite, and also produce a
second video series with The Great Courses, on Quantum
Materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.