* 2006189
* Collaborative Research: Using multi-omic analyses and dynamic modeling to understand fungal cell-wall stress responses
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Steven Harris, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 12/31/2024
* USD 879,894.00

Collaborative Research: Using multi-omic analyses and dynamic modeling to
understand fungal cell-wall stress responses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a better understanding of how the model filamentous fungus,
Aspergillus nidulans, repairs its cell wall during periods of stress. This
understanding is important for society as beneficial species of filamentous
fungi are used to produce billions of dollars of commercial products annually,
while pathogenic species are responsible for billions of dollars in crop damage
and are a significant threat to human health. In both beneficial and pathogenic
species of fungi, the cell wall plays a critical role enabling the fungus to
grow and survive in diverse environments. To help understand the fungal response
to stress, sophisticated mathematical models will be developed to describe
system behavior and these models have the potential to extend to other
biological systems. This research will also have a broad impact on human
capital, as it has a significant educational component. In the three different
laboratories involved, work will include both graduate and undergraduate
students. The plan also includes outreach to underrepresented minorities through
the UMBC Meyerhof Scholars program. These robust and interdisciplinary training
opportunities will contribute to the development of a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the ability to respond to cell wall stress
is a critical feature of growth and morphogenesis in filamentous fungi, the
different regulatory modules that underlie this response are not well
understood. We seek to determine how three specific regulatory modules interact
to mediate the response to cell wall stress. To do this, we use phosphoproteomic
analysis to reveal kinase-mediated regulatory behavior and transcriptomic
analysis to reveal stress-associated changes in gene expression. An important
aspect of the proposed work is that dynamic data will be gathered to understand
how phosphosite occupancy and gene expression change with time. In addition to
experiments, we will use a novel mathematical modeling approach to build a
robust kinetic model (set of coupled ordinary differential equations) describing
wall stress response. A key feature of the modeling is that in addition to gene
expression values, a critical variable will be phosphosite occupancy. We note
there are often multiple phosphosites on a single protein and that these are
often the substrates of different protein kinases. Our model will help us make
connections in this complex network. To develop the model, we will use a Design-
Build-Test-Learn approach, wherein the model is used to make network predictions
which are then tested experimentally. The data from these experiments will then
be used to improve the model. This will allow us to evolve the model to
accurately represent system behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.