* 2006496
* AF: Small: Complexity and Computational Social Choice
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lane Hemaspaandra, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 413,764.00

Computational social choice, most especially its focus on preference
aggregation/elections, is of central importance in the human world. With the
rising prevalence of multiagent systems, it becomes of greater importance with
each passing year. Perhaps the most active research stream within computational
social choice is the study of manipulative actions on elections. In a few
settings such actions can be viewed positively, e.g., as efficient campaign
management. In many settings manipulative actions are viewed negatively. Which
voting systems are most resistant to manipulative actions? Which are most
vulnerable? There has been intense research activity in the area. Yet an
embracing theoretical framework classifying the complexity of the most important
problems still has not been obtained, and it is not clear what the best next
step is. This project identifies two themes or deficits. Their study, guided by
the tools of the foundational type of complexity known as structural complexity
theory, will help move in the direction of improved coherence and unity in, and
better understanding of, computational social choice. The two themes or deficits
to be studied study are these. First, the team will study the importance of
general functions (as opposed to the study of 0/1 functions) in computational
social choice. Second, it will try to better understand and better frame the key
manipulative actions. That will involve more generally exploring weaknesses and
limitations of current models, and it will involve proposing and exploring new
models and questions that more accurately capture the key algorithm/complexity
questions, and that better model natural (human and electronic-agent)
situations. In some sense, the investigators will not take for granted where the
field is and look for a next step. Rather, the project will look at whether
where the field is is even the right place to be. This work will more tightly
connect the theoretical study of computational social choice, and in particular
elections, to the real-world counterparts being
modeled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two themes bring highlight several remarkable
issues, and ones that are particularly well suited for study using the tools,
techniques, and world-view of structural complexity theory. Is it easier to tell
if an election can be manipulated than it is to find what the successful
manipulative action is? One of the project's goals is showing that, for
important problems in computational social choice and other areas of AI, search
and decision often not only separate within worst-case complexity but indeed
separate in the typical case. In the real world, aren't elections attacked
simultaneously in multiple ways? Another project goal is to better model and
study multiple simultaneous attacks. Isn't it unnatural that election attacks
are typically not studied in the online setting? Isn't it unnatural that in
theoretical models of partitioning in multistage elections, the
partitions/districts are often allowed to be unbalanced in size? A project goal
is to better model these and other settings. This will include developing and
exploring online settings. It will also include so-called control models that
better capture the real-world motivating examples and the real (human or
electronic-agent) settings. An embedded project for undergraduates will show the
challenge and beauty of computational social choice and how it interacts with
structural complexity theory. This will help keep current STEM students STEM-
interested and bring new undergraduates to STEM. In summary, this project will
focus the tools, techniques, and general sensibility of structural complexity
theory on the area of computational social choice. By doing so, the project will
put computational social choice on a firmer footing as to appropriately studying
voting theory with regard to computational costs, and will contribute to
improving the body of questions, models, and results in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.