* 2006668
* TRTech-PGR: Ensifer-mediated Transformation as an Alternative to Agrobacterium-mediated Plant Transformation of Model Plants and Crops
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Stanton Gelvin, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,196,191.00

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation (AMT) is the most commonly
used technology for generating transgenic plants and introducing genome
engineering reagents in plant basic research and in agricultural biotechnology.
Although this technology was developed and used for plant improvement since the
1980s, Agrobacterium-mediated transformation has numerous limitations. Key among
these is that Agrobacterium-mediated transformation is limited to specific plant
species and/or varieties of particular plant species. Agrobacterium is a natural
plant pathogen, and it therefore frequently elicits defense reactions from
infected plants, causing tissue necrosis. Such necrotic tissue cannot be
genetically transformed. Ensifer adhaerens is a bacterium related to
Agrobacterium. When supplied with the relevant genetic elements it can, like
Agrobacterium, genetically transform plants. Ensifer is not a pathogen and
therefore fails to elicit necrotic plant defense responses. However, Ensifer-
mediated plant genetic transformation remains inefficient and cumbersome to
perform in the average plant biology laboratory. The work described in this
project will develop an Ensifer-mediated plant genetic transformation system,
greatly simplifying the use of Ensifer in the laboratory and improving the
efficiency of Ensifer-mediated transformation. The resulting system will greatly
extend the host range for plant transformation, allowing for the genetic
improvement of a wider range of crop species than that now permitted by
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agrobacterium-
mediated plant genetic transformation has been used for transformation of many
plant species. However, numerous plant species and cultivars/varieties remain
highly recalcitrant to Agrobacterium-mediated transformation, in part because
they react with a necrotic defense response to Agrobacterium infection. As a
non-pathogen, the related bacterium Ensifer adhaerens does not elicit a strong
plant defense response. Ensifer can, with the appropriate genetic alterations,
transform a wide spectrum of plant species. A limitation to using Ensifer as an
alternative to Agrobacterium is that the best Ensifer strain currently used for
plant transformation, E. adhaerens OV14, is naturally resistant to many
antibiotics commonly used to manipulate Agrobacterium. To develop Ensifer-
mediated transformation, this project will first delete Ensifer genes
responsible for kanamycin resistance. Once a kanamycin-sensitive strain is
created, various virulence (vir) gene complements from different Agrobacterium
strains will be introduced into it, including the trans-zeatin synthase (tzs)
gene that directs synthesis of cytokinins, that potentiates plant transformation
susceptibility, and a virG mutant (N54D) allele that permits vir gene induction
in the absence of phenolic compounds such as acetosyringone. These novel Ensifer
strains harboring various vir gene complements will initially be compared to
equivalent Agrobacterium strains for virulence on several model plant species,
including Arabidopsis and tobacco. Finally, the transformation efficiency of the
best Ensifer strains will be compared with equivalent Agrobacterium strains on
various cultivars of two crop species: soybean (which is highly recalcitrant to
AMT) and potato (many cultivars of which react to AMT with a necrotic
response).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.