* 2006477
* Biophysical multiscale modeling of mitochondrial swelling
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sabzali Javadov, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,019,731.00

Mitochondria are the “power plants” of cells, providing ATP for myriad
processes. The inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM) is essential for ATP
production and plays a critical role in maintaining the volume of this
organelle. Small reversible changes in the volume are associated with regulation
of mitochondrial function, whereas large irreversible changes result in
mitochondrial dysfunction and even cell death. The primary mechanism of
excessive mitochondrial swelling includes the opening of channels known as
permeability transition pores. The mechanisms underlying the transition from the
reversible to irreversible swelling remain unclear. What intra- and
extramitochondrial factors are involved in swelling? How the physical and
chemical characteristics of the IMM coordinate this process? The multiscale
biophysical modeling proposed in this project will characterize mitochondrial
swelling throughout all its phases and, thus, describe the mechanisms of
transition from the reversible to irreversible swelling. The project will
develop a more comprehensive model of this fundamental biological process by
application of a wide range of experimental and modeling approaches. The Broader
Impact activities will include the training of students in quantitative analysis
and modeling approaches.&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to develop a
comprehensive model of mitochondrial swelling based on the kinetics of ions and
neutral species through the IMM and the mechanical characteristics of the
membrane. The project aims to provide an in-depth understanding of the
mechanisms that mediate mitochondrial swelling by developing a biophysical
multiscale model to simulate and predict the dynamics of mitochondrial swelling.
The values of modeling parameters will be calculated using parameter estimation
techniques, and the model will be verified and validated by fitting analysis of
the minimum average differences between the model and the experimental data.
These approaches will iteratively improve the predictive accuracy of the model.
The regulation of the mitochondrial matrix volume can provide relief to stress,
thus allowing mitochondria to maintain their functional and morphological
integrity, aiding in sustaining cellular life. The development of the in silico
modeling from a simple kinetic model to a complex model will take into
consideration the dynamics of mitochondrial ion diffusion, kinetic factors,
membrane potential, and membrane mechanical properties and provide a solid
foundation for application of new developed mathematical tools to other model
analyses in the cell. The model will consider nonlinear mechanical stress in
membranes induced by a swelling process, which is an important factor in the
modeling of mitochondria behavior. The mechanical stress parameters will
describe membrane decay and cover both reversible and irreversible mitochondrial
swelling. Accurate estimation of the threshold parameters for the transition of
the reversible to the irreversible swelling is important for understanding the
mechanisms of cell death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, along with the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.