* 2006293
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Storm and tropical cyclone effects on the spawning activity, larval dispersal, and ecosystem impacts of an endangered marine predator
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Kevin Boswell, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 102,138.00

Many species of reef fish form large seasonal gatherings at specific locations
to spawn. Such aggregations may lead to population overfishing if not well
managed. Additionally, spawning aggregations in shallow coastal areas may also
be susceptible to prolonged surge, high volumes of freshwater run-off and
potentially changes in salinity associated with large storms and tropical
cyclones. Yet, the impact from such events, which are becoming increasingly
prevalent, has not been studied. This study investigates the impacts of
hurricane Dorian on spawning activity of the endangered goliath grouper
(Epinephelus itajara) fish species off the southeast coast of Florida. The
broader impacts of the project relate to its value to inform fisheries
management plans for goliath grouper. The project supports two early career
faculty members and training of a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student,
and several undergraduate students at Florida International University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Dorian occurred at the peak of goliath grouper's
spawning aggregation in Florida's shallow waters. This project takes advantage
of ongoing acoustic surveys since 2017, telemetry, biophysical modelling, and
behavioral studies of goliath grouper at spawning sites to assess how hurricane
Dorian: 1) influenced the duration of spawning events and the size of
aggregations, 2) affected individual residency to spawning sites and spawning
behavior, 3) changed the dispersal patterns of goliath grouper larvae and
identify nursery habitats with/without storm or hurricane events, and 4)
influenced trophic cascades at the reef ecosystem level due to goliath grouper
spawning aggregations as determined by changes on lower trophic level foraging
rates and the subsequent changes to the benthos. The combination of methods
provide insight into how storms affects spawning behavior from the individual to
the group level, and how subsequent larval recruitment may be influenced.
Finally, this project tests the utility of acceleration sensors for identifying
spawning behavior in free ranging fishes, which will be of major significance to
spawning studies across taxa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.