* 2006612
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Fundamentals of Ultra-Dense Wireless Networks with Generalized Repulsion
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Lu Wei, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 293,229.00

An accurate characterization of the statistical behavior of wireless networks is
crucial in the analysis, design, and deployment of real-world wireless networks.
In the past decade, point processes without spatial repulsion, such as Poisson
point processes, have been intensively applied to model and analyze the
performances of wireless networks. However, these point processes may not be
suitable for modeling and analyzing real-world wireless networks with diverse
types of spatial repulsion. This project proposes two families of point
processes generalizing various known repulsive processes, which are able to
accurately characterize real-world repulsive phenomena in a wireless network
such as non-linear and/or asymmetric repulsion. In addition, contrary to the
existing results in the literature that are mostly semi-analytical or numerical,
the project aims at explicit closed-form characterizations by advanced tools
from stochastic geometry and random matrix theory. The results in this project
will provide key insights and a new benchmark in the design of various wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research resides in the
interdisciplinary area of stochastic geometry and wireless networks. The
considered point processes are able to characterize diverse nodal repulsion
phenomena in ultra-dense wireless networks so as to fundamentally improve the
existing modeling and analysis framework of wireless networks with spatial
randomness where the impact of node repulsion is ignored. The project has also
been motivated by the fact that state-of-art analytical tools in the mathematics
community are far from being fully utilized in the wireless networking
community. The project aims at the analytical characterization of performance
metrics including user association statistics, interference statistics, link
rate, and distributed learning, which are based on the closed-form evaluations
of some fundamental performance measures. Among other consequences, the proposed
research will lead to new scaling laws useful in the deployment of ultra-dense
wireless networks for practitioners. The synergy of the PIs brings about the
latest ideas and approaches from stochastic geometry and random matrix theory
aiming at new breakthroughs in understanding the fundamental behavior of
wireless networks. The outcome of the proposed research also has applications in
other domains, such as in machine learning and data science, where the project
results offer new algorithms for sampling, marginalization, conditioning, and
other inference tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.