* 2006864
* FET: Small: A closed-loop electronically automated platform for debugging synthetic biology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Nivala, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 415,999.00

This project aims to increase the scalability of synthetic-biology debugging
systems that could have broad applications in extending capabilities for cell-
based sensors and actuators in medicine and agriculture, as well as for addition
to new knowledge generation in molecular-biology research. This will be
accomplished by building an end-to-end biomolecular-silicon hybrid system.
Broadly, the resulting system will: (1) explore new ways to build hybrid bio-
molecular silicon computer systems by integrating bio-molecular storage and
computing with electronics, and (2) automate closed-loop synthetic biology
design-build-test-learn processes. Importantly, this project will also train
students and professionals in the intersection of biology and computing, which
is a very promising new area of scientific and economic development. Results
from this work will also be incorporated into new course materials at the
intersection of embedded computing/fluidics, molecular biology and machine
learning, with the goal of training students to quickly prototype ideas in
molecular computing/synthetic biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will design and build scalable bio-molecular computing and debugging tools on
top of a closed-loop system that integrates a nanopore sensor array for
biomolecule-to-digital read-out (DNA and protein) with a DNA synthesizer for
digital-to-biomolecule interface, automated with a digital/droplet microfluidic
system and an integrated programming model (PurpleDrop+Puddle). The digital
fluidics system will employ computer-vision techniques for reliable control of
droplet movements. The investigators will develop machine-learning techniques to
analyze raw nanopore sensor data for low-cost and high-throughput identification
of molecular outputs. Specifically, the system will achieve two main objectives.
The first objective will combine DNA synthesis and digital microfluidics for
assembly of biological parts to implement automated cloning, in-line with DNA
sequencing-based quality control. The second objective is transcriptional
circuit auto-tuning, which will carry out automated characterization and
parallel component debugging/tuning of designed in-vivo transcriptional circuits
using a library of new genetic reporter proteins. For each objective, the
nanopore sensor array will read-out the molecular results (DNA or protein); the
control system (Puddle) will then interpret the data and determine the next
fluidic manipulation actions as well as the production of additional synthetic
DNA to guide the design or discovery process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.