* 2006327
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Relationship Between Agriculture and Settlement Pattern
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Kevin McBride, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2022
* USD 29,300.00

Researchers seek to understand how foraging, food processing, and agriculture
affect the ways in which human groups organize their communities in terms of
mobile settlements and sedentism. Traditionally, researchers have equated
mobility with foraging practices while equating sedentary life, which features
permanent or semi-permanent settlement, with agriculture. Recent research,
however, suggests that this may be a false dichotomy, that agriculture and
sedentism may not necessarily be linked, and that there may exist a diversity of
ways in which groups can practice agriculture. Archaeological research is well
situated to investigate the relationship between agriculture, sedentism, and
food processing because it can document and compare the ways in which different
human groups living in different local environments undergo cultural change over
long periods. Krista Dotzel and Dr. Kevin McBride will investigate these issues
by researching to understand past indigenous foraging and maize farming
communities and their relationships to mobility and sedentism in Southern New
England, USA. Radiocarbon dates produced for this research will help other
researchers better understand the cultural chronology of the region. By
disseminating this research at public and academic venues, this work will help
public and academic communities to better understand both the variability of
agricultural practices of indigenous American societies in pre-contact North
America and more generally the diverse ways in which societies adopt and use
crops within their communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
investigate the spread of maize, bean, and squash and the changing role of maize
in different communities within a single region by identifying the first
appearances of these domesticated crops and by identifying changes in maize
cooking and consumption practices. When domesticated crops are introduced into a
society does this necessarily cause the society to develop sedentary
settlements? If so, how long does it take for sedentism to develop? Do foraging
societies that already practice sedentism incorporate domesticates into their
societies faster than mobile societies? How do food processing and cooking
techniques change over time and how might these relate to mobile or sedentary
residence patterns? To investigate these questions, the researchers will analyze
microscopic plant remains extracted from ancient food residues on ceramic pots
spanning roughly 2,000 years from sites in Southern New England, USA. Societies
in this region practiced diverse agricultural strategies and lived in
communities that were mobile and sedentary to varying degrees. This cultural
diversity will allow the researchers to examine these questions in depth through
a comparative study. Using microscopic plant remains, researchers will identify
the first appearance of maize, bean, and squash and, through comparing
microscopic plant remains to whole plant seeds found at the sites, identify
changes in the way that maize was cooked over time in different parts of the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.