* 2006323
* RAPID: Group Effects on Pile Downdrag Following Liquefaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Richard Coffman, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 11/30/2021
* USD 75,011.00

Several of the earthquakes that occurred during the 1811-1812 New Madrid
earthquake sequence were identified by the United States Geological Survey as
being the largest earthquakes East of the Rocky Mountains and within the top 20
of the largest domestic earthquakes United States history. The seismic waves
from these earthquakes propagated for a great distance because of the competency
of the surrounding bedrock, and because the earthquakes occurred in the middle
of the continental plate. Soil liquefaction, where soil below the water table
temporarily becomes a viscous fluid following shaking, was observed to occur
during the New Madrid earthquakes. Liquefaction results in a loss of strength in
the soil that serves as the bearing material for most infrastructure. If the
same size earthquake as the 1811-1812 sequence were to occur today, the United
States Federal Emergency Management Agency warns that the earthquake could
result in the highest economic losses due to a natural disaster in the United
States. Because the areas near the earthquake are now densely populated (St.
Louis, Missouri, and Memphis, Tennessee) additional understanding of behavior of
civil infrastructure when exposed earthquake induced liquefaction is needed to
prevent loses. To remedy this lack of understanding, small explosive charges
will be used to produce liquefaction under full-scale conditions and
measurements will be made of the foundation settlement and the downward friction
force on the foundations. Tests will be performed on two pile groups a site in
Arkansas. Primary support will be provided by Nucor Yamata Steel Corperation;
however, supplemental funding from NSF will significantly expand the scope of
the project. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will provide that
supplemental funding. The results from these tests will allow engineers to
evaluate the accuracy of existing design procedures and develop modifications to
produce better agreement with measured behavior. Improved design procedures will
allow engineers to design safer yet cost-effective foundation solutions that
will remain stable during earthquakes. Limitations of the previous study at the
Turrell Arkansas Test Site will be overcome by 1) testing groups of piles
instead of individual piles, 2) leaving the deadload on the foundations for a
longer period of time prior to blasting to allow the neutral plane to develop,
and 3) leaving the deadload on the foundations for a longer period of time after
blasting to allow the neutral plane to redevelop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
improve our understanding of liquefaction-induced downdrag/dragload on deep
foundations, blast induced liquefaction tests will be performed on two different
pile groups (steel pipe group, H-pile group) at a site in Arkansas. The
objective is to measure negative skin friction and downdrag induced settlement.
With the inclusion of a static load placed on top of the pile groups, the
results from these tests will allow researchers to evaluate the accuracy of
existing design recommendations and develop modifications to produce better
agreement with measured response. Because deep foundations are a common approach
for supporting structures in liquefiable sands, reliable design approaches are
critical to provide cost-effective foundations that are safe in future
earthquakes. The results obtained from this project will be used to mitigate
liquefaction induced damage at other earthquake prone sites with a similar
geologic profile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.