* 2006130
* SBIR Phase I:  A non-viral gene editing platform for cell therapies in the veterinary market
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Wesley Wierson, LIFENGINE ANIMAL HEALTH LABORATORIES INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to advance a novel way to treat cancer. The proposed project will use
of reprogrammed, living immune cells to recognize and destroy cancer. The
technology developed here can be used for treatment of this disease in dogs, and
ultimately for humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is focused on
application of novel gene editing technology to the engineering of cell
therapies and demonstrating the safety of the resultant therapeutic modality in
canines. This therapeutic modality is a human T immune cell reprogrammed with a
Chimeric Antigen Receptor engineered to bind to CD20 (chCAR20-T cells), a
protein found on the surface of cancerous B cells. Identifying optimal gene
delivery and gene editing conditions is a primary focus towards enhanced
manufacturing of CAR-T cells without the use of a virus. These optimal methods
will be used to generate doses of allogeneic chCAR20-T cells and tested against
multiple lines of CD20+ canine cancers in order to confirm their cytotoxic
activity. The final objective of this proposal is to transplant chCAR20-T cells
into laboratory canines to prove safety in vivo. This manufacturing platform can
be applied to the development of human cell therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.