* 2006704
* FET: Small: Smart Probabilistic Computation with Limited Resources
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* John Hayes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 492,087.00

The overall goal of this project is to understand how to build smarter, more
compact, and more environmentally friendly computing devices that can cope
efficiently with uncertainty. Many current computer-based machines, for example,
mobile phones and advanced biomedical devices, depend on remote data centers
(the so-called cloud) to provide brain-like computational services that employ
artificial intelligence and are probabilistic in nature. These centers consume
enormous amounts of high-cost resources such as computer hardware, computing
time, and electrical energy. Embedding their functions directly in low-cost,
reliable and environmentally friendly ways in end-user devices like smartphones
is a key research challenge with broad implications. One way of doing this is
the stochastic computing (SC) approach explored in this project. The SC circuits
are inherently probabilistic and are orders-of-magnitude smaller and more error-
tolerant than conventional circuits. Thus, they provide novel ways to create
tiny, low-cost and reliable systems. Besides its potential for reducing the cost
of, and need for, large systems like data centers, SC has recently been shown
suitable for extremely resource-restricted biomedical applications such as
retinal implants to restore vision to the blind. The project will also enable
graduate, undergraduate and underrepresented students to be trained in computing
techniques at the forefront of modern computing technologies, thus contributing
to the future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional computer science is
mostly devoted to non-probabilistic (deterministic) methods that, although far
easier to understand than probabilistic, are less well-suited to the
applications of interest cited above. Stochastic computing is one of the most
promising probabilistic techniques available. It can be concisely defined as
computing with probabilities encoded in randomized streams of 0’s and 1’s. It is
readily implementable with standard electronic technology; for example, a single
logic gate can perform multiplication, even when the input data is very noisy.
The project will investigate the theoretical underpinnings of SC and its
application to severely resource-restricted systems. Among the questions to be
addressed are: What are the computational fundamental limits on SC’s accuracy?
How can SC’s unique progressive precision and randomness properties be
exploited? How can system architects efficiently balance accuracy, performance,
energy needs, and overall system cost? Prototype systems will be designed and
evaluated via mathematical analysis, simulation and emulation using field
programmable gate arrays. These include designs incorporating neural networks,
as well as smart cameras, medical implants, and portable automatic speech-
recognition systems. The research is also expected to provide useful insights
into other probabilistic technologies such as quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.