* 2006098
* Exploring Early Childhood STEM Tinkering Conference
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Mike Petrich, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,885.00

In informal science contexts, the word tinkering describes a learning process
that combines art, science, and technology through hands-on inquiry. With the
growth in popularity of the making and tinkering movements nationwide, these
practices are increasingly making their way into early childhood environments
where they have great promise to positively impact the early STEM learning
experiences of young children. This 2-day conference hosted at the Exploratorium
in San Francisco will bring together stakeholders exploring applications of
tinkering in informal early childhood environments. The conference will provide
opportunities to explore the role, value, and challenges associated with
implementing meaningful tinkering interventions in learning environments serving
young children. The project seeks to 1) Convene stakeholders from the tinkering
and early childhood programs; and 2) further the exploration and evolution of
practitioner and researcher knowledge about tinkering in early childhood
contexts. The long-term goal is to support more young children being introduced
to STEM learning through tinkering’s adaptable approaches to STEM-learning that
align with the developmental needs of this young population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will collaboratively analyze and document the
state of the field of STEM-rich tinkering in informal early childhood contexts.
Additionally, the project will deepen relationships across the early childhood
tinkering ecosystem. Additional outcomes include an effort to provide tangible
resources to the field highlighting current promising practices and future
opportunities for development. The conference will also provide an understanding
of how tinkering interventions may contribute to the development of STEM
interest, identity and learning amongst early childhood audiences. Finally, the
conference will bring together research and practitioners to explore how
tinkering in early childhood settings can be used effectively to meet the needs
of diverse learners including learners from underserved and underrepresented
communities. The project will recruit a total of 75 participants with
backgrounds in the field of tinkering and STEM learning, early childhood
research, and professional development practices representing a diverse set of
institutions and organizations. Research questions for the conference will focus
on: 1) What types of supports and professional development do early childhood
educators need to facilitate early STEM learning through tinkering? 2) What
types of built environment and hands-on materials best support young children's
ability to learn STEM content and practices through tinkering? 3) What types of
strategies best support caregiver involvement in young children’s learning? 4)
What is the role of early childhood tinkering in young children’s STEM learning,
interest, and identity development? 5) How can culturally and linguistically
sustaining pedagogies be used to ensure equity across a diversity of young
learners and their families? To answer these research questions the project will
use qualitative methods before, during and post-conference. Research methods
will include a landscape analysis identifying needs of participants, surveys,
observations and informal interviews with participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.