* 2006595
* Exploring Early Childhood Teachers’ Abilities to Identify Computational Thinking Precursors to Strengthen Computer Science in Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sean Justice, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,100.00

Strengthening computer science education is a national priority with special
attention to increasing the number of teachers who can deliver computer science
education in schools. Yet computer science education lacks the evidence to
determine how teachers come to think about computational thinking (a problem-
solving process) and how it could be integrated within their day-to-day
classroom activities. For teachers of pre-kindergarten to 2nd (PK-2) grades,
very little research has specifically addressed teacher learning. This oversight
challenges the achievement of an equitable, culturally diverse, computationally
empowered society. The project team will design a replicable model of PK-2
teacher professional development in San Marcos, Texas, to address the lack of
research in early computer science education. The model will emphasize three
aspects of teacher learning: a) exploration of and reflection on computer
science and computational thinking skills and practices, b) noticing and naming
computer science precursor skills and practices in early childhood learning, and
c) collaborative design, implementation and assessment of learning activities
aligned with standards across content areas. The project will explore PK-2
teachers’ content knowledge by investigating their understanding of the design
and implementation of culturally relevant computer science learning activities
for young children. The project includes a two-week computational making and
inquiry institute focused on algorithms and data in the context of citizen
science and historical storytelling. The project also includes monthly classroom
coaching sessions, and teacher meetups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
include two cohorts of 15 PK-2 teachers recruited from the San Marcos
Consolidated Independent School District (SMCISD) in years one and two of the
project. The project incorporates a 3-phase professional development program to
be run in two cycles for each cohort of teachers. Phase one (summer) includes a
2-week Computational Making and Inquiry Institute, phase two (school year)
includes classroom observations and teacher meetups and phase three (late
spring) includes an advanced computational thinking institute and a community
education conference. Research and data collection on impacts will follow a
mixed-methods approach based on a grounded theory design to document teachers
learning. The mixed-methods approach will enable researchers to triangulate
participants' acquisition of new knowledge and skills with their developing
abilities to implement learning activities in practice. Data analysis will be
ongoing, interweaving qualitative and quantitative methods. Qualitative data,
including field notes, observations, interviews, and artifact assessments, will
be analyzed by identifying analytical categories and their relationships.
Quantitative data includes pre to post surveys administered at three-time points
for each cohort. Inter-item correlations and scale reliabilities will be
examined, and a repeated measures ANOVA will be used to assess mean change
across time for each of five measures. Project results will be communicated via
peer-reviewed journals, education newsletters, annual conferences, family and
teacher meetups, and community art and culture events, as well as on social
media, blogs, and education databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.