* 2006329
* SaTC: CORE: Small: An Attribute-based Insider Threat Mitigation Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Daniel Takabi, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2024
* USD 442,016.00

Defending against a malicious insider who attempts to abuse his computer
privileges is one of the most critical problems facing the information security
segment. This is because the damage inflicted is potentially catastrophic. While
the insider threat is of increasing interest in the research community, major
challenges remain in addressing aspects specific to information infrastructure
protection. This project aims to develop an innovative, demonstrable approach to
mitigate insider threats to an organization. The new mechanisms developed in
this project will substantially enhance the state-of-the-art in securing
enterprises including private and public sectors. It will improve an
organization's preparedness to thwart these important threats, and will reduce
the risk for the organizations to be negatively influenced by these threats and
endure potentially negative economic and societal impacts. The project will
involve both graduate and undergraduate students, contributing to a strengthened
relationship between education and research. By getting involved in different
aspects of the project, students will be trained in a critical area of national
security, thereby enhancing their careers and contributing to their professional
growth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project develops novel analysis, design
techniques, and toolkits to better protect an organization's critical assets
from insider threat and unauthorized access. Access control systems are
fundamental to mitigating insider threats and attribute-based access control
(ABAC) has emerged as a promising model in recent years. This project develops a
comprehensive framework based on ABAC that utilizes a combination of moving
target defense (MTD) and deception techniques to address insider threat
challenges. This is achieved through the development of several components in a
systematic way. The first is a scientific foundation for defensive deception
that includes deception modeling and planning, and an approach to generate
consistent and affordable deception plans for insider threat prevention. The
second utilizes moving target defense techniques to increase the cost and time
burden on the insider to achieve an unauthorized access by proactively changing
ABAC system configurations. The third one introduces the notion of honey
elements in ABAC, and integrates them with active deception and moving target
defense techniques. The framework will result in a significant improvement in
the security of the large-scale enterprises so that proactive countermeasures
for insider threats could be deployed with consideration of the system security
requirements, and effectiveness of countermeasures. The proof-of-concept
prototype will demonstrate the ability to monitor insider access and enforce
corresponding authorization policies to mitigate insider
threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.