* 2006894
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Optimizing the Human-Machine System for Citizen Science
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Lucy Fortson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 338,870.00

This project investigates optimal human-machine collaboration for analysis of
large, complex data sets. The project uses advances in machine learning to
develop new citizen science system infrastructure to be built into Zooniverse
--- a large, open-source platform for online citizen science. Citizen Science is
an established method for distributed analysis of large quantities of data in
which online volunteers help with tasks requiring human pattern recognition. An
example is identifying morphology of galaxies in the Galaxy Zoo project. Much
larger data sets are looming on the horizon. Designing a human-machine system to
accelerate labeling of known classes at the same time as solving the problem of
detecting interesting anomalies (suggesting new phenomena) requires answering
several crucial research questions about how humans and machines best complement
one another. Since the project's new techniques will be incorporated into
Zooniverse, they will be available to all for use in citizen science projects
across many disciplines. Additional benefits of this project include engaging
over 2 million members of the public who participate in citizen science through
Zooniverse, engaging young women in University of Minnesota computer science
coding camps, and providing year-long capstone projects for Data Science Masters
program students to engage in real-world research while preparing them for
careers in data science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will carry out a
detailed investigation of load balancing between human and machine classifiers,
optimizing for the speed, accuracy, completeness or purity required by the
domain research for a given task. The research program follows two thrusts: (1)
Classification Efficiency Studies to optimize the classification efficiency of
known classes across multiple domains and task types; and (2) Systematized
Serendipity Studies to increase the efficiency of discovery, including detection
of rare instances, unusual findings, and new classes. The project develops new
infrastructure that builds on the existing capabilities of the Zooniverse
citizen science platform through two modules: (1) Machine Integration
Infrastructure to readily incorporate and combine machines on projects to
increase classification efficiency as well as explore the machine-driven
component of systematized serendipity; and (2) Leveling-up Strategies for
Volunteers to enable human-driven identification of emergent classes.
Ultimately, the human- and machine-driven mechanisms will be joined to form a
combined human-machine system that will be tested for its ability to identify
unknown, rare, or difficult to identify classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.