* 2006433
* Gas Excitation, Chemistry, and Dust in Super Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* J. Turner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 283,347.00

The formation of giant star clusters forms a key part of the history of the
universe and our own Milky Way galaxy. Giant clusters contain the most massive
and luminous stars in existence. These massive stars rapidly produce chemical
elements in their interiors. Strong winds and intense radiation fields from the
stars then enrich and disperse these elements into surrounding clouds. The
affected clouds in turn determine the future of the cluster in ways that are as
yet not well understood. The Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA)
allows high-fidelity imaging of emission from spectral lines of molecules. With
ALMA, it is now possible to observe individual gas clouds in local galaxies. The
goals of this research are to observe and model the effects of massive stars on
gas near young star clusters. The project provides for training of graduate and
undergraduate students, and it will establish more effective links to the local
community by improving bilingual outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will use ALMA to measure gas and dust properties in molecular
clouds near the youngest massive clusters in local galaxies. Using high
resolution images of submillimeter spectral lines of carbon monoxide and other
molecules, chemical characteristics of molecular clouds forming super star
clusters will be defined. Combined modeling of excitation and chemistry within
these clouds will be done using the code, CLOUDY. Observations of molecular
lines and dust currently scheduled to be observed at ALMA will be analyzed,
reduced, and modeled. Submillimeter spectral energy distributions will be used
to estimate the dust content and enrichment by the clusters. Kinematics and
excitation together will allow a three-dimensional view of internal cloud
structure. This program is the detailed study of gas on cluster scales, with the
goal of putting together a comprehensive picture, morphological and dynamical,
of how the cluster interacts with the gas and dust of its natal cloud. The
results of the analyses will be published, and data products, including line
cubes and their derivatives, and grids of line ratios from the modeling, will be
made available to the astronomical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.