* 2006265
* Finding hydrothermal chimneys along the southern East Pacific Rise with machine learning approaches to AUV-based sonar data
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Scott White, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 214,382.00

Seafloor hydrothermal systems emit hot, mineral- and microbial-rich fluids that
impact seawater chemistry, with ramifications for everything from climate change
to biomedical sciences. One of the most detailed and comprehensive plume surveys
ever will be conducted on the South-East Pacific Rise. This research cruise will
characterize both diffuse and focused hydrothermal discharge along a 300+ km
length of the mid-ocean ridge. Based on sonar and photomosaic data resolving
features to well under a meter in size, a machine learning method will detect
and characterize hydrothermal vents from autonomous underwater vehicle sonar
mapping. This will establish a comprehensive inventory of vent chimneys and
hydrothermal sites, as well as examine changes in this system since its initial
study about 24 years ago. Workflows for automated detection of possible
hydrothermal chimneys from sub-meter gridded sonar data would enhance the
infrastructure for all users of deep-submergence mapping sonars since searching
for hydrothermal vents is a common use of these instruments. The study will
implement a front-end Graphic User Interface that will be made available to
anyone with basic skills in Geographic Information Systems to use. In order to
make the experience of seafloor mapping available to an even broader community,
a virtual fieldtrip, “Hunting Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vents”, will be produced and
expose students and the public to a rarely observed yet very critical
environment for both geology and biodiversity. The project also will train a PhD
student contributing to the next generation of marine
geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of the research is
that hydrothermal chimney distributions correlate with observable geologic
features, and that those correlations will provide important insights into the
causes of variations in hydrothermal flux, longevity, and chimney distribution
from the ridge segment to global scales. This project plans to collect sonar
data and photomosaics over hydrothermal vent fields along the Southern East
Pacific Rise from ~15°-18°S. These data would be used to develop a machine-
learning method to detect and characterize hydrothermal vents from sub-meter
scale sonar maps. The development and application of machine learning to find
hydrothermal vents will assist in detecting changes after almost 24 years in
both in volcanic-tectonic morphology as well as hydrothermal vent fields at a
ridge where the magmatic recurrence interval is thought to be approximately 7
years long. A user-friendly interface to the machine learning algorithm,
implemented in Python, would enable non-experts to map candidate hydrothermal
chimneys from bathymetric data to assist in more efficient dive planning and/or
identification of targets for further investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.