* 2006409
* Organizing CSSI PI Meeting - Towards a National Cyberinfrastructure Ecosystem
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Upulee Kanewala, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 03/31/2021
* USD 65,480.00

This project will host a 2-day workshop in Seattle, WA, which will bring
together the community of Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific
Innovation (CSSI) awardees (with the goal of involving at least one principal
investigator (PI) from each Elements, Frameworks, Institute Conceptualizations,
and Scientific Software Innovation Institutes project, many of which are
collaborative awards) from approximately 250 awards. This will be the first CSSI
PI meeting. In addition, PIs from the prior connected solicitations (such as
Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation (SI2) and Data Infrastructure
Building Blocks (DIBBS)) will be invited, as well as PIs on NSF awards in which
CSSI seed investments were made (Venture funded PIs as well as CSSI Early
Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) awardees). In addition, the
proximity to Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) Conference on
Parallel Processing for Scientific Computing (PP20) will encourage participation
by non-PI community to further inform the academic community of CSSI goals and
projects. Goals of this workshop include: (1) Serve as a focused forum for PIs
to share technical information with each other, community, and NSF Program
Officers; (2) Explore innovative topics emerging within software and data
infrastructure communities; (3) Discuss emerging best practices across the
supported software and data infrastructure projects; (4) Stimulate thinking on
new ways of achieving software and data sustainability; (5) Gather the shared
experiences in an online web portal. The workshop is expected to host close to
250 CSSI and other awardees, other speakers and panelists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will support the exchange of ideas
among the current cyberinfrastructure development projects. It will provide
guidance on issues related to the development of robust software and data
artifacts and to the problem of their sustainability. Involvement of program
officers across NSF is expected to help the interdisciplinary CSSI awardees
understand the relevance and impact of cyberinfrastructure throughout the NSF.
The participation of these awardees, program officers, and other researchers in
a common forum will help ensure that the cyberinfrastructure developed as part
of CSSI projects will be relevant and broadly applicable to most science and
engineering domains. The results of this workshop thus have the potential to
guide cyberinfrastructure development and cyberinfrastructure driven research
for both the participating projects and for the wider cyberinfrastructure
development community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.