* 2006017
* EAGER: Development of DNA-encoded Kinase Assay System for Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Dongwook Kim, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,897.00

Appropriate responses to environmental stresses or developmental cues are
critical for the survival of all organisms including plants. Protein kinases are
enzymes that play a central role during these processes by transducing external
and internal signals to downstream cellular components resulting in the
modulation of plant growth accordingly. Thus, the accurate detection of kinase
activity is critical for understanding the mechanism governing the plant’s
response to various signals, which may lead to the development of new crops with
better stress resilience and productivity. The goal of this proposed study is to
develop a new assay that facilitates the detection of kinase activity in plants.
This project not only provides a novel approach to detect kinase activity in a
facile manner but also enables the researcher to overview dynamic cellular
changes in response to various stresses and growth conditions. The project will
also provide research training to graduate and undergraduate students who will
acquire interdisciplinary techniques integrating molecular biology and chemical
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein kinases modulate the phosphorylation
status of cellular targets, thereby regulating plant growth, immunity, and
stress responses. Dysregulation of kinase activity often leads to severe defects
in the overall fitness of plants and stress responses. Because of its critical
roles in plants, kinase activity can be used to deduce the status of signal
transduction and the plant’s stress response. In this respect, kinase activity
assays with high sensitivity, specificity, cost-efficiency, ease of use, or
multiplexing capability are critical prerequisites for researchers to accurately
measure in vivo and in vitro kinase activity. However, most current kinase
assays still lack at least some desired capabilities. Emerging DNA-based
activity measurements of enzymes in drug discovery research have shown promise
in addressing the unmet need for optimal kinase assays in the field, providing a
kinase toolbox with the desired aspects. The goal of this proposal is to develop
a kinase assay, taking advantage of the strength of DNA-based enzyme activity
measurement, and to validate the assay for in vivo plant kinome studies by using
the plant hormone ethylene and brassinosteroid signaling as a model system. The
proposed kinase assay uses DNA-encoded peptide substrates as activity probes and
qPCR-based quantification of kinase activity. Given the versatility of qPCR in
detecting extremely low concentrations of DNA with high specificity through
unique DNA sequence-mediated barcoding for substrate peptides, the investigators
hypothesize that the proposed DNA-encoded kinase assay should be able to
overcome the limitations of current kinase assays and become a valuable tool in
plant signal transduction research. Furthermore, by using the multiplexing
capability of the assay and next-generation DNA sequencing, they will develop
DNA-encoded peptide arrays that provide a simultaneous quantitative dynamic
overview of the changes in cellular phosphorylation events in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.