* 2006443
* AF: Small: Intermediate models between communication complexity and query complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Shachar Lovett, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Communication complexity has been a vibrant sub-field of computer science for
more than 40 years. At its core, it studies distributed problems, where each
player receives a part of a problem, and the players need to cooperate and share
information in order to find a solution. Many of the celebrated results in the
field involve figuring out exactly how much communication is needed to solve
certain concrete important problems with relevance in many other domains in
computer science. On the other hand, there are only few techniques to understand
general communication problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is in contrast with
the situation in simpler computational models, notably query complexity. It is
safe to say that today there is a complete qualitative, and to a large extent
quantitative, understanding of the query complexity of generic problems. The
focus of this project is on intermediate models, which interpolate between
communication complexity and query complexity. The goal is to to understand
fundamental open problems in communication complexity in these restricted
models, in order to develop new tools and techniques that then may be extended
to general communication complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main questions in
communication complexity that this award aims to tackle are:&lt;br/&gt;* Which
functions admit efficient communication protocols?&lt;br/&gt;* Are there
algebraic, analytic or combinatorial properties that characterize such
functions?&lt;br/&gt;* What is the structure of efficient communication
protocols?&lt;br/&gt;* What is the power of randomness in communication
complexity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plan is to consider these questions
restricted to a special class of problems, called lifted functions. These
contain many natural examples of well-studied functions, and also give rise to
natural intermediate models, such as parity decision trees and AND decision
trees. These models are more powerful than standard query complexity, and more
structured than general communication complexity, and as such are an ideal test
bed to develop new techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.