* 2006633
* III: Small: Prediction and Characterization of Extreme Events in Spatio-Temporal Data.
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Lifeng Luo, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,935.00

Extreme weather and climate events such as hurricanes, heat waves, and droughts
are destructive natural forces with the potential to cause devastating losses in
property and human lives. According to the National Center for Environmental
Information (NCEI), there have been more than 40 weather and climate disasters
in the United States since 2017 that cost over $1 billion each, incurring over
$460 billion in total losses and more than 3500 deaths. Given the severity of
their impact, accurate prediction of the magnitude, frequency, timing, and
location of such extreme events are critical to provide timely information to
the public and to minimize the risk for human casualties and property
destruction, thus advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare.
However, despite their importance, forecasting the extreme events from spatio-
temporal data is still a great challenge as the events to be detected are often
rare and hard to predict. Identifying the spatio-temporal drivers of the extreme
events is also a challenge as the events typically involve complex, nonlinear
interactions between the underlying natural and anthropogenic processes. Through
development and use of machine learning algorithms, this project will contribute
to the advances of science to better predict these extreme events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop novel algorithms for
predicting and characterizing extreme events in large-scale spatio-temporal
data. Specifically, the planned research combines statistical theories for
extreme value distribution with deep learning to enable accurate prediction and
characterization of the extreme events. To achieve this goal, the planned
research centers around the following three key areas: (1) development of deep
learning algorithms with extreme value theory for predicting and characterizing
extreme events in time series forecasting problems, (2) development of
convolutional methods for joint extreme event forecasting at multiple locations,
and (3) development of extreme event prediction methods for spatial trajectory
data. As proof of concept, the planned methods will be applied to a variety of
environmental monitoring applications, including the prediction of extreme
weather events such as heat waves, droughts, and hurricanes. The planned
research is transformative as it will shed light on the following key issues:
(1) How to bridge the gap between current extreme value theory for modeling the
tail distribution of random phenomena with deep learning. (2) How to design
spatio-temporal deep learning approaches that can accurately forecast the
magnitude, frequency, and timing of extreme events at multiple locations. and
(3) How to design a deep learning framework for extreme value prediction in
spatial trajectory data. Successful completion of this project will be a
significant step forward towards resolving these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.