* 2006126
* FET: Small: Theoretical Foundations and Applications of High Dimensional Quantum Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Walter Krawec, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 317,846.00

Quantum cryptography promises a future communication infrastructure that is
secure not only today, but also against future technological breakthroughs, such
as the development of large-scale quantum computers. However, despite this great
potential, there are two critical shortcomings that must be overcome before this
technology can see wide-scale adoption. First is noise tolerance and the second
is efficiency. High-dimensional quantum states are a prime candidate to solve
both problems as preliminary evidence shows, however an exact study of why this
true; when it actually occurs; and how to effectively harness this power are
still unanswered questions. This project deepens our understanding of high-
dimensional quantum communication, develops insights to answer these questions,
while also discovering new applications and protocols to more readily, and more
effectively, harness the power of higher-dimensional quantum communication
systems. Furthermore, this project provides opportunities for undergraduate
researchers to become involved and also provides new material for undergraduate
education in quantum technology, vital to the future workforce and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's ultimate goal is to shed light on
the theoretical foundations of high-dimensional quantum secure communication in
applications including, and beyond, quantum key distribution. The PI is
developing novel quantum protocols utilizing high-dimensional quantum states,
while also developing the necessary information theoretic tools needed to
analyze their behavior and security. Various noise scenarios are considered,
along with novel adaptive protocols allowing for optimized performance over a
variety of operational scenarios. The information theoretic methods developed in
this project, allowing us to prove security of these new protocols, also have
broad application to other research areas within quantum information science.
Furthermore, these new protocols hold numerous advantages over current work,
while also allowing us to probe further at the foundations of quantum secure
communication. New cryptographic applications of high-dimensional states are
also under investigation, in a variety of security models, creating theoretical
insights, and also potentially more practical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.