* 2006471
* Role of insect olfactory receptors and cell adhesion molecules in circuit organization
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Pelin Volkan, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,234,398.00

Axons (the long, tube-like extensions of nerve cells that carry electrical and
molecular signals) are a particularly critical feature of brain circuit
architecture. This project examines how functionally diverse populations of
nerve cells coordinate their axonal architecture during fruit fly brain
development to produce precisely-organized brain circuits. Fruit flies have more
than 50 different types (classes) of olfactory receptor neurons that make
precise axonal connections to the first upstream processing station in the
brain. This project combines molecular, cell-biological and developmental
techniques with genomic, bioinformatics and statistical approaches to identify
the mechanisms through which olfactory receptor neurons form class-specific
axonal connections with their targets. Understanding how olfactory receptor
neurons decide upon which class-specific combinations of path-finding and cell
adhesion molecules to express on their cell surfaces will further understanding
of how the physical wiring diagram at the initial stage of brain odor-processing
circuitry gets set up. This research will also lead to fundamental insights into
evolutionarily-conserved mechanisms that assemble brain cells with highly-
diverse functional properties into functionally integrated brain circuits, and
further understanding of how the structure of olfactory circuits and olfactory
behaviors evolves along with changes in olfactory receptor sequence, expression
pattern and function. This award also supports advanced research training for
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, as well as scientific
outreach programs for 6th-12th grade students attending schools in low-income
areas with a high percentage of students from groups who are traditionally
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As neurons are born, they organize their axons
into large tracts (clumps of axons) that extend for long distances. Once axons
arrive at a target site, they defasciculate from these main tracts, sort
themselves out based on their molecular and/or functional identity, and
selectively synapse with target cells. Combinations of genes encoding cell
adhesion molecules (CAMs) act as adhesive or repulsive cues to regulate axonal
behavior. Nevertheless, how diverse neuronal populations coordinate axonal
organization to regulate circuit architecture remains unclear. The Drosophila
olfactory system provides an excellent model to investigate molecular mechanisms
of axonal organization. Olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) of the same class
express the same olfactory receptor (OR) genes, and their axons converge onto
class-specific glomeruli in the antennal lobes to synapse with projection
neurons (PNs). Previous research has identified interacting CAM families
expressed in ORN class-specific combinations. Genetic perturbations of a subset
of CAMs in differentiated ORNs exhibited defects in glomerular position,
morphology and context; simultaneous disruption of function in ORN classes
targeting neighboring glomeruli resulted in similar defects with reduced
expression of some CAMs. This project tests the hypothesis that signaling in
ORNs regulate the expression of CAM combinations to organize axonal projections
to class-specific glomeruli. First, the function of OR signaling pathways and
ORN activity in glomerular organization will be tested. Next, transcriptional
changes in CAMs will be studied in OR mutant flies using RNA profiling. Finally,
developmental and genetic analyses will be used to elucidate the ORN-specific
function of CAMs in axonal and glomerular
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.