* 2006887
* Growth and patterns: existence, stability, and dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ryan Goh, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This project is focused on how spatially-periodic patterns arise in natural
systems and how they are selected and controlled by domain growth, geometry, and
more generally, spatio-temporal heterogeneities. A pattern typically refers to a
regular, repeating geometric structure, and examples abound in many different
scientific domains, such as striped convection rolls in fluids, spiral-seed
arrangements on a sunflower, and differentiation in mammalian embryos in early
stage gastrulation. In both natural and man-made settings, spatial growth
processes have proven to be powerful tools for organizing and harnessing such
pattern-forming mechanisms, while at the same time suppressing the formation of
imperfections, commonly known as defects. This project seeks to rigorously
understand the interaction of growth and patterns in mathematical models arising
in various areas such as chemistry, material science, fluid dynamics, and
biology, and used to study phenomena such as skeletal patterning in animals,
quenching of eutectic metal alloys, evaporative chemical deposition, and defect
suppression in elastic surface crystals. Such an understanding could also aid in
the fabrication of novel and functional materials at macro-, micro, and nano-
meter length scales, giving a cookbook for creating a desired structure. A facet
of this project incorporates research experience opportunities for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop and implement
new techniques in infinite-dimensional dynamical systems theory and functional
analysis to rigorously study growth in prototypical partial differential
equation models for pattern-formation. It will also explore and illuminate
complex phenomena by developing novel numerical approaches to approximate and
continue spatially patterned structures in bounded and unbounded domains. To
characterize the effect of growth speed and boundary curvature on pattern
formation, the project will first focus on quenching inhomogeneities, which
allow patterns in a sub-domain and suppress them in the complement. In simple
planar quenching, the project will study existence, wavenumber selection, and
stability of pattern-forming fronts in multi-dimensional spatial domains. As
standard spatial dynamics methods apply here in only limited settings,
functional analytic approaches will be developed to deal with the presence of
continuous spectrum in bifurcation, perturbation, or continuation schemes for
such patterned solutions. With the goal of studying patterns in non-planar
quenching geometries, this project seeks to extend the tools of spatial
dynamical systems to domains with more than one unbounded spatial direction. The
project will also investigate pattern selection and defect formation for other
types of spatio-temporal heterogeneity of physical interest, such as slowly-
varying parameter ramps, temporally slow but spatially homogeneous quenches, and
spatially localized source terms. In addition to considering existence,
stability, and wavenumber selection of patterns, this project will also use
modulational techniques to approximate the interactions and defects of selected
patterns in terms of the dynamics of simpler, more tractable partial
differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.