* 2006076
* Collaborative Research: Quantum acoustics for optomechanical transduction and entanglement of solid-state spin qubits
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Lin Tian, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2024
* USD 66,000.00

Future quantum computers will need to utilize different physical types of qubits
that need to communicate and convert between each other with high fidelity and
high efficiency. While photons are ideal for quantum communication, different
qubit systems couple to photons of vastly different frequency ranges. The strain
field generated by the mechanical wave in a solid-state material is a promising
approach to enable coupling with a broad range of qubits with theoretically high
efficiency. With a traveling velocity of five orders of magnitude lower than
photons, acoustic waves are ideal for quantum interconnect between multiple
qubits. The quantum acoustic technology developed in this project and the
integration with NV-defect center qubits is an essential first step toward a
chip-scale hybrid, multiple qubit systems. The proposed research both addresses
the imminent issue of frequency inhomogeneity that has been plaguing solid-state
optical qubits and explores the frontier of strong coupling of mechanical modes
with spin qubits. The project will make significant advances from previous
studies of discrete systems to realizing a monolithic quantum system that
includes waveguides, optical and acoustic cavities, and acoustic transducers to
directly interface with qubits, all integrated on a novel material platform. The
approach offers a path to the realization of the integrated quantum computing
system based on hybrid solid-state qubits interconnected with photons and
phonons. The research leverages the tremendous technological development in the
acoustic MEMS technology and advances it to the quantum regime, with the
potential outcome that can impact both quantum information science and microwave
photonics for classical communication. Education and outreach activities aim to
increase the participation of students from underrepresented groups and improve
the diversity of the STEM workforce and include course development in advanced
quantum computing and K-12 science outreach programs with publicly accessible
online courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to develop a novel integrated quantum acoustic device platform for
optomechanical transduction and quantum state manipulation of solid-state spin
qubits based on defect centers in diamond. The integrated devices will be built
on the high-performance heterogeneous material platform of gallium phosphide
(GaP) on the crystalline diamond. The platform uniquely utilizes the layer of
piezoelectric GaP for the dual functions of optical waveguiding and acoustic
wave generation and guiding, thereby to achieve tremendously enhanced acousto-
optic interaction. The effort will include three main thrusts. The first thrust
will realize integrated acousto-optic frequency shifter (AOFS) to address the
optical frequency inhomogeneity problem of qubits based on defect centers. AOFS
can achieve single-sideband, carrier-suppressed frequency shift of photons from
qubits freely over a range of Â±3GHz and with an efficiency better than 80%. The
second thrust will investigate the coupling of itinerant acoustic waves to
ensembles and single defect centers. The acoustic coupling strength will be
enhanced to reach the strong coupling regime and realize time-dependent control
over the states of the qubits. The final thrust will realize the strong coupling
of acoustic modes confined in a high-Q cavity with single defect centers
embedded therein. Quantum state manipulation and quantum entanglement of the
qubits by utilizing the acoustic mode will be achieved. Ensembles of NV-centers
coupled to the cavity acoustic mode in the strong-coupling regime and novel
physics effects in this regime will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.