* 2006445
* STTR Phase I:  Cellulose Based Material Innovations for Ocean Compostable Fish Friendly Plastic Packaging Replacement Platform Technology
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Douglas Bousfield, PARAMOUNT PLANET PRODUCT
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2021
* USD 245,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR project is advancing the
development of environmentally safe packaging. The global packaging market has
been estimated to grow to $980 B in 2022, with lids estimated at $1.4 B in 2020.
As 40% of plastic is created for one-time-use, a need exists for innovative
packaging. The current petroleum plastic lids are not sustainable nor recycled
and they do not break down in the environment. The proposed solution is a new
class of hot and cold drink lids that are low-cost, can be recycled with paper,
and will not harm the ocean environment if littered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
STTR Phase I project proposes to advance the translation of a method to use
highly refined wood cellulose microfibers, combined with calcium carbonate and
other low-cost additives, to generate a lid that mimics the feel of current
plastic polypropylene and polystyrene lids but provides excellent environmental
performance. The environmental impact will be tested via decomposition time, and
ocean impact by zebrafish embryo exposure effects and mortality. The proposed
solution will demonstrate environmental decomposing behavior not obtained with
any petroleum or corn plastic material. The technical hurdles include molding
and drying this new pulp into an automated lid production process at scale. This
project will characterize this new pulp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.