* 2006731
* Mathematical Analysis for Kinetic Equations and Elliptic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Ru-yu Lai, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2024
* USD 215,926.00

This project addresses several fundamental questions in reconstructing unknown
properties through nondestructive methods. These methods allow one to recover
hidden parameters, which are usually unseen in nondestructive evaluation, from
external observations. Related applications appear everywhere from the medical
imaging in our daily lives, to the study of dynamics of our solar system and
beyond, including the detection of tumor tissues in medical imaging, finding
cracks and interfaces within materials, and the study of the Earth and solar
interior. One primary component of this project aims to study central
mathematical questions that arise from the investigation of the dynamics of
dilute charged particles, and performance optimization for semiconductor
devices. The methodologies developed in this project will excite innovative
applications of the nondestructive method in scientific investigations. This
project will integrate the research component with the educational training of
graduate students, and will particularly address the involvement of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
inverse problems for the kinetic theory and elliptic equations. The major goal
will be focused on fundamental questions and important applications related to
these equations, with the aim of developing mathematical theories for the
reconstruction of significant information from the given data. Specifically, the
first part of this project is to study several kinetic equations in both forward
and inverse settings with applications in plasma physics, semiconductor, and
medical imaging. The topics include the identification of unknown properties in
Boltzmann equations, which model the dynamics of dilute charged particles, and
the investigation of material parameters and complex collision effects from
measurable data. The second part of the project centers around the inverse
boundary value problems for elliptic operators. The goal is to reconstruct
unknown coefficients in linear and nonlinear elliptic equations that arise
naturally in many physical phenomena in a bounded region from partial or full
data on the boundary. In particular, the investigator will study uniqueness and
stability issues in the reconstruction process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.