* 2006028
* Magnetic-field Control of Ionic Bonds on Polar Surfaces by Design
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Chang-Beom Eom, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2024
* USD 796,353.00

Understanding, predicting, and controlling the interactions between
nanomaterials and biological entities are critical for the development of
nanostructures for nanomedicine, facilitating more efficient diagnoses and
treatments of diseases. The main goal of this research is to control by magnetic
field the nanoscale interactions between the polar ferroelectric surfaces and
charged biomolecules by designing and creating hybrid magnetic-ferroelectric
nanostructures. These hybrid nanostructures integrate ferroelectric
nanomaterials, a class of nanomaterials possessing permanent and controllable
electric dipoles (hence are “polar”), together with magnetic materials. This
research will clarify how the interactions between the materials are determined
by the size and geometry of the nanostructures as well as magnetic field
strength. This will enable the rational design of hybrid magnetic-ferroelectric
nanostructures for biological and medical applications, such as remotely-
controlled targeted release of drug molecules for cancer treatment, deep brain
stimulation for treating Parkinson’s disease, and enhancing cell growth for
tissue regeneration. The project provides a broad education experience to all
students, including interdisciplinary research training, and participation in an
outreach program focusing on the professional development of high-school science
teachers. The outreach activities include recruiting teachers to perform
project-related research in the investigator’s labs and organizing a two-day
workshop “Nano Connections”. This workshop aims to introduce the participants to
the advanced research topics and applications of nanomaterials and
nanotechnology and develop plans for related classroom activities. Science
teachers from rural school districts and underrepresented groups will be
actively recruited through collaboration with the Wisconsin Society of Science
Teachers. Graduate students will be involved as the mentors of the teachers to
facilitate a mutual learning experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions
between nanomaterials and biological entities are of fundamental importance for
many biological and medical applications of nanostructures such as biosensing,
drug delivery, brain stimulation, and tissue regeneration. The main goal of this
research is to achieve a magnetic-field control of single-molecule-scale
interactions between the polar ferroelectric surfaces and charged biomolecules
by designing and creating hybrid magnetic-ferroelectric nanostructures. Such
hybrid nanostructures integrate ferroelectric nanomaterials, a class of
nanomaterials possessing permanent and controllable electric dipoles, with
magnetic materials. To date, the ferroelectric-biomolecule interactions remain
largely unexplored at the single-molecule scale. A team with complementary
expertise will perform closed-loop research activities including (1)
computational design of the hybrid nanostructures for down-selecting their size
and geometry; (2) computation-guided nanostructure fabrication; and (3)
nanoscale characterization of both the surface polarization and ferroelectric-
biomolecule bonding strength to provide a feedback to computation. This research
will advance the understanding of the nanoscale electrostatic interactions
between inorganic polar nanomaterials and organic biomolecules and will benefit
society by enabling the rational design of hybrid magnetic-ferroelectric
nanostructures for addressing important societal needs in medical diagnosis and
treatment. The project provides excellent interdisciplinary education and
training opportunities for all students and involves the students in a high-
school outreach program. The goal of the outreach program is to provide unique
professional development experiences for high-school science teachers, notably
those from rural school districts and underrepresented groups. The outreach
activities include recruiting teachers to perform project-related research in
the PIs’ labs and organizing a two-day workshop “Nano Connections”. This
workshop aims to introduce the participants to the advanced research topics and
applications of nanomaterials and nanotechnology and develop plans for related
classroom activities. The PIs will collaborate with Wisconsin Society of Science
Teachers on teacher recruitment, program assessment, and post-program
communication to facilitate the implementation of classroom activities.
Successful demonstrations will be presented by the teachers at education
conferences and adapted by the PIs for other university-wide outreach events.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.