* 2006583
* III: Small: Accessible and Interpretable Machine Reading Methods for Extracting Structured Information from Text
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Mihai Surdeanu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,945.00

Computers, the Internet, and cheap storage promote the acquisition and
collection of vast quantities of data. There is a seemingly infinite supply of
text documents which contain critical scientific, socio-political, and business
insights â€“ far more than can be read by a human. Within the natural language
processing (NLP) domain, the field of information extraction (IE) targets
exactly this problem, but it requires its practitioners to have expertise either
in linguistics, machine learning, or both. Consequently, the majority of the
advancements in the field of IE are difficult to access by domain experts such
as epidemiologists, biologists, and economists. This project will empower these
domain experts to develop and deploy IE systems targeting their own particular
needs without requiring expertise in NLP, linguistics, or machine learning,
which, in turn, will dramatically impact the process, pace, and productivity of
conducting critical scientific research and collaboration, as experts could have
far more ready access to the knowledge most essential to them and their research
(both in their domain and adjacent domains). The products of this work will be
shared across the scientific community through a series of outreach efforts such
as video courses, publications, and a workshop at a high-visibility conference.
To broaden participation, outreach activities (including deepening
collaborations with institutional colleagues and local community outreach) will
be done with an emphasis on groups who are historically underrepresented in
academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned work will be accomplished through a
human-technology partnership, where domain experts specify their information
need at the level they find intuitive, (e.g., phosphorylation acts on proteins).
The system will then extend techniques from the adjacent field of program
synthesis to convert these high-level, abstract specifications into low-level
grammars (i.e., sets of hierarchical information extraction rules) which can be
executed in order to extract the desired information from text. Crucially, the
specification requires no linguistic knowledge, making it accessible to a
broader population. The need for domain-specific entities (e.g., names of
proteins) will be addressed through an entity discovery procedure that
incorporates techniques for detecting multi-word entity candidates and inferring
their semantic types (e.g., PROTEIN). To ensure that the product of the system
is readily interpretable and easily extensible, a series of user studies will be
conducted to discover the key characteristics of rules and grammars that affect
their interpretability and maintainability. Through this combined effort,
several datasets and software products will be produced and made available to
the wider community. This includes (but is not limited to) (a) a dataset of
event specifications and the corresponding automatically synthesized rules for
several domains (b) a dataset of human judgements of grammar interpretability,
and (c) models which can serve as automatic proxies for the more expensive human
evaluation of interpretability. All data will be anonymized and released under
the Open Data Commons Public Domain Dedication &amp; License, which allows users
to freely share, modify, and use this data, in the hope that this effort will be
exploited further. To ensure as wide an audience as possible, the software and
techniques developed in this work including the rule synthesis framework, a
pipeline for entity discovery, and any generated user interfaces, will be
released as open-source software products (under an Apache 2.0 open source
license).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.