* 2006307
* I-Corps:   Low-weight Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV) with Wireless Communication
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2022
* M.-Reza Alam, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a high-bandwidth underwater wireless data communication for
research and industry. Unlike communication in air where radio waves allow the
transmission of data, voice or video wireless, a tether is required underwater
to transmit similar information. The development of a new type of underwater
vehicle that can send and receive data wirelessly will unlock new possibilities
in ocean exploration and marine conservation as well as new economic development
opportunities. This technology could provide a solution to efficiently map the
seafloor, significantly improving search and rescue capabilities. Oceans cover
70% of the planet but more than 80% of the seafloor remains unmapped. This
technology also could be used to better monitor offshore industrial activities
and help to prevent environmental damage and ocean pollution. In addition, the
vehicle could gather data that can be used to monitor ocean health and to better
predict climate change. The technology may have application across all fields of
the blue economy: offshore aquaculture, maritime defense, offshore energy, ocean
observing and shipping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of high-bandwidth underwater wireless data communication for
seafloor mapping, environmental monitoring, underwater data collection and
across all five fields of the blue economy. The technology is an underwater
vehicle that can send and receive data using optical communication, which has a
better range underwater than radio communication. This enables remote control
the vehicle and it is possible to receive live feedback from the vehicle (e.g.,
live video stream) without the problems of using a tether. The vehicle also may
be pre-programmed and operated in autonomous mode, and prototypes have been
developed and tested in water tanks. Further development of the technology
requires a better understanding of customer needs and requirements to achieve
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.