* 2006455
* CIF: AF: Small: Data Processing Against Synchronization Errors
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mahdi Cheraghchi Bashi Astaneh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 489,159.00

This research project addresses fundamental challenges caused by imperfect or
lacking synchronization in communications and information systems. Timing
disparity, for example, between a sender and receiver pair or different
components of a high-throughput processing unit may cause these errors. In such
cases, the communicated symbols may be missed or registered multiple times by
the receiver unit. In high-speed optical communications, data is encoded in the
form of intensity variations of light beams. As photons travel through the
communications medium, they may be absorbed or arrive at the destination in an
unpredictable order. The photon detecting receiver will then need to translate
the unreliable photon counts over time to the precise digital data being sent.
More recently, reliable and extremely compact storage of massive digital data in
DNA molecules has been an active subject of study. In such applications, the
stored information is retrieved via existing DNA sequencing technologies that
are also prone to synchronization errors. The scientific impacts of the project
span the above-mentioned technologies that are of key significance to the
processing, transmission, and storage of massive data. Educational aspects of
the project include training postgraduate and undergraduate students and
incorporating elements of the project into coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
above examples divide the specific goals of the project into three main
categories. First, Shannon capacity of the deletion channel, as well as related
communications channels, will be studied. A main goal will be to obtain provable
and improved bounds on the information capacity. Second, Shannon capacity of the
Poisson channel, a classical model for optical communications, will be studied.
The project sets forth the novel hypothesis that the deletion and Poisson
capacity problems, two of the longest-standing open problems in classical
information theory since the 1960s, have remained unresolved due to shared
mathematical difficulties, and thus should be studied with a shared perspective.
Finally, the project studies the complexity of the trace reconstruction problem
which provides a mathematical model to study the capacity of DNA storage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.