* 2006149
* Exploring Excited-State 1D Dipolar Quantum Matter with Dysprosium Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Benjamin Lev, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 536,958.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is built
on the machine the PI and his students assembled under prior NSF support---this
apparatus has inspired research groups worldwide to develop their own similar
experiments. With this apparatus, the PI is exploring new types of excited
quantum gases constrained by light to move in only one dimension. These gases---
of dysprosium---are the most magnetic of any element. That allows the team to
exploit the large, bar-magnet-like interaction between the dysprosium atoms to
reveal exotic quantum physics. Constraining the gas to move in one dimension
results in bizarre phenomena. For example, atoms are normally either bosons
(with integer spin) or fermions (with half-integer spin), but in one dimension,
bosons can act like fermions and vice versa. Moreover, inherently large quantum
effects prevent phases from emerging that possess order at long length scales,
like perfect crystals do. Exciting such gases to higher energy states should
yield even stranger effects, but these are largely unexplored. The PI and his
team aim to create such gases because they suspect these quantum systems will
not thermalize---i.e., unlike how coffee and milk mix to form a brown liquid,
the excited gas will not come into any “mixed-like” thermal equilibrium. Such
systems may teach us how to protect stored quantum information in quantum gases
or materials by inhibiting all information-destroying thermalization processes.
More generally, this research project explores uncharted regimes of strongly
correlated matter by pushing the experimental state-of-the-art in atomic
physics, quantum optics, and condensed matter physics. As such, this research
program provides an exceptional training ground for graduate and undergraduate
students in the formative scientific environment provided by Stanford University
and the PI’s state-of-the-art laser lab. The research concerns physics and
technical skills that find application in a variety of significant areas of
technology, most notably lasers and photonics for telecommunications and
advanced novel solid-state materials for electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A diversity of
exotic quantum many-body phases and nonequilibrium dynamics may arise from the
unusual properties of dysprosium confined to one dimension. The PI and his
students are extending the frontier of quantum simulation by using their unique
experimental system to address novel aspects of the physics of out-of-
equilibrium 1D dipolar gases. These systems allow the PI’s team to touch on
poorly understood aspects of thermalization in quantum physics. For example,
much remains to be learned about both the breakdown of quantum integrability and
the stabilization of highly excited quantum many-body systems. The present
program funds two new activities based on 1D dipolar gases; the PI and students
are: 1) studying how dipolar interactions modify Luttinger-liquid-like ground
and excited states, possibly stabilizing the latter against collapse to yield
novel `quantum many-body scar'-like states; 2) extending their work on bosonic
dipolar quantum Newton's cradles to fermions to ask how quantum thermalization
depends on quantum exchange statistics; and 3) exploring the possible breakdown
of many-body localization in the presence of long-range dipolar interactions in
1D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.