* 2006388
* CHS: Small: Learning and Leveraging Conventions in Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Dorsa Sadigh, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

For almost one million American adults living with physical disabilities,
picking up a bite of food or pouring a glass of water presents a significant
challenge. Wheelchair-mounted robotic arms -- and other physically assistive
devices -- hold the promise of increasing user autonomy, reducing reliance on
caregivers, and improving quality of life. Unfortunately, the very dexterity
that makes these robotic assistants useful also makes them hard for humans to
control. Today's users must teleoperate their assistive robots throughout entire
tasks. For instance, when users control an assistive robot for eating, they
would need to carefully orchestrate the position and orientation of the end-
effector to move a fork to the plate, spear a morsel of food, and then guide the
food back towards their mouth. These challenges are often prohibitive: users
living with disabilities have reported that they choose not to leverage their
assistive robot when eating because of the associated difficulty. The key
insight of this project is that controlling high-dimensional robots can become
easier by learning and leveraging conventions, which enable users to convey
their intentions, goals, and plans to the robot using simple and low-dimensional
inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study convention
formation for human-robot interaction. Conventions define a relationship between
the everyday actions and the latent meanings that these actions embody. This
project will advance the state-of-the-art of robotics from an algorithmic
perspective: i) developing new algorithms that enable learning conventions
developed between humans and robots through repeated interactions, ii)
leveraging these conventions to develop more intuitive, consistent, and
controllable interfaces for teleoperating robots with high degrees of freedom,
iii) shared autonomy algorithms that blend autonomous actions based on the
learned conventions, and iv) extending state-of-the-art shared autonomy
techniques to positively influence conventions over time. In addition, the
proposed shared autonomy and teleoperation algorithms will be extensively
evaluated through human subject studies. This can advance the state of
teleoperation in domestic robotics; in tasks such as feeding or
cooking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.