* 2006661
* AF: Small: Bundle-theoretic methods for local-to-global inference
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Jose Perea, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2023
* USD 350,843.00

Modern technologies, like cellular devices and other sophisticated sensors, have
made possible the collection of large volumes of data. &lt;br/&gt;In many
applications the resulting data may arrive from different sources and at
different times, or the amount of information is so large &lt;br/&gt;that it is
impossible to analyze or store in a single computer. Examples of such
applications include analytics in the cloud, &lt;br/&gt;or inference from
databases distributed across a network of devices for privacy and/or security
reasons.&lt;br/&gt;The need to analyze this type of data has prompted a growing
class of mathematical, statistical and computational challenges,&lt;br/&gt;where
distributed measurements need to be assembled to draw conclusions about a
system. To date most research &lt;br/&gt;has focused on the computational
question of efficiently and accurately synchronizing/aligning distributed
data,&lt;br/&gt;but less is known about how to address the mathematical
impediments to finding such solutions. &lt;br/&gt;This is the knowledge gap this
project seeks to address. Specifically, the investigator will
develop&lt;br/&gt;the theoretical, mathematical and algorithmic foundations
needed to learn from distributed data,&lt;br/&gt;even when total synchronization
is not possible. The tools developed in this project will advance pure and
computational mathematics, &lt;br/&gt;and have the potential to be applied in
areas such as cloud computing, distributed data visualization and sensor fusion.
&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research will be further amplified by its
inclusion into novel educational materials developed by the
investigator,&lt;br/&gt;as well as in the training of computational scientists
and mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main theme in this project is the
adaptation of tools from classical algebraic topology -- the branch of
mathematics concerned with &lt;br/&gt;the shape of abstract objects and how
local constructions interact -- to the problem of learning from distributed
data. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research funded by this award seeks to: (1)
leverage ideas from sheaf theory in order to develop algorithms
&lt;br/&gt;capable of estimating, from data, the topological obstructions to the
global synchronization of distributed measurements; and, &lt;br/&gt;(2) to
utilize tools from the theory of fiber bundles to compute consistent assemblages
of local data,&lt;br/&gt;even in the presence of non-trivial obstructions. The
proposed work will also lead to novel algorithms for
data&lt;br/&gt;synchronization via symmetries in Lie (e.g., matrix) groups, and
analyses where the synchronization problem can be solved only approximately.
&lt;br/&gt;This novel adaptation of tools from fiber bundles in conjunction with
sheaf theory and Cech cohomology&lt;br/&gt;will present new challenges and
application opportunities at the bleeding edge of pure and computational
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.