* 2006943
* CNS Core:Small: Toward Automatic Virtualization of Accelerators
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Christopher Rossbach, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,976.00

The cloud has transformed computing and society over the past decade by
providing fast on-demand access to scalable computing resources. At the same
time, the end of Moore’s law has driven the emergence of a panoply of hardware
accelerators such as GPUs, TPUs, and FPGAs that are critical to game-changing
workloads such as machine learning. Unfortunately, cloud migration and hardware
specialization are on a collision course: cloud applications run on virtual
infrastructure, but practical virtualization techniques for accelerators remains
an open and challenging problem. Solutions offered by cloud providers sacrifice
the consolidation benefits of virtualization and waste energy. With data centers
projected to consume up to 20% of the world's total power by 2025, improving
performance and efficiency of cloud infrastructure is becoming critical to the
health of our planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address
key obstacles that limit efficiency and wide adoption of hardware acceleration
in the cloud, focusing on two questions. The first is how to build practical,
efficient virtualization support for emerging hardware-accelerators. The second
is how to make accelerators of the future more efficiently virtualizable. The PI
will develop language, OS, and runtime techniques to automate the construction
of virtual accelerator support. Applying these techniques to cloud accelerators
is a significant research challenge. The PI will explore techniques to
dramatically improve virtualization support provided directly by accelerators
and will develop language-level virtualization support for reconfigurable
accelerators such as field programmable gate arrays. By bringing efficient
virtualization support to cloud accelerators and cloud services that use
accelerators, the proposed research will bring power-efficient cloud computing
to new problems and domains, and reduce energy waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.