* 2006254
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Magmatic Differentiation in a Fossil Upper-Crustal Silicic Magma System: Stillwater Range, NV
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Joel DesOrmeau, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 120,475.00

Volcanic eruptions involving high-silica rhyolite magmas are explosive, violent,
and have high hazard potential. Yet, there remain significant debates as to how
these magmas are generated and when and why they erupt. Understanding the
processes and timescales related to these questions is key to developing
effective volcanic hazard programs and requires an understanding of how the
physical and thermal conditions of a magmatic system change over timescales
ranging from days to millions of years. Efforts focused on monitoring and
imaging the subsurface at active volcanoes can provide some of this information,
but they cannot inform on processes that occur on very long timescales
(thousands to million years). Consequently, research on systems where both
erupted and non-erupted portions of the magmatic system are preserved can be
used to better understand the entire history of a volcanic system. The goal of
this project is to study a ‘fossil’ magmatic system – the IXL pluton (Nevada)
–in an effort to constrain the processes that lead to the generation, and
possible eruption, of high-silica rhyolite magma. Funding will support two
graduate and three undergraduate students from Purdue University, Stanford
University, and the University of Nevada-Reno. An additional important outcome
of this work will be the production of a student-led documentary that will
highlight the research, with an emphasis on women conducting field-based
scientific research. This will be done through collaboration with the Science
Communication Hitchcock Project within the Reynolds School of Journalism at the
University of Nevada-Reno and will result in the dissemination of this research
to the general public in an engaging fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the
proposed mechanisms for production of high-silica rhyolite involve its
separation from a crystal-rich magma reservoir through gravitationally driven
processes like crystal settling and compaction. Importantly, both processes
should produce vertical geochemical and textural gradients in magma reservoirs.
The Miocene IXL pluton offers an ideal location to document these gradients
because it is well exposed in a coherent crustal section with a known paleo-
vertical orientation. To assess whether these gradients are present, the PIs
will utilize high-density geochemical measurements coupled with electron back
scattered diffraction (EBSD) textural studies and constrain the timescales over
which they occurred using high-precision U-Pb zircon geochronology.
Additionally, U-Pb zircon geochronology, diffusion chronometry, and geochemical
studies will be used to determine whether any of the overlying volcanic rocks
are related to the pluton and to assess the magmatic processes that led to their
eruption. The combination of these techniques will provide a holistic view of
silicic magma evolution in the upper crust and can be used to better interpret
the geophysical data that is used to assess volcanic hazards at modern
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.