* 2006489
* CIF: Small: Learning and estimation with rough non-convex objectives: Fundamental limits and efficient algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Andrea Montanari, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 330,003.00

A large number of problems in signal processing, statistics and machine learning
require minimizing a cost function with many unknown variables. In a general
setting, this task is computationally hard, unless the cost function has the
mathematical property called convexity, a case that has attracted a large amount
of work over the last fifty years. On the other hand, modern applications often
rely on the more complex non-convex formulations, which are optimized using
simple algorithms that are not necessarily optimal. This project explores the
hypothesis that, for a broad class of non-convex cost functions, one can find
optimal solutions in the typical instances of these functions, even if the worst
case might be impossible to optimize. The outcomes will have impacts on all
scientific fields and real-world problems that feature non-convex cost
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at studying probabilistic
models of cost functions that are of `mean-field' type, namely they do not have
a latent low-dimensional structure. This setting is quite common in high-
dimensional statistics and machine learning: Each degree of freedom is equally
likely to interact (or not) with every other one. The conjectured connection
between the geometry of sublevel sets and tractability was recently established
in special cases by developing new algorithms that achieve the desired
optimization goal. These algorithms are based on message passing ideas and free
energy approximations. This project develops these new methods in a broader
domain and investigates precise conditions for their applicability. Furthermore,
it develops potential alternatives and improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.