* 2006750
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Analysis of Rapid Cultural Change
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Margaret Judd, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2021
* USD 19,763.00

People have multiple overlapping and intersecting identities including their
biology, health and socioeconomic status, that define who they are and how they
interact with others. These identities can be used to empower or disenfranchise
individuals and communities based on social milieu. Disruptions to social
environments initiated by changing demographics (migration) or political
upheaval can transform the social significance of these identities. Within this
broad context and under the supervision of Dr. Margaret Judd of the University
of Pittsburgh, doctoral candidate Deborah Neidich will investigate the impact of
human mobility on identity construction following a period sociopolitical
turmoil. This project contributes to the body of research regarding material
signifiers of identity and the relationship between cultural processes and
biology; it may also point to the origins of historically recognized groups that
emerged during sociopolitical change. This is particularly important as it may
serve as a historical analogy to modern sociopolitical issues regarding
contemporary migration by highlighting a diverse history that was forged by
migrations and migrants. The information obtained through this research will be
the foundation for Ms Neidich’s dissertation and available electronically as
well as in a series of academic publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Neidich
will use a range of sources including the skeletal biological profile (age, sex,
and chemical markers of mobility) and skeletal evidence for biological stress
and diet. Stable isotope analysis of carbon and nitrogen adds a dietary
signature, while grave goods analysis provides information concerning status and
gender. Combined, the data can identify salient social categories to answer the
following three questions: (1) Which aspects of a person’s identity were
important for a community to mark at a person’s burial? (2) Were social
disparities expressed as differences in health, trauma and diet, related to
identity in the past? (3) Was there a shift in the perception of these
categories during political change and periods of stability? This work will
identify transitions in identity and mobility over an extended period of time.
The project will assess patterns of change in demography, health, diet and grave
good distribution to evaluate how identities were expressed prior to and
transformed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.