* 2006800
* CIF: Small: Community Detection in Multilayer Networks with Applications to Functional Connectivity Brain Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Tapabrata Maiti, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 517,310.00

Networks provide a powerful and compact representation of the internal structure
of complex systems consisting of agents that interact with each other. Examples
include social networks, the World Wide Web and biological networks of
molecules, cells or entire species. Traditional network science assumes that the
network nodes are connected by a single edge that captures all interactions
between them. However, this is an oversimplification as most real-world networks
are built through different types of interactions among the nodes. Examples
include social networks, where two individuals can be connected through
different types of social ties originating from friendship, collaboration or
family relationships; air transportation networks, where different airports can
be connected through different airlines; and the brain, where different regions
can be interacting across different frequency bands or time points. In recent
years, multilayer networks, which incorporate multiple channels of connectivity,
have been introduced to model these different modes of communication. A core
task in network analysis is to identify and understand communities as they can
reveal meaningful structure and provide a better understanding of the overall
functioning of networks, such as uncovering functional pathways in metabolic
networks, related pages in the World Wide Web or groups of friends in social
networks and more. Community detection methods on simple graphs are not
sufficient to deal with the complexity of multilayer networks for they cannot
leverage the multiple modes of interaction between nodes. This project aims to
develop a comprehensive multilayer community detection framework with the help
of two complementary approaches, namely heuristic quality function optimization
and statistical inference. The connections between these two approaches will be
established for multilayer network models with varying degrees of complexity
starting with temporal networks going to fully coupled multilayer
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the problem of community
detection in multilayer networks through three research thrusts. First, novel
normalized-cut based quality functions will be defined for temporal, multiplex
and multilayer networks, and computationally efficient algorithms will be
developed to optimize these new cost functions. The convergence and consistency
of the resulting algorithms will be studied. Next, generalized stochastic block
models for temporal, multiplex and multilayer networks will be developed.
Connections between maximizing a posteriori probabilities derived from these
models and optimizing the heuristic quality functions will be established.
Finally, the new community detection methods will be applied to multilayer
functional connectivity networks, e.g. temporal and multi-frequency networks,
constructed from electroencephalogram (EEG) data to assess well-known task-
related networks. This new computational framework for multilayer network
community detection can be applied to different types of networks including
social, biological and ecological networks; we expect an impact on the fields of
brain connectomics and cognitive neuroscience through collaborations with
neuroscientists at Michigan State University. As part of the project, a diverse
group of interdisciplinary researchers will be trained, and K-12 outreach
activities that seek to engage female students will be
organized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.