* 2006667
* Collaborative Research: FET: Small: Topological quantum computing beyond anyons
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shawn Cui, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 174,258.00

Quantum computing has drawn a vast amount of attention recently, with investment
from across academia, industries, and governments rapidly increasing for the
construction of a large-scale useful quantum computer. Among the best approaches
to this goal is topological quantum computing (TQC). The hardware for TQC is
provided by topological phases of matter -- the subject of the 2016 Physics
Nobel prize. TQC currently relies on quasi-particle excitations or anyons in
topological quantum media to perform computing. The mobility of anyons
introduces local noise, a major impediment to scaling quantum computing. Anyons
are also difficult to realize and manipulate - they are realized in two-
dimensional phases, while three-dimensional (3D) materials are more available
and practical. With the mathematical theories underlying anyons mostly
established and the relevant both promising and challenging experiments being
carried out extensively, the project seeks to expanding the scope of TQC beyond
just two-dimensional anyons. The goal is to not only provide new approaches to
TQC beyond anyons, but also strengthen the connection between topological
physics, higher category theory, and topology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
foci of the project are on quantum error correction, computational universality,
and mathematical foundations of TQC beyond anyons. The project systemically
investigates three related aspects: fracton phases, loop excitations in 3D
topological phases, and symmetry defects. Firstly, the investigators will
explore error correction properties and mathematical foundations of fracton
phases, which form an exotic class of lattice models that cannot be described by
conventional topological quantum field theories. Secondly, the project will
develop methods to compute the exchange statistics of loop excitations in 3D
topological phases of matter. New techniques in representation theory and
topology are utilized to compute motion group representations associated with 3D
topological field theories. Thirdly, the project will study the interaction
between topological phases and symmetry defects. The defects, like anyons, also
provide stable ground state degeneracy and non-Abelian statistics, and hence can
be used to perform quantum computing more powerfully than anyons alone. The
investigators are especially interested in non-Abelian defects arising from
Abelian anyons and seek to examine if they can be made universal for quantum
computing under realistic physical conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.