* 2006736
* Shape Dynamics of Vortices: Theory and Numerics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Tomoki Ohsawa, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 164,965.00

Vortices are ubiquitous in fluids. We observe swirls in rivers, the ocean, and
hurricanes. The main objective of this project is to understand how such
vortices interact with each other; more specifically, what kind of geometric
patterns they can form in nature. A simple example is how the triangle formed by
the centers of three hurricanes changes its shape in time; it is a mathematical
model for the three hurricanes, Irma, Jose, and Katia, that appeared near the
Gulf of Mexico in the Fall 2017, shortly after the Hurricane Harvey. Such
interacting vortices are known to appear in much smaller scales in certain
materials as well, and are key to the understanding of superconductors, which
have engineering applications including powerful electromagnets (used for maglev
trains, fusion reactors, and magnetic resonance imaging). This project exploits
mathematical ideas to better understand the dynamics of interacting vortices.
The project will contribute to outreach events, and the PI and the graduate
students will also mentor undergraduate students with diverse backgrounds
participating in a mathematical modeling contest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project investigates interactions of multiple vortices in ordinary fluids,
superfluids, and superconductors using modern geometric methods to study how the
configuration of vortices evolves in time. While the shape dynamics of only a
few vortices is well understood, the shape dynamics of a larger number of
vortices has been a challenge. The new geometric insight sheds a new light on
the shape dynamics of vortices by finding invariants that will help us
understand the stability of possible configurations. The project develops
techniques to analyze the shape dynamics of vortices by exploiting ideas from
symmetry reduction in the geometric approach to mechanics. The technique applies
not only to vortices in ordinary fluids but also to quantum vortices in
superfluids and superconductors. The project also develops numerical methods to
accurately predict stability/instability of configurations of many vortices.
Vortex dynamics is a practical example of so-called non-separable Hamiltonian
systems, to which many conventional explicit methods for Hamiltonian systems do
not apply directly. The project aims to develop explicit numerical integrators
for non-separable Hamiltonian systems with favorable geometric properties, such
as exact/near conservation of invariants in vortex
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.