* 2006747
* RI: Small: Embracing Deep Neural Networks into Probabilistic Answer Set Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Joohyung Lee, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 458,499.00

The integration of low-level perception with high-level reasoning is one of the
fundamental problems in artificial intelligence. Today, the topic is revisited
with the recent rise of deep neural networks. While deep learning excels in many
perception tasks, it is not obvious how multiple aspects of commonsense
reasoning, such as causality, defaults, abductive reasoning, and counterfactual
reasoning, can be computed by neural networks. These subjects have been well-
studied in the area of knowledge representation (KR) including answer set
programming (ASP) but most KR formalisms are logic-oriented and do not
incorporate high-dimensional feature space and pre-trained models for vision and
text as in deep learning, which limits the applicability of KR in many practical
applications involving uncertainty. The goal of the proposed research is to
investigate a principled combination of knowledge representation, reasoning, and
learning by integrating answer set programming with neural networks, which will
enable representation, inference, and learning in both symbolic and sub-symbolic
levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate two different
approaches to integration. One is a loose coupling that is based on the concept
of neural atoms which serves as an interface between the neural network output
and the parameters for probabilistic answer set programming. The other is a
tighter coupling method that obtains fuzzy-valued atomic facts from the neural
network and applies the fuzzy answer set semantics on the vectorized
representation. Not only these methods allow for applying symbolic reasoning on
the neural network perception result but also allow for making use of logical
rules in training a neural network so that a neural network not only learns from
implicit correlations from the data but also from the explicit complex semantic
constraints expressed by ASP rules. The success of the project will contribute
to identifying fundamental issues in bridging the gap between knowledge
representation and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.