* 2006553
* El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Interactions with Tropical Atlantic and Indian Oceans
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Tim Li, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 599,339.00

The El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the dominant interannual variability
in the Earth’s climate. Current understanding of the interactions between ENSO
and tropical Atlantic and Indian Ocean is limited. However, these interactions
are seemingly crucial for accurate prediction of ENSO structure and evolution
and its global impact. Current operational models have difficulty accurately
predicting ENSO and its interactions with climate modes in other ocean basins.
Through observational analyses and numerical modeling tasks, results from this
award may reveal key physical processes behind these interactions and advance
our current knowledge of ENSO dynamics, pan-tropical climate interactions, and
general large-scale atmosphere-ocean interactions. This in turn may provide
additional metrics to assess and improve global model representations of ENSO
and its influence on weather events.

The award has three research thrusts. The first thrust investigates the relative
roles of ENSO-induced extratropical and tropical forcing of sea surface
temperature anomaly (SSTA) in the tropical North Atlantic (TNA) and how the TNA
SSTA may feedback to ENSO through induced Rossby and Kelvin wave responses.
Observational analyses and idealized model experiments will be performed. The
second thrust examines the interaction between Atlantic Niño and ENSO. A
composite analysis will be conducted to elucidate the formation mechanisms of
Atlantic Niño under preceding El Niño and La Niña conditions. Coupled and
uncoupled model experiments will be carried out to investigate how ENSO
influences Atlantic Niño and how Atlantic Niño impacts subsequent ENSO evolution
and to what extent model bias in sea surface temperature affects the remote
Atlantic forcing. The third thrust investigates how ENSO influences the Indian
Ocean dipole (IOD) and to what extent Indian Ocean basin warming contributes to
El Niño turnabout. Focus will be placed on the effect of equatorially symmetric
and antisymmetric circulation responses to El Niño during its developing summer
and linear and nonlinear wind responses to the boreal winter IDO rainfall
pattern.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.