* 2006550
* Galaxies and their Circumgalactic Media at the Edge of Reionization
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kristian Finlator, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 317,832.00

During the first billion years, stars, galaxies, and quasars ionized and heated
the hydrogen gas located between galaxies; most of the Universe has remained in
a plasma state ever since. Finlator and collaborators will investigate whether
elusive, faint galaxies dominated this process. The team will compare
observations of galaxies and their circumgalactic media (CGM) to a series of
theoretical "Technicolor Dawn" simulations to quantify the abundance of faint
galaxies and learn about their stars. Coordinators from the New Mexico Alliance
for Minority Participation (AMP) program will assist in recruiting an
undergraduate student to participate in a hands-on research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finlator and colleagues will simulate the
galaxies, their CGM, the ultraviolet background, and the progress of
reionization using cosmological simulations incorporating a spatially-resolved,
multifrequency radiation transport solver. The team will determine how many
galaxies (not just the nearest galaxy) are required to provide the metals for
each high-ionization absorber. This will include an analysis of the galaxy
masses and luminosities to investigate which galaxy populations are traced by
metal absorbers and how this varies with ion and absorber strength. A Bayesian
Information Criterion analysis using ensemble statistics of absorbers will probe
the galaxy mass function. This will resolve the inconsistency between older
simulations, which required high numbers of faint galaxies, and observations of
absorbersâ€™ environments indicating that faint galaxies are rare. The team will
also apply observational constraints to the reionization-epoch Initial Mass
Function (IMF). For example, strong high-ionization absorbers that trace galaxy-
poor environments may indicate a hard ionizing background, but a tail of even
stronger absorbers could indicate a "top-heavy" IMF rich in massive
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.