* 2006001
* Studying Scientist-Educator-Artist Collaborations and Participatory Community Learning around Environmental Change and Adaptation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Amy Lesen, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 01/31/2021
* USD 299,893.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This two-year Pilots and Feasibility project seeks to build knowledge and
strategic impact in the informal STEM learning field by studying how and why
science-education-art collaborations yield impactful informal STEM learning
experiences. By design and implementing interactive and participatory
experiences for adult audiences, this project will build knowledge about how to
help communities learn about environmental science and apply scientific
knowledge to environmental decision-making in their lives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projectâ€™s two overarching research questions are: (1)
What are the essential elements of collaboration among scientists, educators,
and artists that support learning about adaptation in a changing environment?
(2) In what ways do designed, participatory, informal science learning
experiences support participant learning? This pilot project will: a) develop
methods for facilitating and assessing collaboration among scientists,
educators, and artists; b) pilot and refine approaches for engaging scientists,
educators, and artists with community members for high quality participatory
experiences focus on learning about adaptation to environmental change in
informal learning settings; c) pilot and refine methods to measure the outcomes
for community participants on knowledge about environmental change and its
application to problems in their everyday lives. This project is innovative in
bridging a diverse body of scholarship in order to study the process of
collaboration and the specific ways interdisciplinary collaborations foster
learning. Because informal STEM learning settings often combine the work of
multiple disciplines, examining the process and outcomes of collaborative,
participatory STEM learning has the potential to deliver widely applicable
guidance for achieving more impactful educational
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will broaden participation
by engaging adult members of environmentally vulnerable communities in
participatory STEM activities and will improving individual and community well-
being by delivering tools for future decision-making. The collaborative project
will build valuable partnerships and capacity between disparate sectors of
society, allowing co-learning and co-production of knowledge. Results will be
published in scholarly journals as well as shared with community
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.