* 2006977
* SHF: SMALL: Effective and Equitable Technical Interviews in Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Christopher Parnin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 316,000.00

In the software industry, a software engineer must pass a series of technical
evaluations, called technical interviews, when applying for a job. A popular
form of the technical interview requires software engineers to write computer
code on the spot in front of interviewers. There are industry-wide concerns that
such interviews may lack real-world relevance and be ineffective at evaluating
technical competencies, while introducing systemic bias and unnecessary stress.
This project aims to develop technical evaluations of software-engineering
proficiency that are more equitable. The main objective is to enable broadening
participation in the software-engineering workforce. To achieve this objective,
the research investigates software-engineering processes involving human
judgment of code, such as during code reviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop techniques to measure the technical performance of a programming
task and identify factors that negatively impact the ability to write code, such
as high cognitive load, poor affective state, and limited affordances. Three
main research tasks will be investigated for this project. The first task will
involve data mining technical-interview experiences and engagement with
stakeholders in order to determine a comprehensive list of factors concerning
technical evaluation of code. The second task will involve a series of
randomized, controlled trials to establish the effects of various conditions,
such as problem-solving complexity, use of concurrent think-aloud, and presence
of stereotype threat on technical performance. The third task will involve the
development of interventions that reduce unwanted effects on technical
performance, such as retrospective think-aloud or private interviews, and will
include evaluating trials in industry. Overall, this project connects to the
stream of research on identifying opportunities for increasing equity in
software engineering and information work: improving diversity and tenure of
teams and providing resources for disadvantaged and low-resource job
seekers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.