* 2006242
* Collaborative Research: Design a New Polymer Platform for Engineering Fast and Selective Molecular Transport in Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ruilan Guo, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2024
* USD 474,677.00

Polymer-based separation membranes play central roles in many technological
innovations, such as clean energy (e.g., H2 purification) and environmental
remediation (e.g., carbon capture). However, one major barrier to advancement in
membrane field is the lack of feasible synthetic methods that can produce high-
molecular-weight polymers with desirable function and composition. In this
project, the investigators aim to develop a highly adaptive polymer platform
that targets specific macromolecular designs for fast and selective molecular
transport in polymeric membranes. By applying a new polymerization tool and
targeting specific structure motifs for maximizing molecular transport while
readily achieving high molecular weights, this research will open a new
intellectual area for thinking about how to design polymer membrane materials
for a variety of applications. In addition, the proposed research is dedicated
to educating and training students at all levels in this interdisciplinary field
with particular emphasis to attract underrepresented students into polymer
materials research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using the Friedel-Crafts
hydroxyalkylation polymerization technique recently developed in the principal
investigator's group, the project aims to synthesize a series of
triphenylmethane-backboned polymers that have high molecular weight, a wide
range of tunability on both substituent groups, and chain architectures. The
polymerization technique provides an opportunity to explore the respective
effect of polymer structures (e.g., polar, steric and morphological) at multiple
length scales on gas transport properties without cross-influence from molecular
weight. The investigators hypothesize that gas transport properties can be
correlated with variations in the substituent groups and will vary with
geometric size (physical effects on free volume) or polarity (interactive
chemical effects). Three major research tasks are planned: 1) to synthesize
triphenylmethane-based polymers with various substituent groups to investigate
the respective chemical and physical effects of functional groups on gas
transport; 2) to synthesize graft triphenylmethane-based polymers with target
side chains to interrogate the mesoscale morphological effect on gas transport;
3) to investigate fundamental gas transport properties (i.e., permeation,
diffusion, and sorption) and evaluate membrane performance under both ideal and
realistic conditions. The ultimate goal of this membrane materials research
project is to engineer fast and selective gas transport in polymers based on the
rigorous structure-property relationship determination enabled by the proposed
new polymer synthesis tool and polymer platform. The synthetic derivatives
proposed here will allow the investigators to decouple chemical and physical
effects and study them independently. The project is supported by both the
Interfacial Engineering program (Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems Division of the Engineering Directorate) and the Polymers
program (Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.