* 2006101
* Stories of Fire: Integrative Informal STEM Learning through Participatory Narratives
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Leda Kobziar, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,911.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
The goal of this pilot and feasibility study is to increase participation in
informal STEM learning in rural Idaho through Stories of Fire, a program based
on personal narratives of wildland fire. Idaho is a rural state, with an average
population of just 19 people per square mile, the fourth lowest population
density in the United States. The state is experiencing increasingly severe
wildfire, and effective responses to such environmental change require a better
understanding of the underlying science. Contextualizing science learning,
making connections between everyday lives and a sense of place can engage
learners and bring about a better understanding of wildfire. This project will
bring together a science communicator, a narratologist, a fire ecologist, and a
specialist on emotions and public lands. They will work collaboratively with
informal educators based in rural areas of Idaho underrepresented in STEM
fields. Rural areas are rich in knowledge based on years of cumulative
observations, cultural beliefs, and practices shared through community networks.
This project builds on these rural assets while addressing the challenges rural
populations face. The project addresses broadening participation in STEM through
narrative practices that encourage more diverse ways of knowing, being, and
representing science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study will explore: 1)
what mechanisms of narrative (storytelling) most effectively integrate
individuals’ personal experiences and accurate STEM content in fire science
communication, and 2) what audience-centered approaches best facilitate
narrative approaches to informal STEM learning. This project engages four levels
of participants over four phases of research and programming: 1) The research
team will interview and analyze the narratives of 40 Frontliners (e.g., wildland
firefighters and evacuees) from the inland Northwest region with first-hand
experience with wildfire. 2) They will conduct a narrative workshop to train 20
informal STEM Educators from across the state on audience-centered approaches
that facilitate participant storytelling about fire. 3) Educators will pilot
their own narrative-based informal science learning programs with program
participants in their rural home communities across the state, 4) A professional
podcaster will create two podcasts modeled on our research findings for public
audiences reached through media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.