* 2006617
* CNS Core:Small: Re-thinking the Design of Data Management Software Upon the Arrival of SSDs with Built-in Transparent Compression
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Tong Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 389,418.00

This project is developing techniques that can improve the efficiency of data
management software (e.g., database and filesystem) by leveraging new data
storage hardware with built-in compression. These are disks that automatically
compress data when it is written to the disk and decompresses data when it is
read. This makes the disk appear larger than it really is because of the
compression. For the first time, such new storage hardware decouples the logical
storage space utilization efficiency from the physical storage space utilization
efficiency, which creates a large but completely unexplored space for
simplifying the design and implementation of data management software. This
project involves developing a set of techniques to explore this new design space
for simplifying mainstream data management software. In order to demonstrate and
study the involved design trade-offs, this project will implement prototype key-
value store and caching software, and enhance existing open-source filesystems
and relational databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing
solutions to largely simplify data management software, this project could
significantly contribute to improving the efficiency and cost effectiveness of
future data-intensive computing infrastructure. This work can inspire broader
research to fully explore the potential of leveraging new storage hardware with
built-in computation capability to innovate computing system software stack. The
developed source codes and experimental results will be available online for
public and wide-range usage, benefiting both industrial and academic
researchers. The research training to both undergraduate and graduate students
will address the concerns of lacking researchers and engineers with cross-
hardware/software expertise in IT and computer
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.