* 2006127
* Multiple-Energy-Assisted Ultrasharp Probe-Based Nanomanufacturing for High-Resolution and High-Efficiency Nanopatterning
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Changhong Ke, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2024
* USD 609,436.00

Nanomanufacturing is the manufacture of sub-100 nanometer patterns, components,
devices, and systems. Over the past few decades, nanomanufacturing progress has
greatly advanced many fundamental research fields from physics to biology and
has generated numerous commercial applications, such as biomedical products,
semiconductor components, and energy devices. However, high-resolution
manufacturing of sub-10 nanometer feature sizes remains a scientific challenge.
This award supports fundamental research to create and understand ultrasharp
probe-based nanomanufacturing processes for high-resolution and high-efficiency
nanopatterning. By using strong and thin carbon nanotubes as patterning tools,
this new ultrasharp probe-based nanomanufacturing paradigm will enable high-
efficiency manufacturing down to sub-10 nm level and will accelerate innovations
in high-resolution flexible and scalable manufacturing. This research will
enable a number of science and engineering research and applications, will
impact a number of industries, and will help boost the US economy. This research
will provide scientific training and research experience to graduate and
undergraduate students, particularly women and minorities, from various outreach
programs at Binghamton University. Research results will be incorporated into
existing advanced manufacturing and nanotechnology courses and will be
disseminated through journal and conference publications and through outreach
programs to local K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to create and understand an ultrasharp probe-based nanomanufacturing
technique for high-resolution and high-efficiency nanopatterning down to sub-10
nanometer feature level. This research will integrate electrical field, Joule
heating, and mechanical vibration with an atomic force microscope to create an
efficient nanomanufacturing platform to overcome the barriers of existing
maskless nanomanufacturing techniques. The research team will manufacture
machining tools from ultrasharp carbon nanotube atomic force microscope probes,
with customized nanotube lengths and orientations, by using an electron
microscopy nanomechanical single-nanotube pull-out technique. The team will
experimentally characterize the patterning resolution, the manufacturing
efficiency, and the tool lifetime. To understand the mechanism of the
manufacturing technique, the research team will simulate electric flux density
to uncover how the manufacturing parameters, such as the applied voltage and the
thickness of resists, govern the resolution of the manufacturing process.
Statistical and semi-empirical models will be built to unveil the relationships
between the input parameters and the nanomanufacturing performance. This
research will also combine the high-resolution manufacturing process with soft
lithography to enable flexible and scalable high-resolution nanomanufacturing.
It is envisioned that this research will enable a number of new technologies for
biomedical, electronic, and energy applications in the research, industrial and
governmental sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.