* 2006839
* Compact Object Binaries in the Gravitational Wave Era
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Rosalba Perna, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,107.00

Neutron stars (NS), which are extremely compact stellar remnants, and black
holes (BHs), the densest objects in the universe, are fantastic astrophysical
laboratories for probing fundamental aspects of the laws of physics, from
quantum mechanics to general relativity. A wealth of information comes from
observing them in the final moments of their lives, when they are members of a
binary system that merge due to the emission of gravitational waves (GWs). If a
NS is member of the binary, then this merger may also produce light, or
electromagnetic emission (EM), which greatly increases the astrophysical
information that can be extracted. This was shown in the many observations of
the merger event GW170817/GRB170817A, the results of which impacted knowledge in
a variety of research areas, from high-energy astrophysics, to nuclear physics,
to cosmology. A research group at the State University of New York at Stony
Brook will undertake theoretical work aimed at maximizing the research gain from
future observations. The variety of topics (and techniques) that this research
plan encompasses makes it ideal for the involvement of students at all levels,
including undergraduates. The principal investigator (PI) is especially
interested in involving female undergraduate student in this research, with the
goal of empowering and giving confidence to young women in their abilities to do
science, and hence encouraging them to pursue careers as
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore several facets of
binary formation and evolution, and of the GW-EM connection, while probing
issues of fundamental physics. In particular: (a) It will develop a general
framework for the interpretation of the radiation from NS-NS and NS-BH sources
triggered by the LIGO and Virgo GW detectors. The goal is to connect the
properties of binary compact merger ejecta with the EM emission of their jet-
cocoon systems, the time delay from the GW signal, and the type of compact
object remnant left behind. Along with mass measurements from GWs, this
information aids in constraining the equation of state of NS matter. (b) It will
extend and refine the predictions of dynamical formation of compact object
binaries in star clusters. Among the outcomes will be an exploration of the mass
distribution of NS-BH binaries produced via this channel, and a comparison to
those formed from field binaries. (c) It will couple results from the first two
studies to compute the broadband EM radiation expected for the main formation
channels of NS-NS and NS-BH binaries, as well as BH-BH in dense environments,
extracting potentially discriminating features and aiding searches for EM
counterparts to GW triggers. As part of this project, the PI plans to partner
with the WISE (Women In Science and Engineering) program at Stony Brook. This
will involve (a) supervision of undergraduate research projects during the
academic year; (b) giving guest lectures in a course specifically designed by
WISE to discuss opportunities in STEM fields; (c) being a high-school mentor in
the WISE after school program. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.