* 2006125
* AF: Small: Natural Algorithms and Dynamic Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Bernard Chazelle, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The emergence of large-scale order from local interactions is a theme common to
computing and living systems. The field of natural algorithms seeks to discover
the fundamental principles that underlie this phenomenon in all its remarkable
diversity. Can simple algorithmic rules explain how birds flock, how termites
cooperate, how opinions polarize, how oscillators self-synchronize, how
languages evolve through iterated learning, or how robustness emerges from
adaptive systems? Beyond providing answers to these specific questions, the
broader ambition of this project is to build bridges between the fields of
algorithms and dynamical systems. Nearly all of the processes under
consideration involve dynamic networks whose nodes represent autonomous agents
interacting under time-varying topologies. It is often crucial to perform
dimension reduction on such systems in a manner respectful of the dynamics. This
task is approached through the lens of “semantic renormalization,” a process
that involves clustering dynamic graphs hierarchically. The theme of the project
is highly multidisciplinary and forms the basis of graduate seminars and
undergraduate projects with participation from computer science, mathematics,
statistics, neuroscience, genomics, evolutionary biology, and mechanical
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws upon a wide range of
techniques from areas as diverse as dynamical systems, machine learning,
statistical mechanics, and network theory. It consists of four main parts: (a)
“iterated learning” features students who, acting as Bayesian agents, learn from
teachers and then, in turn, become teachers themselves; (b) “dynamic random
walks” model random walks over graphs whose topology changes over time via a
feedback loop; (c) “opinion dynamics” investigates how autonomous agents can
reach consensus through mutual, constrained interaction; (d) “averaging systems”
are coupled dynamical systems driven by convex combination updates over embedded
dynamic networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.