* 2006326
* EAGER: Infectious Norovirus Persistence in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Kyle Bibby, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2023
* USD 186,486.00

Norovirus is considered to be responsible for most infections resulting from
exposure to sewage contaminated water. Assessing risk posed by norovirus
requires the ability to accurately measure and cultivate them in water.
Unfortunately, at present we cannot readily culture norovirus in the lab. We
also lack suitable molecular probes to rapidly and accurately measure norovirus.
Recent studies using human intestinal enteroids (HIE) have shown promise as a
technique to enable accurate cultivation of norovirus. The goal of this project
is to develop HIE as a tool to characterize infectious norovirus persistence in
water. Achieving this goal will require evaluating the agreement between the HIE
technique and other tools to assess the accuracy of the method. Successful
completion of this work will enable the use of HIE methods as a rapid and
accurate measurement tool for norovirus. The proposed project will have
significant benefits to society and education through improved norovirus
monitoring and control efforts to protect human health in water, food, and
recreation. In addition to these societal benefits, the proposed project will
contribute to the training of an environmental engineering PhD student in
cutting-edge norovirus cultivation approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Norovirus is
an important waterborne pathogen that likely accounts for the majority of
infections resulting from exposure to sewage contaminated water. Measuring
norovirus persistence and inactivation in water is complicated by a lack of
suitable molecular or surrogate methods and an inability to culture norovirus
the laboratory. We propose to address this limitation by developing a novel
cultivation approach using human intestinal enteroids (HIE). This approach is
based on promising results showing HIEs have enabled reproducible cultivation of
norovirus. This tool will be used to characterize infectious norovirus
persistence in water and results compared to culture, molecular, and surrogate
measures for validation. Cultivation of norovirus in HIE remains highly
specialized. Thus, successful validation of this approach represents a
potentially transformative advance in understanding infectious norovirus
persistence in water. It would also enable future investigations of infectious
norovirus fate in other environmental matrices. Such advances would have broad
benefits to society, particularly in the fields of drinking water, air, food,
agriculture, and recreational water management. The proposed project will have
significant benefits to society and education. Accurate measurement and
forecasting of norovirus may allow us to proactively respond to outbreaks,
reducing the disease burden. In addition to technical results, the proposed
project will contribute to the training of an environmental engineering PhD
student in cutting-edge norovirus cultivation approaches and research results
will be disseminated widely via journal publications and a conference
presentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.