* 2006464
* AF: Small: Graph Theory and Its Uses in Algorithms and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Julia Chuzhoy, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 398,163.00

This project focuses on studying structure of graphs, as well as using insights
about graph structure in order to design better algorithms for basic graph
problems, and to prove negative results about the existence of such algorithms.
Graphs are central combinatorial objects that are widely used in Computer
Science, Mathematics, and other disciplines, both in theory and in applications.
Graphs are a natural model of various types of networks, including computer and
traffic networks. Additionally, graphs are also used to represent data and
relationships between various objects. One of the goals of this project is to
study properties of complex graphs that can be exploited in order to design
faster and more accurate graph algorithms. In addition, the project will focus
on several fundamental graph problems that have connections to routing traffic
in a network that evolves over time, and to computing a layout of a graph with
the goal of creating a good visualization of it. It will also explore the use of
graph-theoretic techniques in proving negative results that show that designing
fast and accurate algorithms for several central graph problems is
impossible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the project consists of
three main parts. The first part focuses on graph-theoretic questions that aim
at better understanding the structure of complex graphs. The questions include
obtaining stronger bounds on the famous Excluded Grid Theorem, designing good
algorithms for drawing graphs in the plane with few crossings, and studying a
new problem on graph partitioning that arose from the study of graph theoretic
questions. The second part focuses on dynamic algorithms for shortest-paths
problems: given a graph that undergoes edge deletions and insertions, the goal
is to provide quick and accurate responses to shortest-paths queries between
pairs of vertices. This type of questions arises both in practical scenarios
(such as applications for routing traffic), and in theoretical settings
(algorithms for dynamic shortest-paths have been used as sub-routines in solving
many central theoretical problems). The goal of this part is to obtain very fast
algorithms that provide high-precision responses to the queries. In the third
part, the project will focus on several closely related problems that are
believed to be hard to approximate, and will attempt to prove that this is
indeed the case, by exploiting graph-theoretic techniques. This part of the
project is closely related to the areas of Hardness of Approximation and
Probabilistically Checkable Proof, and one of its goals is to increase the flow
of ideas and techniques between these areas and Algorithmic Graph
Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.