* 2006034
* Collaborative Research: A new model for producing science documentaries: Building collaborations between scientists and storytellers to test methods of communication in film
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Sarah Goodwin, Science Communication Lab, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2022
* USD 349,225.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project will research core methods of science documentary film production
and impact on audience engagement and understanding. The findings from this
study will be used to later produce a film on how the CRISPR genome editing
technology will shape agriculture, ecology, and the natural world. The research
study and film to be produced will be a collaboration of science communication
practitioners and researchers. The intended outcomes are to improve effective
science filmmaking and increase impact on audiences. Many people rely on
documentary film and videos for science information outside of formal learning
environments. Research has shown that video programming can reduce knowledge
gaps between those of higher and lower levels of education. But there is little
research with findings about what makes a particular style of storytelling
effective for engagement and learning outcomes. A recent report of the National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine identified a significant
shortage of social science research with directly applicable lessons for
filmmakers. This project addresses this need by providing new frameworks for
research and methods to produce science documentaries. Project partners are
iBiology, a producer of video resources for learning, and science communication
researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine two key questions: 1) In a science documentary film, how
does the diversity of the scientists profiled and the use of a narrator shape
audiences’ perception of content and scientists? and 2) What are effective
methods in science filmmaking to visualize the invisible (i.e. explain
scientific phenomena that are not easily visualized)? The project begins by
testing a recently produced film, Human Nature, that tells the story of the
discovery of CRISPR (genome editing), told by the scientists who led the effort.
Phase 1 testing will include screenings, focus groups, and experiments run
through Amazon Mechanical Turk to test what features of the film (editorial
voice and visualization styles) are most effective for communicating scientific
content. In Phase 2 video test clips will be produced using a combination of
narration and visualization strategies. An experimental design run through
Amazon Turk will randomly assign participants to watch a clip using different
combinations. Researchers will use this data to parse out what effect seems to
be related to particular narration and visualization choices. This quantitative
experimental data will be supplemented by qualitative data from focus groups
with participants with a diverse range of science experience and demographic
backgrounds. Researchers will design a survey-embedded experiment with a U.S.
nationally representative sample to see how well the findings translate and
change in a broader population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.