* 2006183
* AF: Small: Circuit Walks in Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Steffen Borgwardt, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 233,560.00

The field of optimization provides powerful tools for finding optimal solutions
to mathematical programs based on complex real-world problems. However, the
computation of a better solution is just a first step towards the greater goal
of actually implementing it in practice. In many applications, a gradual
transition to a new transportation plan, a new schedule, a new database
structure, or a new software solution is required. Such a transition should be a
short sequence of simple and natural steps that satisfy a combination of
optimality criteria and restrictions associated with the problem. The goal of
this project is the design, study, and implementation of algorithms for optimal
gradual transitions between solutions of a mathematical program. The ability to
efficiently construct such a transition will enable a wealth of new
applications. The project will raise awareness in the scientific community to go
beyond just solving a problem and will advance knowledge on the transfer of
computational results to practice. The research is complemented with synergistic
education and outreach activities, including new courses, the training of
students, and a workshop bringing together students from across the country with
international experts. The impact will be tested in applications, involving
students through a collaboration with the Auraria Library's Data to Policy
Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the polyhedra arising in linear and integer
programming, a transition between two solutions can be modeled as a walk along
the so-called circuits, the elementary, support-minimal difference vectors
retaining feasibility. The circuits contain valuable information on the
underlying application. Each step of a circuit walk is a meaningful, human-
interpretable step towards the new solution. This project aims to provide a
broad, comprehensive approach to the efficient construction of optimal circuit
walks in various settings. The main settings are circuit walks between two given
solutions, motivated by the need for gradual transitions in practice. Further,
circuit walks are a generalization of edge walks, and the corresponding circuit
diameters provide a fresh point of view on the polynomial Hirsch Conjecture.
Finally, augmentation along circuits is a generalization of the famous simplex
method and gives a new way to deal with degenerate polyhedra and to study the
existence of a polynomial pivot rule. The methods will combine applied graph
theory, polyhedral theory, mathematical programming, and complexity
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.