* 2006162
* CAREER: High Integrity Navigation for Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Grace Gao, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 517,473.00

The number of systems developed for applications including package delivery via
small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and self-driving cars, is growing. To
ensure safe and reliable positioning, it is critical to address not only
positioning accuracy, but also the confidence in accuracy, defined as integrity.
Most of the positioning and navigation studies for autonomous vehicles have
focused on only accuracy, but not integrity. However, navigating autonomous
vehicles equipped with relatively low-cost sensors in complex and rapidly
changing environments -- e.g., urban areas with Global Positioning System (GPS)
signal blockage -- poses great challenges compared to flying aircraft in the
open sky, where positioning integrity has been well addressed by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA)-regulated aviation industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to assess, monitor and improve
positioning integrity for autonomous vehicles, such as UAVs and self-driving
cars, and integrate the proposed research into education and outreach. The
project involves a novel positioning integrity assessment and monitoring
solution that is robust in GPS-challenged environments and is suitable for
navigation sensor fusion. The investigator will (1) derive a new algorithm to
directly assess and monitor GPS integrity in urban environments; (2) design an
integrity monitoring framework for GPS sensor fusion using camera vision, LiDAR
and inertial measurements; and (3) improve integrity by turning unwanted multi-
path signals into a useful navigational source based on physical interaction
with the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER development plan will
also integrate an education plan with the research goals by broadening
participation of under-represented groups, such as women, by fostering a female
researcher community through organizing female social events at technical
conferences; educating and informing the public about FAA rules and safety
issues regarding flying UAVs; and outreach to K-12 students by demonstrating the
results of the proposed research at the Illinois Engineering Open House and
leading hands-on activities for various school girl
camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.