* 2006410
* Computational Algebra and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Henry Schenck, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Many real world problems have a significant mathematical component. This project
uses computational algebra to attack such problems. The main themes are: (1)
Data Analysis, (2) Graphics, visualization, geometric modeling, (3) Computer
science and computational complexity. A main problem in Data Analysis is to
extract meaning from a massive dataset: imagine a dense, cloud of moving points.
One approach is to freeze the cloud at a moment in time, and then increase the
size of the individual points until nearby groups coalesce. Topological Data
Analysis uses sophisticated mathematical tools to study the problem, and has led
to insights into visual cortex activity, cancer pathology, and viral evolution.
Companies from Boeing to Pixar use computer graphics and geometric modeling in
applications ranging from analyzing turbulent fluid flow (air passage over a
plane's wing) to accurate simulations and virtual reality. Key mathematical
tools are splines, which provide a way of assembling a coherent big picture from
local pieces. A third theme of this project is the modeling of dynamic
processes, which often comes down to multiplying (massive) matrices many times
(a matrix is a rectangular array of numbers). Finding efficient ways to multiply
matrices is the topic of a subfield of Computer Science known as complexity
theory. The project builds on prior work of the PI using algebraic objects known
as permanents to provide insight into the problem. While at his previous
position at Iowa State, the PI partnered with the Iowa State Veterans Center to
provide extra math tutoring and support for student veterans, including an
intensive day long Math Boot Camp at the start of each semester. In this
project, he will develop similar programs at Auburn, with the first boot camp
planned for fall 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal revolves around a few
main themes: permanents, polytopal parameterizations, and persistent homology,
approximation theory and splines. The first group of topics is unified by
homological methods and simplicial complexes, and the second by the interplay of
algebra and discrete geometry; the objects of investigation are central players
in computational mathematics. The problems share three traits: they are of
importance in real world applications; subtle geometric or combinatorial data is
reflected algebraically; and they are computationally tractable. The project
will use the power of computational algebra to discover hidden connections
between important applied invariants and geometry, combinatorics, and algebra.
There are elegant characterizations of key invariants for applications (e.g.
dimension of the spline space for a polytopal subdivision, equations for
Wachspress parametric surfaces, the support locus of persistent homology) in
terms of algebra. The concrete and computational aspect of the problems means
they are ideal for involving graduate students and postdocs, and makes prospects
for progress excellent. In addition to scientific advances, the project will
result in development of specialized software, to be coauthored with students
and integrated into the NSF-sponsored Macaulay2 software
package.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.