* 2006384
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Compact Binary Formation with the First Gravitational Wave Detections
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Bangalore Sathyaprakash, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 249,793.00

The formation and evolution of binaries of compact astrophysical objects (black
holes and neutron stars) is an important and challenging problem in
astrophysics. Observational data of such systems comes from radio telescope
detections of binaries with at least one pulsating neutron star, or pulsar, and
from gravitational-wave observations of the final few seconds to minutes of the
lives of the binary, when they inspiral and merge. A research collaboration
between Johns Hopkins University and Pennsylvania State University will use
gravitational-wave observations to explore astrophysical models of compact
binaries, using statistical inference and machine learning. Among the specific
scientific topics to be addressed are the details of how compact binaries form,
the use of compact binary mergers to measure distances to sources far off in the
universe, and understanding the state of matter in the dense cores of neutron
stars. The phenomenal discoveries by the gravitational-wave detectors have
received a great deal of attention from the press and in social media. Black
holes, neutron stars and gravitational waves are topics of great interest to the
public, and have the potential to attract students in middle and high schools to
STEM subjects who would have otherwise chosen other alternatives. The
researchers will use the current surge of interest in these areas to inform
middle and high students of the excitement of research and discovery in the
forefront of physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will shed
light on evolutionary models of compact binaries using a catalog of binary
merger events observed by the LIGO and Virgo gravitational-wave detectors. More
specifically, the goal of the project is to discriminate between competing
evolutionary models of compact binaries (dynamical interactions in clusters,
evolution of isolated binaries, and primordial origin of binary black holes)
from the measured distributions of masses, spins and other properties of compact
object mergers. This study will help produce a map from the astrophysical models
to the bulk properties of the systems measured from gravitational wave
observations. Such maps, in combination with Bayesian inference and machine
learning, will be used to gain a deeper understanding of the astrophysics of
compact object binaries. The investigators will use compact binaries as accurate
measures of distance to obtain peculiar velocities of galaxies and clusters, 3-d
mapping of galaxies, and to characterize the gas, stellar and dark matter
content of galaxies, comparing the results with other approaches. Gravitational
wave observations are key to multi-messenger astronomy, which will help address
the origin questions, such as how and when black holes formed and how they
evolved, what constitutes the expansion history of the Universe, and what is the
state of matter in dense cores of neutron stars. This project advances the goals
of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.