* 2006284
* Functional stratification of sensory encoding in a biological gyroscope
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Bradley Dickerson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

Flying insects are among the most maneuverable animals on the planet, and must
rapidly integrate information from multiple senses to achieve fine-scale control
of locomotion. For example, flies combine input from the eyes and small,
dumbbell-shaped structures known as halteres to both maintain stability and
perform aerial maneuvers. The halteres are located behind the forewings and
evolved from the hindwings. The halteres are well-known as biological
gyroscopes, detecting body rotations that in turn trigger a number of
stabilization reflexes, including changes in wing motion. At their base, the
halteres possess hundreds of biological strain gauges, known as campaniform
sensilla, that provide the wing steering muscles with direct feedback each
wingstroke. Recent evidence suggests that the haltere is under active control
during flight, making it a multifunctional sensory organ that helps flies
perform maneuvers and still maintain their balance while in the air. However,
how the haltere accomplishes these dual roles, and how these roles relate to the
activity of the wing muscles, remains unclear. A more complete understanding of
the haltere’s role in flight control will provide insight into how this unique
sensory organ endows flies with their exquisite flight capacities. This project
involves a collaboration with the Morehead Planetarium that takes advantage of
the principal investigator’s extensive experience in informal education to
foster public dialogue through Carolina Science Cafés. Additionally,
undergraduates from underrepresented groups will be mentored in conducting
research throughout this project. Finally, the results from this research will
help develop micro air vehicles navigate complex
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
reveal the principles of sensory encoding and sensorimotor processing that flies
use in controlling the haltere, and thus, their aerial maneuvers. The research
will focus on the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, and combine new in vivo
imaging techniques with analysis approaches drawn from computational
neuroscience and muscle electrophysiology. Through expression of the
genetically-encoded, optical calcium sensor GCaMP, the activity of haltere
campaniform sensilla during visually-guided flight maneuvers will be directly
observed. These experiments will test the hypothesis that specific regions of
the haltere encode different aspects of visual motion, such as direction or
angular velocity. Then, reverse correlation analysis will be used to construct
quantitative models that test if these different regions are recruited in a
linear or nonlinear fashion during active maneuvers. Finally, simultaneous
calcium imaging and electrophysiology of the wing steering muscles will address
if the functional divisions of the wing muscles are derived from particular
regions of the haltere. Furthermore, this work will demonstrate how the
arrangement and location of mechanosensors acts as a filter for behaviorally
relevant stimuli. By taking an organismal approach, and linking the
micromechanics of sensory structures with flight behavior, these experiments
will make clear the selective pressures that led to the haltere’s
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.