* 2006274
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research:Heterogeneous Ultra Low Power Accelerator for Wearable Biomedical Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Houman Homayoun, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 87,054.00

With the rapid advances in small, low-cost wearable computing technologies,
there is a tremendous opportunity to develop personal health monitoring devices
capable of continuous vigilant monitoring of physiological signals. Wearable
biomedical devices have the potential to reduce the morbidity, mortality, and
economic cost associated with many chronic diseases by enabling early
intervention and preventing costly hospitalizations. These low power systems
require to have the capacity to provide fast and accurate processing and
interpretation of vast amounts of data and generate smart alarms only when
warranted. The objective of this project is to build the foundation of the next
generation of heterogeneous biomedical signal processing platforms that can
address the current and future generation energy-efficiency requirements and
computational demands. The PIs start with understanding the specific
characteristics of emerging biomedical signal and imaging applications on off-
the-shelf embedded low power multicore CPU, GPU and FPGA platforms to accurately
understand the trade-offs they offer and the bottlenecks they have. Based on
these results, the PIs will design and architect a domain-specific manycore
accelerator in hardware and integrate it with an off-the-shelf embedded
processor that together combine performance, scalability, programmability, and
power efficiency requirements for these applications. The PIs will implement the
proposed heterogeneous architecture in hardware and will evaluate its
performance and power efficiency with a number of real-life biomedical workloads
including seizure detection, handheld ultrasound spectral Doppler and imaging,
tongue drive assistive device and prosthetic hand control
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed interdisciplinary research effort
could inspire and enable new approaches to healthcare monitoring, and can
significantly impact several fields including human-centered cyber-physical
systems, cyber-security, mobile communications, bioinformatics and applications
that require high performance and energy efficient embedded computing from
different sensors. The proposed benchmark, characterization, and software-
hardware computing framework will be freely shared and broadly disseminated
among colleagues in related disciplines. Research results will be integrated in
graduate and undergraduate courses offered by the investigators in both
campuses. The PIs are active in several campus-wide and national organizations
that work to attract and retain members of under-represented groups to engage in
research and complete graduate degrees in science and engineering.