* 2006244
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Hannah Epstein, Epstein, Hannah
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Here, the Fellow will explore microbial
interactions within island ecosystems to shed light on coral reef health and
function, which relies on both ocean- and land-based processes. Tropical islands
and their proximity to adjacent reefs provide opportunities to explore the
critical link between these seemingly different habitats. Invasive rats affect
island and reef health through the predation of native seabird eggs and chicks,
which disrupts the natural flow of nutrients to the reef. If removed, seabird
recovery will restore the transfer of nutrients. As facilitators of this
transferal, microbes may hold the key to determining a link between these
habitats. Using clues from soil, seawater and coral microbiomes, this project
will capitalize on a planned rat eradication event occurring on the island of
Tetiaroa, French Polynesia, to assess the effects of a land-based conservation
initiative across the land-sea interface. This project further supports
education and diversity through student mentorship, while also creating outreach
opportunities among local communities that will inform them of the scientific
and social importance of the proposed work. Microbes play important roles in
nutrient cycling and provision, and the signature of either disruption or
reinstatement of the natural flow of nutrients is likely reflected in the
microbial community. Shifts in the presence, abundance and function of nutrient-
utilizing microbes across all connected habitats can provide evidence of a land-
sea link. Thirty island and reef sites around Tetiaroa will be targeted for
microbial sampling in soil, seawater and coral before, during and after rat
eradication to determine the impacts on microbial communities and their
functional role in nutrient cycling. Compositional and metagenomic analyses
paired with macro-ecological surveys will highlight impacts of rat eradication
on marine and terrestrial recovery across scales of biological organization from
microbes to entire ecosystems. This fellowship will support the Fellowâ€™s
research, career and outreach objectives through advancement in analytical
skills and scientific knowledge, mentorship and teaching, and local community
engagement. Through the exploration of cross-ecosystem linkages, this research
will expand on ecological theory by bridging the land-sea gap, while providing a
key foundation for building policy and promoting simplified coral reef
conservation initiatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.