* 2006752
* In Situ Formation of Short Period Terrestrial Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Thomas Quinn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2024
* USD 451,334.00

A team of scientists at the University of Washington will perform computer
simulations of the formation of rocky planets around other stars. The idea that
rocky planets in our own Solar System were formed from much smaller bodies
explains many features of the Solar System. They will investigate whether this
same idea can successfully explain the formation of the planetary systems found
around other stars. Their results will address whether our own Solar System is
an outlier in how it formed. The study will focus on the systems of planets very
close to low mass stars, which are the most common of type of planetary system
discovered. This program will allow university students to gain experience in
high performance computing and the handling of “big data”. Some of the work will
be done in small projects for undergraduate students participating in the
University of Washington's Pre-Major in Astronomy Program (PreMAP). PreMAP
provides under-represented students in STEM with research opportunities in
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, planetary Systems with Tightly-packed
Inner Planets (STIPs) are the most statistically well-represented type of
exoplanetary system, making them an excellent testbed for planet formation
theories. However, planet formation models designed to reproduce the structure
of our own Solar System typically fail to explain the seemingly exotic
population of STIPs. A key component of the standard model of terrestrial planet
formation is the growth from approximately kilometer size bodies to full sized
planets, a regime where the physics is dominated by gravitational interactions
and collisions between bodies. The team will use a recently enhanced, highly
scalable particle code to follow the evolution of planetesimals on short period
orbits as they interact gravitationally and collide. The results from these
simulations will then be passed to a symplectic particle code to follow the late
stages of planet formation for many millions of dynamical times. Using
planetesimal compositions motivated by protoplanetary disk chemistry models,
compositions of the terrestrial planets that result will be predicted, allowing
future observations observations of the atmospheric composition of STIPs with
James Webb Space Telescope to validate or falsify the possibility of in situ
formation. Additionally, the gravitational influence of an outer giant companion
during the accretion process will be considered, which may provide ways to infer
the presence of an undetected giant companion from the orbital and compositional
properties of the terrestrial planets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.