* 2006299
* CAREER: Engineering Heat Conduction Through Alloys and Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Asegun Henry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 10/31/2021
* USD 152,832.00

The research objective in this project is to use atomistic level modeling
techniques to understand heat conduction through alloys and interfaces and then
use the insights gained, to guide the design or identification of
materials/systems with unprecedented properties. The educational objective is to
increase scientific literacy around atomic level vibrations/heat transfer, since
heat transfer plays a fundamental role in our energy infrastructure. The
educational approach is to create a new program targeted at underrepresented
minority high school students that stimulates a fascination with atomic level
vibrations/heat transfer via sonification of MD simulation data (e.g., the
conversion of atomic vibrations into audible sounds), which will then be used to
make music. The outreach program will recruit African-American and women
undergraduates, high school music teachers and high school students each summer,
via two outreach programs administered by the Georgia Tech center for education.
The participants will build an understanding of both atomic motions and coding
as they work together to create a mobile app. The students and general public
users will use the mobile app to make music from the sounds generated by
sonification of each element on the periodic table, which will provide a new way
for students to learn chemistry. The program will facilitate long term mentoring
relationships between the PI and participants, which will both strengthen and
diversify the underrepresented minority STEM pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat
conduction through non-electrically conductive media is dominated by the energy
transferred between atoms due to their motions. In solids, these motions are
vibrations, referred to as phonons, and virtually all knowledge of phonon heat
conduction is understood through what is termed the phonon gas model (PGM). The
PGM works well in many situations, but the idea itself breaks down in disordered
materials, where one cannot rigorously define phonon velocities. Recently, the
PI developed a new molecular dynamics (MD) based formalism that presents an
alternative picture to the PGM, where transport is described by normal mode
correlation, instead of phonon quasi-particle scattering. Most importantly, the
new formalism provides a more general view of phonon transport that allows one
to treat any class of materials and exploit new features that are inconceivable
from the PGM perspective.&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging this new perspective, the
proposal focuses on (1) studying semiconductor and insulator alloys to
understand heat conduction through non-propagating vibrational modes. The
purpose of this is to determine if it is possible to identify or engineer an
alloy that has higher thermal conductivity than one of its constituent pure
crystalline compounds. Such a material would be unprecedented, because the
current theory suggests this is impossible, yet experimental data and
predictions based on the PI?s new formalism suggest otherwise. (2) The proposal
also focuses on studying semiconductor and insulator interfaces to understand
the roles of different types of vibrational modes and find the most useful
descriptor that can be used to identify/engineer highly conductive interfaces.
The purpose of this is to determine if it is possible for an interface to have a
conductance higher than the PGM limit, where one simply assumes all vibrational
modes transmit 100% of their energy. Exceeding the PGM limit would be
unprecedented, because the current theory says it is impossible, yet new
experimental data and predictions by the PIs new formalism suggest it is. If
thermal interface conductances beyond the PGM limit and alloys with thermal
conductivities higher than their pure compounds can be achieved, it could have a
major impact on energy applications involving heat dissipation, such as multi-
junction solar cells, LEDs and power electronics.