* 2006763
* SHF: Small: Printed Computer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Rakesh Kumar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,740.00

While computing appears to be ubiquitous in today's society and economy, a large
number of important domains are still minimally touched. Consider the over
10-trillion dollar fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) market, for example.
Disposables such as packaged foods, beverages, toiletries, over-the-counter
drugs, and other consumables are sold largely without any embedded computing
devices that could help with identification and tracking, quality monitoring,
brand authentication, or interactivity. The primary reason why FMCG domains as
well as domains such as low-end healthcare (e.g., bandages and wound dressings),
agriculture, and environment have not seen much penetration of computing is the
cost limitation of today's silicon-based computing systems. Silicon-based
systems continue to cost much more than the cost requirements of these domains.
For example, item-level tagging of several FMCG products must have costs
equivalent to that of a barcode, which silicon-based systems cannot meet due to
the high manufacturing, testing, and assembly costs of such systems. Printed
electronics has emerged as promising technology to target such application
domains. Printing technologies often rely on maskless, portable, and additive
manufacturing methods which can greatly reduce costs and production timelines.
Such technologies also lead to devices that are conformable and nontoxic. This
work will focus on making this method cheap, reliable and flexible. The outcomes
can ensure electronic tagging of all components and parts of the manufacturing
economy. Students will be trained in a unique and up-and-coming
interdisciplinary area at the intersection of architecture, circuits, and
materials science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Prior work on printing active
electronics has largely focused on fabricating simple circuits. No prior work
has explored the architecture, design, or optimization space of printed computer
systems, e.g., microprocessors and accelerators. It is not surprising since such
exploration requires Process Design Kits (PDKs) that have started becoming
available only recently. A synthesis and physical design standard cell library
is a pre-requisite for an architectural exploration. This project will develop
standard cell libraries for Electrolyte Gated FET and CNT-thin film transistor
printed technologies calibrated with fabrication measurements. These libraries
(to be made public for broader use) are critical for design space exploration of
printed computer systems. The investigator will develop and prototype different
microarchitectural building blocks of a printed computer system. Building blocks
to be developed and prototyped include instruction and data memory, ALUs, etc.,
for printed microprocessors, and decision trees and perceptrons for printed
machine learning accelerators. These building blocks will then be used, in
conjunctions with the developed standard cell libraries, to explore the design
space of printed computer systems. Expected outcome of the exploration includes
instruction set architecture and microarchitectural design principles for
printed microprocessors and accelerators, and optimizations to minimize area and
power of printed hardware. Overall, the research will help democratize hardware
fabrication making computing ubiquitous even in disposable ultra-low-cost
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.