* 2006359
* AF: Small:  Complexity of Representations for Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Paul Beame, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

The use of computers to store data, and calculate results based on that data, is
familiar. However, people also use computers to reason; that is, to take what is
known to be true about the world and infer logical consequences of these
properties. Sometimes, information about the world is measured in terms of
probabilities rather than certainties. In this case, the goal is to infer the
probability that a particular property of the world follows as a consequence;
i.e., computers are used for probabilistic inference as well as logical
inference. Finally, there is the process of using observations about the world
to infer properties of the world that are not directly measurable. All of these
kinds of inference have become increasingly widespread and important
computational applications, including critically important ones of verifying the
correctness of software and hardware. In these inference problems, one can
represent the information for inference in a variety of different ways and, in
developing inference methods, one must consider both the complexity of computing
these representations and the efficiency of making inferences from them. This
project focuses on analyzing specific representations and associated inference
methods that have the potential to improve the overall efficiency of inference
and permit efficient inference in a wider variety of situations where it is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze the strengths and
limitations of logical inference based on semi-algebraic representations, which
are representations in which information is expressed as polynomial
inequalities. In particular, the project will analyze semi-algebraic reasoning
as a higher-degree generalization of cutting-planes reasoning and as a dynamic
generalization of sum-of squares reasoning, which already captures the best
algorithms known for a wide range of NP-hard optimization problems, such as
those based on semi-definite programming. This project will also focus on the
analysis and methods for sum-product-complement networks, a representation that
permits efficient weighted-model counting, a cornerstone of methods for exact
probabilistic inference. This will build on methods for less powerful sum-
product networks and branching programs, which sum-product-complement networks
generalize. Finally, this project will develop stronger and more general
analytical tools for understanding the capabilities of algorithms for inductive
inference that are themselves expressed as restricted branching
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.