* 2006011
* Using Guided Nature Experiences To Engage 18-25 Year-Olds in STEM and Climate Science Content
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mark Scallion, National Audubon Society
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,080,123.00

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that over 41 million people connect
to nature through birding. Learning about birds in their natural environments
offers opportunities for informal engagement in STEM by a broad range of
individuals and groups. Birders often engage in scientific data gathering and
analyses, geolocation and remote sensing, and phenology. They also become aware
of ecological changes in bird habitats and migratory patterns due to rising
temperatures and climate-related events like sea level rise, droughts, fires,
and extreme weather. As such, the birding community is an ideal network to
better understand and communicate the impacts of climatological changes on bird
populations to the public. With this Innovations in Development project, the
National Audubon Society will develop a new avian-focused, conservation and
climate science community science curriculum for its Nature Centers, and test
the effectiveness of the curriculum in educating the public about avian-focused
conservation and climatological changes through guided nature experiences.
Birding can serve as a pivotal entrée for young people into STEM fields and
careers. Through its programs and partnerships, Audubon will leverage its
national network to ensure that through this project a more diverse group of
voices – particularly young adults and young adults of color – become involved
in asking critical questions and developing solutions to address important
environmental issues of the future. If successful, the broader impacts of this
project on capacity building and public engagement could be far-reaching and
long-lasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the three-year project duration, Audubon
will bring educators from its nationwide network of thirty-four Nature Centers
(including urban, suburban, and rural sites), together with over 510 young
adults (ages 18-25) from its network of college campus chapters. An evidence-
based curriculum and community science activities will be created and tested,
relying heavily on a team of experts in ornithology, climate science research,
STEM curriculum design, diversity, and informal science education. College
students will advise on the design of content and activities to effectively
interest and engage young adults. These students will be recruited from the new
Audubon Campus Chapters Program, which includes 111 college and university
campuses – among them, 19 Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)
and other Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs). The target population will be
surveyed to also understand their current and likely participation in guided
nature experiences and knowledge base in climate science. Current best practices
in guided nature experiences will be gathered from across the Audubon network.
The implementation efforts will result in a national STEM model, with train-the-
trainer guides and workshops for informal science educators and public
engagement opportunities focused on improving the state and condition of avian
habitats and communities through climate science research. An external
evaluation will be conducted and will include data collection methods such as
retrospective pre and post surveys, semi-structured interviews, focus groups,
and an embedded assessment to determine impact. The findings will be used to
iteratively refine the evidence-based curriculum and measure STEM learning
outcomes for the guided nature experience participants. The evaluation will
address four areas: (1) fidelity of program implementation to promote
accountability; (2) formative evaluation to understand needs and interests of
young adults (ages 18-25), and subsequently inform program design; (3) outcomes
for Center educators, to inform iterative improvement; and (4) outcomes for
program participants, to contribute to the growing knowledge base on effective
practices for STEM learning in informal settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.