* 2006739
* SHF: Small: Perception-Based Analytics For Semiconductor Production and Test Data
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Li-Chung Wang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 461,103.00

Big data analytics is transforming multiple industries by impacting how
companies operate their businesses. The semiconductor industry, a key driver for
the high-growth technology sector, is in the vanguard of this development. A
large part of data-analytics practice in the semiconductor industry relies on
workflows that involve human-in-the-loop steps to make an expert decision. How
to automate those human-in-the-loop steps remains a fundamental challenge, and
requires capturing the decision-making perception of an expert into software.
This project will develop a set of novel methods and software tools that provide
the capability for a domain expert to effectively model their perception in an
analytics workflow. This capability enables automation of the workflow. Workflow
automation not only enhances productivity but also reduces the chance of human
error and, consequently, improves the overall quality of an operation. The
experimental framework developed in the project will serve as an education
platform for undergraduate and graduate students with diverse backgrounds. The
platform will support training across multiple fields, including semiconductor
production and test, machine learning, and software engineering. Such training
provides a broader choice of career paths for students and prepares them with
skills to meet future demands in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data analytics
in the semiconductor industry largely involves prescriptive analytics, where
analytics results are often used to support decision making that demands
accountability. Today, there remains a substantial gap between what data-
analytics and machine-learning technologies can provide and what is needed for
automating a prescriptive analytics workflow. This project will fill the gap by
developing a perception-based analytics software component which enables domain
experts to model their perception into an automated workflow. The project
addresses two fundamental challenges in such modeling. The first concerns the
lack of sufficient data samples when training a model. The second concerns the
requirements for robustness when using such a model. To address the first
challenge, the project will pursue a novel approach that enables learning a
model in one domain via learning a model in another domain that has sufficient
data samples readily available for training. To address the second challenge,
the project will provide an innovative approach enabling integration of multiple
learning methods to achieve a required robustness level. The values and impacts
of the research results will be demonstrated based on data collected from actual
semiconductor product lines and through experiments that reflect actual
industrial settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.