* 2006808
* Semiparametric Methods for Data Assimilation and Uncertainty Quantification
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tyrus Berry, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2024
* USD 233,747.00

There is a growing demand in many scientific disciplines for efficient tools to
automatically learn models and make predictions from limited noisy observations.
For these predictions to be actionable, they must also have quantifiable
uncertainty, and be robust to model misspecification. This is particularly
relevant in light of events such as the COVID-19 pandemic, where models have to
be constantly adapted to include new phenomena such as unreported and
asymptomatic cases and constantly evolving social distancing rules and
compliance. Other applications include large complex systems such as weather
forecasting and social network dynamics where first-principles models are
powerful but have difficulty capturing the full range of phenomena involved. The
semiparametric framework will help address the growing problem of un-modeled
phenomena by allowing existing models to be automatically merged with model-free
methods that leverage data to learn a correction to the model in order to match
the observed data. The new tools will allow application to a class of high
dimensional problems with spatial structure, such as geosystems problems, social
networks, and global disease dynamics. Beyond improving forecasting, the
semiparametric approach will include accurate uncertainty quantification, which
is critical in these application domains. The investigator will train a graduate
student and undergraduate students who will be able to carry this research
forward, as well as developing and disseminating this key expertise. These
students will learn to apply both state-of-the-art and the newly developed
methods which will prepare them for future work in applied and computational
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will develop semiparametric
modeling techniques that optimally leverage the strengths of parametric (model
based) and nonparametric (model-free or data-driven) methods. Specifically, the
semiparametric framework allows the flexible nonparametric models to fill in the
gaps and correct the low-dimensional model error in a parametric model. The
framework employs an ensemble of states in the parametric model to represent the
uncertainty in a forecast or state estimate, while a full probability
distribution is estimated for the nonparametric model. At each filtering or
forecasting step, the ensemble is updated by sampling individual corrections
from the model error distribution estimated by the nonparametric model. These
sampled corrections will automatically correct biases in the model and inflate
the uncertainty when necessary in order to match reality. The evolution of the
nonparametric model will typically need to be conditional to the high-
dimensional state of the parametric model, which current methods to do not
allow. In other words, information must flow in both directions: the
nonparametric model corrects the parametric model, but is also informed by the
current state of the parametric model. In order to overcome this crucial
challenge, supervised dimensionality reduction techniques will be combined with
a novel method of learning mappings between non-diffeomorphic spaces. This will
allow a Bayesian update of the nonparametric state estimate based on the learned
projection of the parametric state. The research includes a novel higher order
unscented ensemble forecast that will form the basis for a higher order Kalman
filter. These advances will make the best use of available computation
resources, since the higher order ensemble forecasting and filtering methods can
scale up from small to large ensembles as resources allow. The higher order
methods will improve accuracy and uncertainty quantification by estimating
higher order moments of the state estimate and the forecast. For the ensemble
forecast, a novel multivariate quadrature method will be applied that uses
rank-1 tensor decompositions of the higher moments as quadrature nodes. For the
Kalman update, higher order equations will be used based on a maximum entropy
closure of the moment equations derived from the Kushner equation (which fully
describes the true solution). The advances will effectively use data to learn a
model-free correction to a parametric model, simultaneously alleviating model
error and the curse-of-dimensionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.