* 2006286
* AF: Small: Distortion and the Quality of Agent Preferences in Social Choice, Facility Location, and Other Settings with Limited Information
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Elliot Anshelevich, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2024
* USD 361,653.00

The main goal of this project is to design and analyze algorithms for various
settings with limited information. Settings where only limited information is
available, while choosing the best outcomes depends on the underlying
(unavailable) truth, are common. For example, consider social choice (i.e.,
voting) settings in which the goal is to choose outcomes which benefit the
voters as much as possible, but the only information available is the limited
preferences of the voters for the outcomes, not the strength of those
preferences or the exact benefits of the outcomes for the voters. The same
occurs in matching problems (such as matching students with schools, applicants
with jobs, or available kidneys with patients), clustering and facility location
(such as choosing where to place new post offices or other services), and many
other settings with the presence of multiple independent agents with individual
interests, including project assignment and economic markets. In all these
settings, the goal of the algorithm designer is to choose outcomes maximizing
happiness, the welfare of society, fairness, as well as other objectives.
Unfortunately, these settings also include social interactions where eliciting
the true detailed structure of the agent preferences and utilities may be
difficult, although obtaining a basic understanding of it is feasible. This
project aims to develop algorithms and techniques for these settings to provide
outcomes which are close to the true optimum (the one obtained if the algorithm
were omniscient and knew all the information about the agent preferences and
benefits), while only using very limited information. Such algorithms would
allow better outcomes for many settings mentioned above, or include guarantees
that much better outcome choice would not be possible, even with much more data
and information, which should increase the satisfaction of the users with the
resulting outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the settings
mentioned above containing many independent agents with individual preferences.
It will develop algorithms for these settings which will take as input only
limited information about the agent preferences, but will produce outcomes with
provable approximation guarantees as compared with optimum solutions based on
the full (unavailable) agent preferences. Approximation algorithms formed in
this project could be used to suggest new protocols, which would not only
optimize some notion of fairness (as is common in such settings), or focus on
computing only optimum solutions regardless of sacrificing other desirable
properties, but would instead have provable guarantees on the quality of the
resulting (non-optimal) solutions. The main issues this project will focus on
are as follows. (1) For the settings mentioned above, this project will perform
a careful study of which types of information about agent preferences allow
algorithms with performance close to that of the omniscient optimum, and which
types of information make such performance impossible, as well as quantify the
tradeoffs between how much information is known and the quality of the resulting
outcomes. This project will consider ordinal information, threshold information,
being able to select which part of the true information is known, and many other
types of limited information. Understanding such tradeoffs allows the knowledge
of in which settings it is worth working hard to obtain a little bit of extra
information, compared to settings in which the given limited information already
yields good solutions. (2) This project is especially interested in forming
algorithms which approximate multiple objectives simultaneously, including
social cost, fairness objectives, the diversity of selected outcomes, and
stability of solutions. (3) This project will also devote a significant amount
of effort to studying how agent self-interest interacts with the quality of
resulting solutions and what is possible to obtain using specific types of
limited information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.