* 2006998
* CNS Core: Small: Enabling Privacy-Preserving Routing-on-Context in IoT
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Tao Shu, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 479,889.00

Over the past 50 years, Internet has evolved from initially a data network
connecting only computers to an Internet of Things (IoT) - a global cyber-
physical network that connects not only computers but also things in the
physical world. Compared with computers, the connected things are closely
coupled with their physical environment (a.k.a. the context) through sensing. As
a result, IoT applications are typically context-oriented, i.e., being aware of
and sensitive to the physical circumstances that form the interest of the
application, while conventional computer-based Internet applications are context
agnostic. Despite the distinct disparities between connected things and
computers and the fact that Internet traffic is shifting from computer
communication to context-oriented IoT applications, surprisingly, today's
Internet routing principle has little change than the long-standing
connectivity-based routing, characterized as connecting a specific source node
with a specific destination node. Context-oriented IoT applications do not
perform well under this traditional routing model, because what these
applications are essentially targeting on is the application context, rather
than a specific destination node. To better support IoT in the future Internet,
this project seeks to establish a new efficient and privacy-preserving routing
technique that is based on the targeted application context but does not
disclose this information. This project will provide the urgently-needed
solution to protect the privacy of tens of millions of IoT users while
supporting their efficient usage of IoT, thus making a deep impact on the
nation's economy and social well-being. This project will also carry out a
comprehensive education plan to broaden its impact, with an emphasis on
underrepresented and minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will
advance the state of the art in privacy-preserving context-based routing. The PI
will develop new tools and techniques for routing in the encrypted space,
whereby geographic routes are computed and represented directly based upon
encrypted location information. In particular, two novel techniques will be
developed: (i) a novel space-filling-curve-based method for encrypting the
space; (ii) a Kademlia-tree-based routing technique to achieve efficient and
privacy-preserving geographic routing in the encrypted space. The project will
also establish the efficiency-privacy tradeoff for the proposed methods under
various special conditions such as mobility and different attack
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.