* 2006589
* AF: CIF: Small: Communication complexity techniques beyond classical information theory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Amit Chakrabarti, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 497,639.00

Communication is central to modern computing systems, which involve data
distributed across multiple entities. Developing communication-efficient
algorithmic strategies (protocols) to solve problems featuring distributed data
is therefore an important practical goal. Correspondingly, communication
complexity---which studies the possibilities and limitations of such protocols
---is important to foundational research in computer science. In fact, the
influence of communication complexity runs much deeper, because the operation of
an algorithm can itself be seen as a careful orchestration of information flow
from input bits to output bits, which gives rise to a communication protocol
between abstract entities. Key questions in communication complexity are: how
much efficiency is gained by allowing the communicating parties to (a) use
randomized strategies that may err with some small probability, or (b) use a
complex pattern of interactive communication as opposed to a simple one? This
project will address some such questions, seeking theorems that provably require
fresh mathematical ideas, forcing an expansion of our mathematical arsenal. The
project aims to grow the foundations of communication complexity either through
novel lower bounds or by obtaining surprising new protocols that may teach us
algorithmic lessons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viewing communication as information
flow and quantifying this using the machinery of Shannon entropy and Kullback-
Leibler divergence is a powerful technique for proving lower bounds on the
communication required to accomplish a task. This project's central goal is to
make progress on problems where this general paradigm provably cannot work. The
investigator has identified some concrete communication tasks where a
deterministic solution plausibly requires considerably more resources than a
randomized solution, and proposes to prove such separations by developing a more
delicate quantification of information flow that is attuned to deterministic
communication protocols. Additionally, the project will study a class of
communication problems involving parties with asymmetric knowledge (the so-
called Arthur-Merlin setting, where one super-player knows all of the
distributed input but is not blindly trusted by the other, regular, players),
where classical information theory fails to capture the communication from the
super-player.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.