* 2006066
* Theoretical Studies in Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Stuart Shapiro, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 510,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
LIGO/Virgo Scientific Collaboration has compiled an impressive list of detected
gravitational wave (GW) events consisting of several dozen binary black hole
(BHBH) mergers, a couple of binary neutron star (NSNS) mergers and several
likely black hole--neutron star (BHNS) mergers. These detections mark the
beginning of the era of GW astronomy. This research project spans several
problems involving general relativity (GR), the generation of GWs, relativistic
hydrodynamics, and relativistic magnetohydrodynamics. A common thread uniting
the different theoretical topics is the crucial role of gravitation, especially
relativistic gravitation. Compact objects (black holes, neutron stars and white
dwarfs) provide the principal forum, and the dynamics of matter in a strong
gravitational field is a major theme. Some of the topics for investigation
include the inspiral and coalescence of compact binaries (BHBHs, NSNSs and
BHNSs); the generation of GWs from merging binaries and other promising
astrophysical sources, and their counterpart electromagnetic (EM) signals;
gravitational collapse; the stability of rotating, relativistic stars and the
evolution and final fate of unstable stars; gamma-ray burst sources (GRBs); the
formation and growth of supermassive black holes (SMBHs) from the
magnetorotational collapse of supermassive stars (SMSs) and other scenarios;
circumbinary disks around merging binary SMBHs in the cores of galaxies and
quasars; and the profiles and observable signatures of dark matter around SMBHs
in galaxy cores, including the Milky Way, and the dynamical evolution of
clusters containing DM, stars and SMBHs. The results have important implications
for astronomical observations, including those collected by and/or planned for
GW interferometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of these topics represent long-
standing, fundamental problems in theoretical physics requiring large-scale
computation for solution. Hence the approach involves to a significant degree
large-scale simulations on supercomputers, in addition to analytical modeling.
The key tool will be the robust and well-tested Illinois general relativistic,
magnetohydrodynamic (GRMHD) code. The simulations solve Einstein's field
equations of GR for gravity coupled to the equations of relativistic MHD for the
fluid and Maxwell's equations for the EM fields. These equations constitute
highly nonlinear, coupled partial differential equations in 3+1 dimensions that
are solved by finite-differencing. The Illinois GRMHD code employs the
Baumgarte-Shapiro-Shibata-Nakamura (BSSN) technique with moving puncture gauge
conditions and adaptive moving mesh refinement to solve the field equations and
a high-resolution, shock capturing scheme for the MHD. The problems to be
tackled comprise both initial value and evolution computations and treat vacuum
spacetimes containing black holes, as well as spacetimes containing realistic
matter sources, magnetic fields and both EM and neutrino radiation
("multimessenger astronomy"). The research and outreach activities supported by
this grant help promote the use of computers and visualization tools at all
levels of education, as well as the public awareness of some the latest and most
exciting developments in gravitational physics and
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.