* 2006355
* Workshop: A New Synthesis for the Science of Science
* SBE,SMA
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Aaron Clauset, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 01/31/2023
* USD 40,418.00

The goal of this workshop is to formulate a new synthesis of the "science of
science" that sets an agenda for developing and validating causal understandings
of the origins of social and epistemic inequalities, and their consequences for
knowledge production. New scientific knowledge comes from the collective and
linked efforts of thousands of researchers working within and across
disciplines. The makeup of this scientific workforce is known to shape what
scientific discoveries are made, and its social structure is complex, evolving,
and increasingly interdisciplinary. However, inequalities within science are
both pervasive and persistent, and these appear across both the individual and
organizational levels of the academy. The "new synthesis" this workshop aims to
produce will help align a diverse set of research communities toward specific
questions related to the causes and consequences of social and epistemic
inequalities in the production of knowledge. A likely outcome of the workshop is
writing a collective agenda-setting perspective piece that presents these ideas
to the broader community, which will also help guide policy makers and funders
as to what is known and unknown about the casual structures that limit
scientific progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary workshop will
bring together experts from a diverse set of communities to engage specific
questions of identifying, debating, and developing evidence-based policies that
resolve genuine inequalities of opportunity in science, in order to increase the
pace and diversity of scientific discoveries. Progress in this direction
requires developing a new synthesis in the area of the "science of science," to
specifically develop a causal understanding of the social, competitive, and
structural factors that drive these inequalities and make them so persistent.
The complex and dynamic structure of the ecosystem of scientists, organizations,
and incentives has inhibited past efforts to unravel this causal structure. By
convening a diverse set of accomplished scholars all studying the science of
science from different perspectives, this workshop seeks to formulate a new and
integrated vision for how interdisciplinary research, in combination with modern
digital infrastructure (including bibliographic databases, digital censuses of
fields, and the powerful tools of causal inference and machine learning), can
break through the past barriers to create a genuinely scientific understanding
of the scientific ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.