* 2006886
* RI: Small: Exploiting Symmetries of Decision-Theoretic Planning for Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Lantao Liu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The project aims at making breakthroughs in AI planning theories that directly
affect the accuracy and efficiency of autonomous robots' basic motion and
coordination. These advances will play an important role for enhancing the
systems' resilience to extreme disturbances in unstructured environments.
Specifically, an important focus of this research is to gain a deeper
understanding of the interrelationship between model "symmetries" and various
performance characteristics in decision-theoretic planning. Traditionally, study
of model symmetries belongs to the field of group theory. This research is based
on the intuition that autonomous systems acting in real-world environments
follow physics laws, and many systems studied in physics show some form of
symmetry. Model symmetries in planning, decision-making, and multi-agent
coordination domains can be immensely beneficial for designing efficient solving
mechanisms to tackle problems with large computational and communication
complexities. The results of this project will enhance the autonomy and
intelligence of many mobile robot platforms that perform challenging outdoor
missions such as environmental monitoring and surveillance, search and rescue,
and other applications of societal importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research re-thinks the modeling methods of decision-theoretic planning by
examining an important class of group-theoretic mechanisms and the possibilities
for utilizing them to boost existing solutions to many planning, decision making
and coordination problems. Identifying the symmetric properties during the
modeling process will help reduce search space and minimize the redundancy that
often leads to drastic inefficiencies in computation and communication. By
carefully exploiting the symmetric structures of not only the continuous vehicle
motion transformation, but also the discrete vehicle state transition,
principled frameworks that synthesize various elegant symmetries will be
designed, and new models, theoretical analyses, as well as implementation
algorithms will be developed. The project will seek improvements related to
algorithm convergence, solution quality/accuracy, uncertainty tractability, and
system distributability (for multi-robot systems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.