* 2006994
* AF: Small: High-dimensional geometry and probability for efficient inference
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Luis Rademacher, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

A fundamental challenge of this time is inference, that is the extraction of
information from data. A particular challenge from the algorithmic perspective
is the curse of dimensionality. This involves the exponential explosion of
computational cost as the number of features of the data grows. The project will
advance the understanding of data with many features and provide new tools for
data summarization. It has a high potential of leading to the development of new
practical algorithms to extract information from data. The main educational
outcome of the project will be to train PhD students in theoretical computer
science and to provide research experience and mentoring to undergraduate
students. The project will enrich the experience of PhD students by funding
their attendance to prestigious workshops on the foundations of data science and
other aspects of theoretical computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will design new tools for efficient inference and solidify understanding of
existing tools. The focus will be on tensor methods, deconvolution and convex
optimization. The underlying theme is the use of ideas from high-dimensional
probability, and discrete and convex geometry. The rationale for these choices
is twofold. Firstly, the research team is highly qualified in those fields.
Secondly, those foundational fields provide some of the most powerful tools
available to understand high-dimensional data. Within the broader topics of the
project, this project will focus on (1) Frank-Wolfe methods in optimization, (2)
blind and non-blind deconvolution and the interplay with tensor methods and
parameter estimation for Gaussian mixture models, and (3) geometric tools to
describe and summarize the shape of data. The project will provide insight into
well-recognized challenges. While the questions are challenging, in recent years
there has been steady progress on them, such as new insights into tensor
methods. A specific intellectual opportunity is the identification of the right
tools in high-dimensional probability and discrete and convex geometry that
provide insight into the design of new algorithms for inference and data
analysis. The proposed work on the foundations of data science and optimization
has connections with random polytopes, random matrices, high-dimensional
probability and discrete and convex geometry. The proposed work is expected to
provide more instances of "cross-pollination," where theoretical tools can aid
the design of new algorithms and the algorithmic approach provides new questions
and motivations to theoretical fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.