* 2006394
* SHF: Small: Synthesis of Complex Deep Neural Networks on Distributed Resource-Constrained Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yu-Hen Hu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,867.00

Deep neural network (DNN) machine learning algorithms have become significantly
complex in order to address challenges in modern Information Technology
applications such as smart city, autonomous driving, pervasive health care,
among others. This complexity necessitates execution on high-end computing
platforms which typically reside in a cloud infrastructure. Such applications
rely on simple Internet of Things (IoT) devices, such as sensors, to gather
data, which typically transfer their data via network to the cloud
infrastructure for DNN processing and then receive back an inference. However,
such an approach is not scalable to the billions of IoT devices that are
projected in the near future. In addition, it cannot work when the network
infrastructure is unavailable, and may not allow customization to learn from
individual needs or for specific environments. In this project, new techniques
will be investigated to directly deploy complex DNNs onto simple IoT devices
which work in parallel, with the primary goal to perform an inference task as
fast as possible. Technology developed in this project will enable rapid
development of smart IoT devices, which can serve as fundamental building blocks
of next generation smart services. The research outcomes will be disseminated
through intellectual property filing, publication, lectures, and software
distribution. They will also be integrated as new curriculum materials into
existing courses. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the
research activities, with an effort to recruit from women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research activities include: (1)
exploring a new methodology to synthesize a complex DNN as a collection of
smaller DNNs which are mapped to distributed IoT devices; (2) developing "class-
aware" structure simplification techniques to aggressively prune any of the
small DNNs when the goal is to cover a subset of the label space on a single IoT
device and generate a "don't know" signal for the rest; (3) enhancing the
inference accuracy via performing low-cost customizations which arise from usage
and environmental factors, when implemented locally on each IoT
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.