* 2006541
* I-Corps Teams: Energy efficient 3D printing of thermoset polymer and composites for field operations
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2020,07/31/2020
* Jingjing Qiu, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
development of a 3D printing technology that has great potential in diverse
applications, including oil/gas, renewable energy, aerospace, defense, and
healthcare. In particular, readily usable parts fabricated using this 3D
printing technology may be vital in supporting motorized equipment for field
operations. This application holds true for commercial field operations that are
situated in remote outposts with limited energy input. This project will advance
3D printing technology of thermoset polymer and composites and provide insights
on developing more energy efficient, high-rate and end-user friendly advanced
manufacturing techniques, ultimately benefiting society by saving energy and
reducing design/fabrication cycles in mass production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
technology for a high-rate and energy-efficient 3D printing technology for
thermoset polymer and composites that allows for fabrication of readily usable
products for on-site operations and extreme conditions. The proposed innovation
is an in-situ polymerization-based new additive manufacturing method using only
heat or light initiation. The major concerns for conventional 3D printing
technology such as high-energy consumption, negative environmental impact, and
low production rate will be addressed. It combines the cutting-edge research in
materials science/engineering, mechanical engineering, computer science and
cyber systems. Using the thermoset polymers and their composites, the as-printed
products are designed to demonstrate improved temperature and shape stability
with negligible environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.