* 2006422
* Fundamental Understanding of Residual Stress in Binary and Ternary Nitride Thin Films: Measurements and Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Eric Chason, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 619,958.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nitride thin films are widely used in applications
such as protective tool coatings and microelectronic interconnects. However, the
deposited films often have large amounts of residual stress that can reduce
their performance or lead to failure. A more fundamental understanding of the
connection between the film deposition conditions and the resulting stress is
needed in order to control and predict the stress. This understanding is
achieved by performing comprehensive measurements and using them to develop a
model that can predict the stress under different conditions. This provides a
science-based method to choose the processing parameters instead of trial-and-
error. Sharing this model with others impacts the broad community of thin film
users by providing a tool to analyze and optimize their growth processes. The
students who are trained on this project develop a deep understanding of the
kinetic processes controlling thin film growth that are valuable in industries
such as automotive components and semiconductor processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The research on stress in nitride thin
films integrates measurements with the development of a quantitative model. The
measurements are performed in real-time during the deposition of the films using
an optical technique. The different processing parameters (growth rate,
pressure, nitrogen flow rate) are systematically varied so that a comprehensive
set of data is generated. The measurements are done on both binary nitrides
(nitride with a single transition metal species) and ternary nitrides (nitride
with two transition metal species) with different compositions. The data is used
to develop a set of rate equations based on the underlying kinetic mechanisms
that can calculate the stress for different processing conditions. Applying the
model equations to the experiments allows a set of kinetic parameters to be
extracted for each material. This is important for interpreting the data and
understanding the processes controlling the stress. It also transforms the
method of choosing processing conditions by predicting parameters that can
produce the desired stress. A user-friendly web-based version of the model can
be used by others to analyze their own results and select the best processing
conditions for their needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.