* 2006308
* SG: Can green infrastructure maximize ecosystem processes related to nitrogen?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Diane Pataki, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 10/31/2024
* USD 270,130.00

Nitrogen pollution causes many environmental and human health problems. These
include harmful algal blooms, acid rain and smog. In cities, fossil fuel burning
and fertilizer application add large amounts of nitrogen to stormwater. City
infrastructure carries stormwater downstream, which may pollute downstream
ecosystems with excess nitrogen. Nature-based designs that use ecological
processes to remove nitrogen from stormwater may provide a solution. These green
infrastructure designs are popular in cities globally. Questions remain,
however, about their effectiveness. Should green infrastructure design mimic
natural ecosystems as closely as possible? Or can new combinations of soils and
species more effectively mitigate pollution? This research will seek answers to
these questions by studying several types of stormwater management facilities in
Salt Lake City, UT. Results from this research will provide useful guidance to
the design of stormwater management systems. It also has the potential to
advance fundamental understanding of the nitrogen cycle. Researchers will also
conduct extensive public outreach and educational activities to highlight the
importance of ecological processes in urban spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific community currently lacks a theoretical framework to guide design of
ecosystems that maximize nitrogen retention. This is due largely to the
complexity of nitrogen cycling in ecosystems. The researchers propose to
quantify the relative influence of two key paradigms of ecosystem science on
nitrogen retention: biodiversity-ecosystem function and thermodynamic ecological
stoichiometry. The project will involve quantifying rates of nitrogen retention
processes (microbial &amp; plant uptake, plant biomass and soil nitrogen
accumulation, and permanent gaseous removal) over event-scale and seasonal-scale
in two sets of replicated stormwater management experimental facilities, as well
as replicate plots in an adjacent natural area. The first experimental facility
includes nine plots planted with three levels of plant functional diversity. The
second includes eight plots with two levels of plant community composition:
ornamental vs. native, xeric-adapted species. Researchers hypothesize that plots
with high plant diversity and/or xeric-adapted traits will have higher nitrogen
retention if physiological traits related to rapid resource acquisition are an
important driver of nitrogen cycling. Further, researchers hypothesize that
variation in microbial community diversity across plots and over time following
plot establishment will correlate with higher nitrogen immobilization and
denitrification if biodiversity is an important driver of these processes.
Conversely, if biodiversity is not an important driver of ecosystem scale
nitrogen fluxes, we expect to find retention rates follow thermodynamic and
stoichiometric models without significant variation across plant
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.