* 2006225
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous active safety systems for verifiably safe operation of ground vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Jeffrey Johnson, MAPLESS AI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

&lt;p&gt;The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop technology that will enable automated
transportation systems to verifiably maintain safety without relying on a human
driver as a fallback. Driver-related factors were involved in an estimated 94%
of fatal crashes; up to 80% could have been mitigated or prevented by advanced
technology. More broadly, each year vehicle collisions in the U.S. result in
35,000-40,000 fatalities, over 2.3 M serious injuries, and costs of $850 B. The
success of the proposed work will demonstrate that simple, robust methods can be
used to achieve safe autonomous vehicle behavior.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will explore translation of
an advanced autonomous control system in a combination of advances in multi-
agent control theory and new, sensor-based control techniques. This project
addresses the challenges of translating theoretical advances into industrial-
grade algorithms and defining a vehicle safety system that does not rely on a
human fallback mechanism. The Phase I work addresses these technical hurdles
through: 1) a feasibility study of a prototype system, and 2) an extensive
verification and validation process for a safety case report.&lt;/p&gt;
&lt;p&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy
of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and
broader impacts review criteria.&lt;/p&gt;