* 2007582
* SHF:Small:Making Effect Systems Practical with Polymorphism, Inference, and Prototyping Support
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Colin Gordon, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2024
* USD 362,028.00

Effect systems are extensions to the type system in a programming language that
aid in checking aspects of how a program behaves, for example whether it uses
concurrency constructs safely, or respects certain kinds of security policies.
The most popular example is the notion of checked exceptions built into the Java
programming language. Yet despite many years of research experience with effect
systems, they are not widely used outside Java. This project pursues work to
make effect systems easier to design, easier to implement, and easier for
regular developers to apply to programs to prevent bugs. The project
investigates both the theory of effect systems, such as how to extend them to
non-trivial programming constructs like exceptions and generators, and their
application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project implements and applies a variety
of effect systems to substantial real-world programs written in Java, using
experience with that empirical evaluation to guide improvements to the theory of
effect systems, focusing in particular on lightweight ways to accommodate code
reuse and effect polymorphism without requiring excessive guidance from
developers. The project constructs an open-source implementation framework for
effect systems, which will make it easier to implement new effect systems. The
project validates the framework by building open-source implementations of
previously proposed and new effect systems for Java, providing tools directly
useful to practicing developers. Furthermore, the project develops generic
inference techniques to automatically deduce effects for many effect systems,
further reducing the effort required to design, implement, and use
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.