* 2007730
* SHF: Small: Program Analysis for Dependable Clustering
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Iulian Neamtiu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Cluster analysis, a.k.a. Clustering, is a machine-learning technique used to
group together entities that are related or share similar characteristics.
Clustering has applications in medicine, biology, social sciences, robotics, and
earth sciences, including high-stakes domains such as medical image processing
or medical diagnosis, predicting disease-related genes, or resource allocation
in acute disease. However, currently, users or developers of applications that
incorporate clustering have no assurances that the applications are reliable;
this calls into question results or diagnoses obtained with the use of
clustering, and discourages researchers or practitioners from using clustering
applications. This project will make clustering implementations more reliable,
easier to develop, and easier to fix. Software engineers will benefit from
implementations that are easier to program/fix/check. In turn, the resulting
software will be more reliable, benefiting end-users. The project will introduce
students and IT professionals to challenges in, as well as approaches for,
dependable machine learning; this will make students and professionals better
equipped for tackling emerging software research and development challenges.
Ongoing outreach and support efforts, to minorities and underrepresented groups,
will continue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clustering use will expand with the
increasing interest in machine learning in general, and increased adoption of
machine-learning implementations (hardware or software) in software-driven
products. Hence it is imperative that clustering implementations be dependable.
Researchers in this space lack definitions of basic clustering-correctness
properties and effective/efficient analyses for verifying clustering
implementations' properties. This project will address the aforementioned issues
by defining clustering correctness starting from first principles, e.g., program
determinism; and constructing approaches for verifying correctness via program
analysis. Approaches will include differential execution, white-box as well as
black-box techniques, dynamic slicing, and symbolic execution. The scope of this
work includes "purely software" clustering implementations as well as
implementations that use hardware acceleration. Using these tools, developers
and researchers will be able to gain effective insights into clustering-
implementation behavior and dependability. Researchers will be able to use the
general principles introduce developed in this work to construct program
analyses in other domains, e.g., scientific computing, numerical computing,
high-performance computing, and use the tools/approaches for lockstep-executing,
slicing, or symbolically executing other categories of data-intensive
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.