* 2007814
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Convexification-based Decomposition Methods for Large-Scale Inference in Graphical Models
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Simge Kucukyavuz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,990.00

Systems prevalent in modern society can be characterized by complex networks of
interconnected components that generate massive amounts of data. The ability to
make timely inferences using these data presents unprecedented opportunities to
solve major societal problems. For example, advances in wearable technology are
transforming the delivery of personalized healthcare and wellness programs. More
broadly, wearables naturally create sensor networks over populations and the
data from these networks can be harnessed to detect and/or prevent diseases,
crimes or environmental hazards. Inference from such data can be naturally
accomplished using graphical models. Unfortunately, existing technology for
graphical models requires stringent assumptions that are seldom satisfied in
modern applications. The goal of this project is to address these shortcomings
by developing new computational methods that automatically infer the topology of
a graphical model from high-dimensional data, identify and/or correct outliers
and anomalies, and solve the estimation problems simultaneously. Furthermore,
the proposed research will lead to innovative teaching material defining modern
data science curricula and develop a diverse cadre of Ph.D. students with skills
at the interface of discrete optimization, continuous optimization, and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inference problems with spurious data and
unknown network topologies can be modeled as large-scale constrained mixed-
integer convex optimization problems. To address the challenges posed by the
presence of the combinatorial constraints, this project employs a combination of
two key ideas. The first idea is to decompose the problem into progressively
small problems, that can be solved in a decentralized and parallel fashion, by
leveraging the Markov property inherent in graphical models. The second idea is
the convexification of the combinatorial constraints, to diminish or prevent
altogether the loss in quality from the decomposition of the problem. Unlike
typical decomposition methods such as Lagrangian relaxation, which can lead to
large duality gaps, this project will develop novel techniques based on
convexification and Fenchel duality. In particular, the resulting method will
account for the combinatorial restrictions and the nonlinear loss function
concurrently, ultimately resulting in small or no duality gaps. The successful
completion of the project will lead to significant advances in inference with
spatio-temporal data, interpretable prediction, and identification of causal
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.