* 2007903
* Collaborative Research: FET: Small: Machine Learning Models for Function-on-Function Regression
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ranadip Pal, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 219,983.00

Large heterogeneous feature sets are quite common in biological studies such as
genetic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic information and in electronic
health records. The goal of personalized medicine is often to link this
information to therapeutic responses. Higher accuracy prediction can assist in
selecting the most desirable therapy for each individual patient. Some of the
latest machine-learning tools, such as deep learning based on convolutional
neural networks, have shown great promise in various areas of image-based
predictive modeling but are often unsuitable for scenarios involving non-image
based large feature sets that appear quite frequently in biological scenarios.
The project develops a novel framework termed REFINED (REpresentation of
Features as Images with NEighborhood Dependencies) to represent high-dimensional
vectors as compact images that increases the accuracy of machine-learning models
trained on such datasets and is able to handle heterogeneous feature set as
well. Successful implementation of the innovation will assist in the goal of
higher-accuracy predictive modeling from biological datasets. The developed
algorithms will be made available online in a user-friendly manner.
Investigators are deeply involved in educating and training the next generation
of students at all levels with attention to minority and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the design of a novel
regression framework that can convert scalar and functional predictors into
mathematically justifiable image objects that can be processed by convolutional
networks based deep-learning methodologies. Preliminary results illustrated on
biological datasets show the higher prediction accuracy of the framework as
compared to existing methodologies while maintaining desirable properties in
terms of bias. The specific project contributions involve (a) an innovative
design for representation of high-dimensional scalar features as images with
neighborhood dependencies that results in high accuracy predictive modeling
using Convolutional Neural Network based deep learning (b) extension of the
image-based representation to incorporate functional changes in predictors and
outputs. The project also explores the theoretical underpinnings for this new
predictive-modeling framework for biological scenarios. The framework can be
applied to any biological-prediction problem where the predictors have scalar,
functional and/or image attributes. The successful completion of this project
will result in a new effective tool for feature representation and function-on-
function regression and will be a significant methodology to perform object
regression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.