* 2007443
* AF: Small: Fundamental High-Dimensional Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Santosh Vempala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The availability of high-dimensional data in a myriad of applications makes
efficient and general-purpose algorithmic tools a critical need. This project
explores basic questions to address this need in high dimension: How to compute
the volume? How to optimize with constraints? How to sample from a desired
distribution? How to learn from samples? Progress on these questions will build
the foundations of the emerging science of data. The investigator routinely
collaborates with scientists from other disciplines to identify specific
challenges. He will continue to organize collaborative workshops, write up-to-
date research surveys informed by the discoveries of this project, as well as a
textbook on Continuous Algorithms, and maintain open-source software for state-
of-the-art sampling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this project is to
extend algorithmic techniques in three ways: from Euclidean to non-Euclidean
geometries, from convex to non-convex settings and from optimization to sampling
problems. Concretely, it will explore algorithms for non-convex optimization and
sampling, for robust clustering and learning (in the presence of adversarial
noise), for faster sampling by utilizing Riemannian geometries, and for volume
computation by leveraging recent progress on the Kannan-Lovasz-Simonovits
hyperplane conjecture. It will also explore such a conjecture for manifolds, and
the possibility of a deterministic algorithm for polytope
volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.