* 2007367
* Multilinear Subspace Techniques for Learning and Recovery through Tensor-Tensor Decompositions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kyle Caudle, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2024
* USD 416,744.00

As digital devices continue to produce massive amounts of data on a daily basis,
data scientist aim to analyze this data in an effort to discover patterns not
discernible by human investigation. Pattern discovery (or pattern analysis)
often involves algorithms that reduce the dimensionality of the data to
something manageable for data scientists to work with. One major goal of modern
data science is to determine which algorithm is best suited for pattern
discovery based on the data to which the patterns are embedded. This project
aims to investigate a new family of algorithms for data discovery that are
particularly well suited for data being analyzed in multi-dimensional formats.
The results of this research could provide novel techniques to aid in the
analysis and interpretation of existing medical imaging and signal data to help
diagnose and preempt medical anomalies; allow farmers to interpret and analyze
multi/hyper-spectral data to increase crop yield; analyze and interpret
biometric data and human gaits for increased personal and national security; and
provide new approaches to the analysis of networks (from social to peer-to-
peer), to name but a few. Furthermore, this research will educate a
multidisciplinary team of graduate and undergraduate students combining
expertise from the computing sciences, mathematical sciences, and statistical
sciences to be next generation leaders in data science and pattern discovery.
This project is jointly funded by Robust Intelligence (RI) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical goals of the current project are twofold: 1) investigate new
multilinear subspace learning techniques to uncover hidden patterns in
multidimensional data and 2) investigate new approaches to multilinear optimal
sample and recovery techniques for data reconstruction and interpretation.
Toward this end the investigators will explore a fundamentally different
approach to decompositions of multi-way arrays, commonly referred to as tensors.
The approach is based on a recently developed tensor-tensor decomposition viewed
as circular convolution where, similar to their linear algebraic counterparts,
the decompositions result in the product of three tensors, each with a defining
structure. Through these decompositions, the investigative team will develop new
multilinear extensions to the many variations of linear subspace learning (and
their mathematical relationship), a subset of which include multidimensional
scaling, locally preserving projections, independent component analysis,
canonical correlation analysis, and partial least squares as well as novel
advances to optimal sample and recovery through multilinear extensions to
compressed sensing, sparse approximations, and sparse
coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.