* 2007935
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: An Optimization Framework for Designing Derived Attributes with Humans-in-the-loop
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Senjuti Basu Roy, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2023
* USD 189,179.00

Attribute design is one of the most challenging aspects of the Big Data Science
pipeline, where raw attributes need to be transformed into easily-interpretable
attributes that can aid data scientists in ad-hoc data exploration and building
predictive models. Unfortunately, current automated techniques for attribute
design do not offer adequate interpretability to the end user, and attribute
designed by human data scientists is painstakingly slow and heavily reliant on
domain expertise. This project will develop a novel and transformative approach
to enable an ensemble of amateur human workers to be involved in the
computational loop for attribute design. It will benefit various domains that
require effective applications of Big Data Science. In addition, the project
will improve the economic well-being of the country by involving amateur workers
and fostering systematic development of a data science workforce. On the
educational front, the project will have significant education and outreach
activities that span K-12 as well as graduate Data Science education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves developing a suite of algorithms and
techniques for understanding the opportunities and challenges of involving an
ensemble of human workers in attribute design, which is inspired by ensemble
methods in Machine Learning. The main focus is on iterative methods to guide
amateur human workers even with limited domain expertise to suggest new
attributes for data exploration and predictive modeling. The research makes
fundamental advancements to engineering by integrating theoretically-proven
attribute design algorithms with application-specific details of real-world data
science tasks. A prototype will be rigorously evaluated involving datasets from
several application domains and human workers. The outcomes of this research
will spur significant research in next generation human-in-the-loop computing,
as well as impact data exploration over huge, high dimensional and unfathomable
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.