* 2007436
* III: Small: Subset Selection for Summary Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Michael Gleicher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 532,000.00

When confronted with large data sets, viewers use summaries to gain an overview
of the data. For collections of complex objects, such as documents, medical
records, or even chairs, standard statistical summaries either do not apply, or
are difficult for viewers to interpret. Our project will develop the use of
subset summaries: providing overviews of large collections by selecting a small
number of data items and presenting them to the viewer. While the basic idea is
straightforward, there is a lack of understanding to use summarization by subset
effectively. The field lacks knowledge of how people interpret subsets to use
them to accomplish overview tasks. There are no guidelines on how to choose the
design of subsets, i.e., the choice of elements and their presentation. The
premise of this project is that by developing a better understanding of how
viewers interpret subsets, visualization creators can more appropriately choose
designs to make the subsets more effective tools for summarization. The project
has the potential for broad impact by providing general methods for data
presentation that can be used across a wide variety of domains and through its
plans for education and outreach to promote visualization proficiency and
encourage a broad range of students to consider data topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develop subsetting as a summarization method
for overview. The work will interleave three research threads. First, the
project will develop the foundations of subset summarization, adding to our
understanding of how people interpret subsets to perform overview tasks. The
project will use empirical studies to provide connection between design choices
and task performance, which will allow us to refine theories and choose methods.
Second, the project will develop a library of methods for using subsetting as a
summarization method. This will include algorithms for selecting appropriate
subsets, display methods to present the subsets in tabular form, and interaction
techniques to move through the data set by changing the visualization subset.
Development will consider approaches to embedding complex objects into metric
spaces, sampling approaches for selection in these spaces, and tabular
presentation and selection mechanisms to provide better user experiences. Third,
the project will develop practical implementations of the methods in general
toolkits and provide guidelines that advise practitioners on how to employ
subset selection in their systems. The project will disseminate its results
through publications, guideline documents, open source toolkits, and example
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.