* 2007857
* CHS: Small: Improving Web Accessibility Through Multi-Resolution Mixed-Initiative Interaction Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Walter Lasecki, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,209.00

This research will create powerful new ways to bridge critical accessibility
gaps that people with visual impairments face on the Web every day, enabling
greater independence and access to information. Many websites are difficult or
impossible for users with visual impairments to access through screen readers.
Many of these accessibility barriers have been shown currently to be
insurmountable without help from a sighted colleague. This project envisions a
future in which the Web can be made more navigable and accessible over time
while using minimal human effort to bridge access gaps the first time they are
encountered, and then automating this bridging support for future interactions.
This is done through a mixed-initiative interaction between end users, web
automation tools, and remote human workers, at multiple levels of interaction
resolution. This allows development of a system that will not only work every
time for end users (even on web pages the system has never seen before), but
also to leverage the common design elements on the Web more effectively in order
to reduce the total amount of human effort needed to successfully learn a new
task, significantly reducing cost and improving
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the approach to be developed by this
project, when Web users with visual impairments encounter an inaccessible site,
they will be able to specify their high-level intent in natural language and
then a combination of automated macros and remote helpers will help them achieve
their task. Not only do websites differ greatly, but websites often change their
underlying structure, and users' goals change as well. Web automation scripts
are often unable to infer how to achieve the end user's high-level intent under
such dynamic conditions. Human crowd workers, on the other hand, are adept at
figuring out which actions to take to achieve a given goal on a website. This
work will address some of the fundamental challenges of using automation by
employing humans to fill in the gaps where automation fails, and to understand
when semantically-meaningful changes have occurred in how a page works. The
research is divided into two phases: the first phase focuses on developing
methods for creating macros, and the second phase will focus on ways to leverage
crowd helpers to make these macros more robust. Both phases will advance the
state of the art for Web automation. Progressively the system will be evaluated
through a set of laboratory and field studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.