* 2007006
* CNS Core: Small: Towards Hybrid Data Center Switching Using Partially Reconfigurable Circuit Switch
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jun Xu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 417,336.00

Fueled by the growth of cloud computing, data center networks (DCN) continue to
grow relentlessly in both size and speed. A highly cost-effective approach to
this scalability problem, called hybrid DCN architecture, has received
considerable research attention in recent years. A hybrid DCN employs two
technologies to interconnect racks of computers in data center: a much faster
and less expensive circuit switch that is reconfigurable with some performance
cost, and a traditional packet switch. The research problem of hybrid switching
is to near-optimally schedule the circuit switch, so that it removes as much
traffic as possible from the packet switch. Previous work on hybrid switching
solves this optimization problem based on a convenient assumption that the
circuit switch is not partially reconfigurable. This is however an outdated and
unnecessarily restrictive assumption because electronic and optical technologies
underlying today's circuit switches can readily support partial reconfiguration
in the following sense: Only the input ports affected by the reconfiguration
need to pay a reconfiguration delay, while unaffected input ports can continue
to transmit data during the reconfiguration. Allowing partial reconfiguration
can significantly increase the throughput and reduce system delay, thus
significantly improving data center operation. However, it also leads to a host
of challenging research questions that will be tackled in this project. This
project will engage students through integrated classroom curriculum and
research training that span multiple disciplines, and includes outreach efforts
to underrepresented minorities. The PI will work closely with leading networking
and systems providers to facilitate technology transfer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the assumption of partial
reconfiguration, the non-preemptive scheduling of the circuit switch in a hybrid
switching system can be modeled as an Open Shop Scheduling Problem (OSSP),
referred to as switching OSSP. Switching OSSP has opened up a new research
direction teeming with open problems, because many algorithmic results
(approximation ratio, NP-hardness, etc.) on general OSSP no longer apply. This
project will investigate the following five research tasks on switching OSSP.
First, it will study the approximation ratios of BFF (Best Fit First) under
various traffic workloads, and design deterministic or randomized algorithms
that can, with high probability, avoid or mitigate the worst-case scenarios.
Second, the project will investigate research challenges that arise when a DCN
is interconnected by a giant virtual switch comprised of a network of
interconnected bufferless circuit switches. Third, it will study partially
reconfigurable hybrid and optical switching when each rack has multiple
transmitters/receivers, which appears to be a new and challenging problem that
is fundamentally different than anything found in the literature. Fourth, for a
data center with 100 or more racks, BFF still takes tens of milliseconds to
compute, which is roughly an order of magnitude longer than the ideal level of
latency (no more than a few milliseconds) desired by cloud providers. The
reseearchers will study how to significantly reduce the computation time of BFF
so that it remains fast enough when the DCN size becomes much larger in the
future. Last, they will investigate how to accommodate ``last-minute" traffic
arrivals during the transmission of the current batch (corresponding to arrivals
during a previous scheduling epoch), which if successful, can further improve
the delay performance of their solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.