* 2007045
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research:Dynamic Computer-Aided Machining: Supporting Interactive Workflows for Digital Fabrication and Manufacturing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Nadya Peek, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,140.00

This project will develop digital fabrication tools that align with the workﬂows
of low-volume manufacturing. It will study how early-adopter manufacturing ﬁrms
are developing production workﬂows that harness digital fabrication. Informed by
this data, programming representations and software tools will be developed that
facilitate the creation of specific digital fabrication workﬂows. These software
tools will be developed from an end-user perspective, providing programming
abstractions that allow for high-level creative input that is compatible with
existing digital fabrication equipment. Digital fabrication technologies such as
3D printing enable a shift from mass-manufacture to low-volume production of
niche, specialized, and customized products. Small manufacturing firms rely on
digital fabrication for the design and production of new products; using an
iterative process they develop product-speciﬁc workﬂows that apply the primary
stages of digital fabrication (digital modeling, machine programming, and
machine operation) in different forms for ideation, prototyping, revision, and
production. This research will broaden and diversify participation in digital
fabrication and end-user programming by providing technologies that are relevant
to traditional art and craft domains, as well as facilitating local manufacture
of a diversity of goods designed to appeal to niche and diverse
customers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will establish domain-speciﬁc
programming representations and software tools for describing and executing
dynamic digital fabrication workﬂows. At present, there is no formal description
language that can be used to describe digital fabrication operations at a global
level. This research will contribute a digital fabrication representation and
programming environment that enables the description of end-to-end digital
fabrication workﬂows. The representation will provide generic datatypes for
machine state, user input, and sensor feedback that can be used interchangeably
to create geometry and toolpaths, or drive machine operation. It will also
support the expression of complex workﬂow architecture through conditionals,
loops, and abstractions for modularization. The programming environment will
build on this representation to enable practitioners to deﬁne and execute
product-speciﬁc workﬂows through a uniﬁed interface for modeling, machine
programming, and machine operation. This work will substantially advance human-
computer interaction research efforts in interactive fabrication and end-user
programming by providing generalizable programming tools for specifying dynamic
machine behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.