* 2007437
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Harnessing Big Data for Improving Career Mobility
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yong Ge, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 257,881.00

U.S. college students are facing critical challenges for their career
development and job mobility, which is vital for their long-term career success,
especially during global pandemic times. Indeed, the questions that often puzzle
students include what career choices to choose next, how to update skills for
future new jobs, and which learning opportunities to take. These challenges have
been increasingly observed among different groups of students in different
majors and socioeconomic statuses at many universities. This project collects
and analyzes academic curriculum and student career data, discovers useful
patterns about college curriculum and students’ career development, studies
students’ career choices, and develops sophisticated solutions to improve their
career mobility. This study makes significant contributions to the fields of
data mining, machine learning, and education and career data analytics. The
results of this project can bring new ways for understanding and improving
college graduates’ career success, provide useful insights and tools for
students to make their decisions on career development, and augment the service
capability of college career and academic advising offices. This project
integrates the research with education through new course module development,
involving graduate and undergraduate students in research, and research
showcases for local K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
the following three specific aims (SA): mining and informing useful semantics
and patterns about college curriculum and graduates’ career development;
studying the career choices of college graduates; and developing sophisticated
solutions to improve career mobility of college graduates. To achieve the first
SA, this project develops a novel context-aware deep learning method for mining
semantics from heterogenous textual data and discovers insightful horizontal and
vertical patterns. To solve the second SA, this project mines multiple-scale
career path patterns and develops a new hierarchical neural network method to
model and predict graduates’ career choices. To achieve the third SA, this
project develops novel reinforcement learning methods to recommend learning
items for both graduated students and enrolled ones. The results of this project
will be disseminated in the form of peer-reviewed publications, publicly
available data set, tutorials, seminars, and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.