* 2007932
* III: Small: Fair Decision Making by Consensus: Interactive Bias Mitigation Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lane Harrison, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 515,990.00

As the use of AI becomes ever more prevalent in socio-technical systems, people
making decisions frequently collaborate not only with each other, but also with
automated technologies to make judgements that have real and lasting impact on
other people's lives. This has serious implications for the equitable and fair
treatment of historically disadvantaged groups, due to the potential interplay
between &lt;br/&gt;implicit bias analysts may suffer from and algorithmic bias
inadvertently embedded in AI systems. There is a strong imperative to address
open problems surrounding interactive decision support systems with effective
bias mitigation technologies to ensure fair outcomes. This project, named
AEQUITAS to reflect the concept of justice and fairness, investigates the
application of contemporary notions of group fairness to the classic task of
aggregating multiple rankings of candidates to derive an overall fair consensus
decision. The resulting methods and tools help decision makers mitigate both the
implicit bias they suffer from as well as expose algorithmic bias inadvertently
embedded in automated AI ranking algorithms. This technology will have impactful
applications in domains from hiring, lending, to education, where decisions
often made by committee with input from multiple decision makers must have
unbiased outcomes. Fair access for historically disadvantaged groups of people
to potentially life changing opportunities such as jobs, loans, and educational
resources is a potential game changing societal outcome of the AEQUITAS project.
Further, the integration of project activities with the training of a future
STEM workforce with focus on female and underrepresented students via the WPI
Data Science REU summer site and the interdisciplinary degree programs in Data
Science at WPI also represent significant broader
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AEQUITAS promises to break fundamental new ground
in ethical AI by providing the first interactive consensus-based bias mitigation
solution. New insights are expected to be gained into the ways in which unfair
bias against underprivileged groups may be introduced by a consensus building
process and manifest itself in a final ranking. As foundation of AEQUITAS, the
fair rank aggregation problem is &lt;br/&gt;modeled using a constraint
optimization formulation that captures prevalent group fairness criteria. This
new fairness-preserving optimization model ensures measures of fairness for the
candidates being ranked while still producing a representative consensus ranking
following the given set of base rankings. A family of exact and approximate bias
mitigation solutions is designed that collectively guarantee fair consensus
generation in a rich variety of decision scenarios. Tailored optimization
strategies for these new fair rank aggregation services are potentially
transformative -- pushing the envelope on practical ethical applications of AI
for fair decision making. Further, these fair rank aggregation methods are
integrated into carefully designed mixed-initiative interactive systems to
&lt;br/&gt;facilitate understanding and trust in the consensus building process
and to empower human decision makers to engage in an AI-driven consensus
building process to reach unbiased decisions. The AEQUITAS technology supports
comparative analytics to visualize the impact of individual rankings on the
final consensus outcome, as well as to explore the trade-offs between
theaccuracy of the aggregation and fairness criteria. User studies to understand
how well fairness imposed by the AEQUITAS system aligns with human decision
makers' perception of fairness are undertaken. Further, the effectiveness of the
AEQUITAS technology in supporting multiple analysts to collaborate towards
reaching a fair shared decision is studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.