* 2007991
* OAC Core: Small: Next-Generation Communication and I/O Middleware for HPC and Deep Learning with Smart NICs
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In-network computing technologies, or the ability to offload significant
portions of compute, communication, and I/O tasks to the network, have emerged
as fundamental requirements to achieve extreme scale performance for end
applications in the areas of High-Performance Computing (HPC) and Deep Learning
(DL). Unfortunately, current generation communication middleware and
applications cannot fully take advantage of these advances due to the lack of
appropriate designs in the middleware-level. This leads to the following broad
challenges: 1) Can middleware that are “aware” of the computing capabilities of
these emerging in-network computing technologies be designed in the most
optimized manner possible for HPC and DL applications?, and 2) Can such a
middleware be used to beneﬁt end applications in HPC and DL to achieve better
performance and portability? A synergistic and comprehensive research plan is
proposed to address the above broad challenges with innovative solutions. The
proposed framework will be made available to collaborators and the broader
scientific community to understand the impact of the proposed innovations on
next-generation HPC and DL middleware and applications. Several graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained under this project as future scientists
and engineers in HPC. The proposed work will enable curriculum advancements via
research in pedagogy for key courses at The Ohio State University. Tutorials and
workshops will be organized at various conferences to share the research results
and experience with the community. The project is aligned with the National
Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI) to advance US leadership in HPC and the
recent initiative of the US Government to maintain leadership in Artificial
Intelligence (AI.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovations include: 1)
Designing scalable communication primitives (point-to-point and collectives) for
using emerging switch and NIC based in-network computing features, 2) Exploiting
in-network computing features to oﬄoad complex and user deﬁned functions, 3)
Designing high-performance I/O and storage subsystems using NVMe over Fabrics,
4) Designing enhanced in-network datatype processing schemes for MPI library, 5)
Designing and optimizing in-network computing-based solutions for emerging cloud
environment, and 6) Carrying out integrated development and evaluation of the
proposed designs with a set of representative HPC and DL applications. The
proposed designs will be integrated into the widely-used MVAPICH2 library and
made available to the public. The project team members will work closely with
collaborators to facilitate wide deployment and adoption of released software.
The transformative impact of the proposed research is to achieve scalability,
performance, and portability for HPC and DL frameworks/applications by
leveraging emerging in-network computing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.