* 2007449
* Functional characterization of effectors of the Microbotryum complex of fungal phytopathogens
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Michael Perlin, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 335,013.00

The emergence of new infectious diseases or modification of existing diseases
refractive to treatment, or with expanded host range, poses serious threats to
human survival. This project will explore genetic and molecular underpinnings of
such disease emergence, and may allow better prediction of emerging infectious
diseases through host shifts. The fungi, members of the Microbotryum violaceum
fungal species complex, that infect a large diversity of wildflower species in
the Carnation family (Pinks), provide a unique model compared with organisms
that cause disease on more genetically homogeneous agricultural plants. Since
shifts of these host-specific fungi to new wildflower species has been observed
in nature, understanding the range and limits of such shifts, as well as the
genes and proteins involved could provide a unique approach for dealing with
ever-increasing diseases that either directly or indirectly affect human health
and survival (e.g., by threatening food supply). In the process of investigating
such fundamentally and practically important scientific questions, this project
will also provide training to a range of students and professional trainees
(from undergraduate to graduate student to Postdoctoral), in areas of
comparative population genomics and proteomics, and in technical training in
state-of-the-art methods used in molecular biological and biotechnological
investigations. Concerted recruitment efforts established by the PI target
candidates from traditionally under-represented groups in the region of Kentucky
and the Southeastern US (specifically, African-Americans, Latinx, women,
Appalachians) that enhances their pursuit of an advanced degree. Moreover, a
“bridge year” will be established to support recruits as mentors for subsequent
minority students recruited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Microbotryum violaceum
complex of fungal plant pathogens is a useful model of emerging infectious
diseases through host shifts. As pathogens on genetically more diverse host
plant populations, the M. violaceum complex provides an important alternative
model to pathogens on agricultural generally homogenous hosts. Pathogenic fungi
often secrete effector proteins to manipulate their hosts and these may be an
important aspect of host specialization. In Aim 1, populations of Microbotryum
on Dianthus host species will be compared to test the hypothesis that fungal
small secreted proteins (SSPs) play important roles in localized host
adaptation/specificity. Via comparative genomics, we already identified possible
Microbotryum SSP effectors across 3 Microbotryum species. Here, comparisons will
be added, of “generalist” Microbotryum species on Dianthus hosts with a
“specialist” species, limited to one Dianthus host species, to test predictions
of local adaptations, reflected in effector function, within the same
Microbotryum species. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 2 will validate possible effectors in plant
hosts. Expression levels in each fungus, modified by over-expression of specific
candidate effector genes via “mix and match” experiments, will assess ability of
effectors from one fungal species to expand the host range of another species.
CRISPR/Cas9 will be used to delete effectors in fungi and test such mutants in
plants. Candidate effector genes in host plants, absent the fungus, will test
the hypothesis that the candidate effector is responsible for plant pathology,
possibly by modifying host development; such experiments will also provide
localization in planta, co-localization studies of effectors and predicted host
targets, and Co-IP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.