* 2007961
* AF: Small: Expanding the Reach of Topological Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Tamal Dey, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 10/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

Data science and analysis have taken a center stage in modern years for a swath
of applications embracing daily life. In general, AI and machine learning have
been the backbone of this development. Recently, a technique based on the
classical mathematical area of topology has evolved that is showing promise to
complement and in some cases be an alternative to AI techniques. As this
emergent area, known as topological data analysis (TDA), expands its reach, the
task of extracting intelligent summaries out of diverse, complex data becomes
increasingly challenging. To meet this challenge, TDA also needs to expand its
current repertoire of techniques by making further and deeper connections
between mathematical and algorithmic concepts. This project aims to develop
these techniques while training graduate students and other workforce in data
science as a consequence.

The project, in particular, will investigate several novel mathematical concepts
in conjunction with computations to address various challenges appearing in the
following topics: (i) augmenting topological summarization with geometry, (ii)
connecting discrete Morse theory to further applications, (iii) developing
persistence theory for combinatorial dynamical systems, and (iv) developing
multi-parameter persistence from a computational view-point. A successful
algorithmic theory supported by sound mathematics for the four aforementioned
themes can provide a powerful tool for data exploration and analysis in a
spectrum of engineering and scientific fields. The proposed outreach activities
will also further consolidate the ongoing effort of bringing together different
communities in science and engineering engaged into modern data analysis. The
project will help train graduate students who will develop skills in mathematics
and theoretical computer science, most notably in algorithms and topology, in
writing efficient and usable software, and in its application to analyzing real-
world data sets. Efforts will be made to recruit and mentor students from under-
represented groups, as has already been done by the investigator.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.