* 2007512
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Retrofitting IoT Ecosystems with a Software-defined Overlay to Enforce Safety, Security, and Privacy Policies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Endadul Hoque, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 262,139.00

The recent advancement in the Internet-of-Things (IoT) domain has substantially
transformed many important sectors (e.g., manufacturing, healthcare, smart-home)
by introducing programmable IoT platforms to fulfill their varying business
needs. Such programmable platforms facilitate a user to bring together a
collection of low-powered IoT devices to automatically carry out customized
tasks at hand by installing various native and third-party automation apps.
Unfortunately, many of these existing programmable IoT platforms do not provide
adequate in-built security measures (e.g., fine-grained access control) to
thwart risks from misbehaving (rogue/faulty) apps. As a result, a misbehaving
app can exercise unrestricted access to the devices and thus, transition the IoT
system to an undesirable and/or unsafe state. This can lead to financial loss,
fatal consequences, or environmental disasters. This project focuses on
defending IoT systems against such threats by preventing native and third-party
apps from administering unexpected operations on IoT devices. The project
develops a platform-agnostic solution, which has the potential to substantially
improve the overall security, privacy and safety of existing programmable IoT
systems. The foundational techniques developed in this project are also
applicable to a variety of networked systems (e.g., mission-/safety-critical
systems). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop an effective solution, this
collaborative research project relies on the insight that undesirable state
transitions of the IoT system can be viewed as violations of the system's
desired stateful invariants or policies. The system is expected to comply with
these policies to ensure its safety, security, and privacy guarantees. The core
objective of this research is to create a policy-guided defense mechanism which
prevents an IoT system from entering into an undesired state, even at the
presence of misbehaving apps, by dynamically enforcing user-defined policies at
runtime. This project realizes the project's objective through three research
thrusts. The first thrust designs a unified, expressive policy language to
capture user-defined rich stateful policies, which would dictate the expected
behavior of a system. The second thrust develops a software-defined overlay
which not only generalizes heterogeneous IoT devices connected through several
network technologies but also enables a platform-agnostic policy enforcement
approach. The third thrust devises the necessary techniques to realize the high-
level foundational developments from the preceding thrusts for real-world IoT
ecosystems (e.g., smart-home, industrial control systems). With the goal of
developing a competitive cybersecurity workforce, the theories and prototypes
developed in this project are used to educate undergraduate and graduate
students on the inherent design trade-offs in building practical, secure and
resilient systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.