* 2007151
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Joseph Weaver, Weaver, Joseph Earl
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Our daily lives involve biofilms, complex
arrangements of beneficial and detrimental bacteria. For example, biofilms
affect many forms of wastewater and water treatment. Currently, answering basic
‘what-if’ questions about controlling biofilms involves intensive, hard to
generalize, experimental work. However, improved computing abilities have begun
to enable biofilm simulations. Tools such as the Newcastle University Frontiers
in Engineering Biology Individual Based Model (NUFEB IbM) of biofilms promise to
advance research by enabling rapid design and reducing the number of needed
experiments. Right now, the barrier to using these tools is high; expertise is
required between many fields and across many ‘levels’ of biology. The Fellow
intends to help the NUFEB model transition from a subject of research into a
tool for research not only by improving its predictions, but also by making the
tool more useful and usable to a broader range of researchers and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to improve the NUFEB IbM
through: extension, validation, and facilitation. The Fellow will extend the IbM
to simulate antagonistic interactions though type VI secretion systems.
Implementing those ecologically relevant systems will also enable modeling the
broader class of ‘chemically mediated interactions’ (e.g., quorum sensing and
antimicrobial kin selection). Validation will be performed against biofilms
grown in microfluidic reactors incorporating multiple levels of physical and
biological complexity. Further, the validation will be model-agnostic, providing
a common reference frame for comparisons between biofilm simulations.
Facilitation will reduce the barrier to entry and will go beyond ‘better
documentation’. A domain specific language will be developed which better
represents the simulated biology and will be incorporated with a supporting
tool-set, similar in spirit to the PyFoam tools used to enhance OpenFOAM
computational fluid dynamics usability. The impact will be broadened by using
the NUFEB IbM to develop interactive ‘play-based’ lessons aimed at the secondary
school level. Additionally, these goals support the training of the Fellow; they
partially overlap with but also significantly extend their skills. The
experience will also help the Fellow establish their independence, acquire
experience in non-research tasks of a project (e.g., budget management), and
establish their professional niche and while growing their existing
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.