* 2007481
* III: Small: Nonlinear Processes for Detailed and Principled Insight into Graph Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* David Gleich, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,998.00

Networked systems such as road networks, flight networks, information networks,
and social networks are critical pieces of society. Moreover, networks of cells
behave together as systems within living things, and these living things
themselves interact in ecosystem networks. Understanding the pieces of these
systems and how they participate in the overall network is fundamental to many
areas of science and engineering ranging from sociology, biology, and
neuroscience. This fundamental scientific study requires that scientists have
easy-to-use tools to study these systems. In particular, tools to find pieces of
these systems and to draw pictures of these systems. Pictures, in particular,
are extremely helpful to communicate insights about the networks. There are two
common types of mathematical and computational tools to accomplish these tasks.
The first class is based on simple collections of equations that can be easily
solved using methods that have been studied for a long time. These use intuitive
physical ideas such as dye spreading in water. The second, and more recent,
class of tools involves more complicated techniques that mimic mathematical
abstractions of the brain. Recent work has shown the second class of tools to
provide better insights into the networked systems. But this comes at the price
that the tools make it hard to understand how and why they work. This is very
different from those in the first class, which are easy and intuitive to
understand. The main aim of this award is to investigate a class of tools that
falls between the two. It combines the physical intuition of the first class
with a simple change that gives the ability to produce results like the second
class. This study is an important component of the overall scientific effort to
understand how these networks work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical
abstraction underlying these networks systems is a graph and these tools to find
structure are often called graph mining methods. The first class of tools
discussed above is based on linear systems and eigenvectors. These methods are
often used as benchmarks and have many helpful intuitions to guide their
application. Recent innovations in advanced graph neural network and embedding
techniques, those in the second class, have considerably improved on these
benchmarks across a wide variety of graph mining tasks. These new methods are
more powerful but are harder to reason about. The focus of this research is to
navigate an opportunity between these two scenarios by introducing simple
nonlinear adaptations of the linear system and eigenvector algorithms that are
both competitive with neural network algorithms and remain easy to reason about.
The investigation covers four different ways the nonlinear idea could be used.
First, there are simple nonlinear generalizations of highly intuitive physical
processes such as dye spreading in water that give improved performance. A
challenge here is that these need fast and reliable algorithms to make graph
mining easy. Second, a graph regression seeks to fit data to the vertices and
edges of a network. The research in this award involves studying a simple
nonlinear transform of common regression problems. Third, many graph mining
tools based on linear systems have interpretations that involve a combination of
simple linear functions. Here, the study seeks to replace these linear functions
with nonlinear functions. Fourth, producing a useful visualization of a graph
with millions of vertices and edges remains a challenge. This award will
investigate how simple nonlinear transformations create intuitive network
visualizations. The primary outcomes from this research will be in the form of
algorithms and methods, as well as papers describing them, that characterize the
challenges and opportunities of simple nonlinear processes run on networks. The
investigator also plans to release software to compute or approximate the new
simple nonlinear processes on networks to make them widely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.