* 2007995
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Secure and Efficient Mobile Edge Computing in Wireless Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Rose Qingyang Hu, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,994.00

Future wireless networks will support massive energy-limited computation-
constrained user equipment that are often required to execute latency sensitive
yet computation-intensive tasks. Although technologies that can elevate local
device computation capability and battery capacity have been substantially
pushed forward, there still exists a huge gap between the high
computation/processing demands and the low computation/battery capacities in
user equipment. Mobile edge computing (MEC) allows user equipment to offload
partial or complete computation-intensive tasks to the edge computing servers to
save power and reduce latency. Inspired by recent advances in wireless
technologies and challenges, the proposed research aims to explore a novel
framework that can jointly consider communications and computations in a mobile
edge computing-based wireless heterogeneous network to realize secure and
efficient offloading and achieve desirable trade-offs among computation
throughput, computation efficiency, latency, and user fairness. The proposed
research activities have significant potentials to revolutionize the next
generation wireless network design by jointly considering edge computations and
communications in delivering secure, latency critical, computation-intensive
applications such as augmented reality/virtual reality, connected and autonomous
vehicle, and remote medical diagnosis. It can significantly facilitate the
understanding in the field of emerging mobile edge networks, which will play a
key role in the modem society to realize smart environments with computation
intensive mobile applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
framework develops secure multiple access schemes during offloading, computation
coordination and scheduling schemes for selecting user equipment and computation
tasks to offload. The research will identify unique technical challenges and
explore many new aspects in the mobile edge computing enabled wireless
heterogenous networks, including non-orthogonal multiple access, computing
offloading mode selection, success interference cancellation decoding order
design, hybrid multiple access analysis, and heterogeneous MEC coordination,
driven by joint consideration on security, efficiency, and user fairness. The
theoretical framework formulation and analysis, engineering design guidelines
for practical implementation and deployment will be obtained, and
prototyping/simulation tools will be shared with the scientific research and
engineering communities. The success of this project can greatly advance the
understanding of the critical issues in the mobile edge computing-based wireless
network design and contribute a new resource allocation framework that can
remarkably improve the performance of future wireless network computing. The
project will also both undergraduate and graduate students research
opportunities with developing and deploying new wireless network technologies,
thus serving the growing need for educating and training students, especially
female students and students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.