* 2007716
* III: Small: Deep Generative Models for Temporal Graph Generation and Interpretation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Liang Zhao, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 12/31/2020
* USD 498,050.00

Temporal graphs represent a crucial type of data structure where the entities
and their connections evolve over time. These time-evolving phenomena are
ubiquitous in real-world networks such as social networks, biological networks,
and cyber networks. Existing generative models of temporal graphs typically rely
on the principles of temporal process of network generation predefined by human
heuristics and prior knowledge, such as temporal exponential random graphs,
randomized reference models, and dynamic Bayesian models. They usually fit well
towards the properties that the predefined principles are tailored for, but
usually cannot do well for the others. Unfortunately, the mechanisms of many
critical real-world network dynamics are still largely unknown, such as co-
evolution of structural and functional connectivities in brain networks,
catastrophic cascading failures in power networks, and malware epidemics in the
Internet of Things. This project focuses on developing a transformative
framework for temporal graphs generative modeling that can automatically learn,
characterize, and interpret the underlying patterns and principles from temporal
graph observation data. It aims at significantly benefiting the related
scientific and engineering domains with open-sourced tools for temporal graphs
modeling and network dynamics knowledge distillation. The project includes
educational and engagement activities that will substantially increase the
community's understanding of temporal graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a generic framework of generative deep neural networks for temporal
graph modeling, generation, and interpretation. The two major types of network
dynamic patterns will be investigated, including "topological dynamics of a
graph" (e.g., growth of a social network) and "activity dynamics on a graph"
(e.g., real-time communications in contact networks). The proposed framework
will: 1) automatically learn the (unknown) process of topological dynamics and
activity dynamics in discrete- and continuous-time temporal graphs, 2) enforce
validity constraints on dynamic topologies and time-evolving activities over the
generated temporal graphs, and 3) pursue the temporal graph model
interpretability for network dynamic patterns distillation and model
intervention. To achieve the above research goals, a number of research
activities will be conducted including: i) develop scalable deep generative
models for dynamic topologies of large temporal graphs under the temporal-
topological constraints, ii) propose novel deep generative models for activity
dynamics in temporal graphs under validity-guarantee activation functions, iii)
design strategies for modeling the co-evolution of topological dynamics and
activity dynamics, iv) pursue model interpretability enhancement by
disentangling static and dynamic patterns as well as post-hoc interpretation on
the generated temporal graphs by dynamic graph attention and dynamic subgraph
detection techniques, and v) develop a novel human-model interaction system for
temporal graph visualization and model intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.