* 2007275
* AF:Small:Geometric Optimization Problems for Routing, Searching, and Coverage in the Face of Uncertainty
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Esther Arkin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 449,986.00

A massive amount of spatio-temporal data is continuously collected by the
devices that make up the modern, interconnected world. The ability to take
advantage of this data for strategic and societal good depends, to a large
extent, on how one can best utilize information about a constantly changing
world in which much of the data is necessarily uncertain. Large data sets have
the potential to capture the stochastic variation in data at a level of
statistical detail previously unimaginable. Along with this increasing access to
data comes the challenge of making decisions robustly and strategically in the
face of uncertainty, while being equipped with data that enables a highly
detailed model of stochastic variation. Availability of massive quantities of
data presents opportunities for exploiting the data to make economical decisions
while mitigating risk. When optimizing in the face of uncertainty it is
important to account for not only the "expected" outcomes but also the
unexpected or low-probability events. This project seeks to design algorithms
that address some of the challenging optimal-decision problems in the face of
uncertain spatiotemporal data, such as customer demand sites, congestion in
transportation systems, incidences of crime, and other geospatial events.
Motivating applications include delivery services, coordination of autonomous
vehicles, smart cities, security patrols, material handling, and search and
rescue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the algorithmic study of
optimization problems in geometric settings with uncertainty. Uncertainty can
arise in various ways, including locational uncertainty (on the coordinates of
sites or agents), existential uncertainty (on whether a site exists or is
relevant), and domain uncertainty (on the geometry/topology of the domain of
interest). Most of the problems are some form of optimization problem, in which
the goal is to minimize a cost or maximize a benefit, or some combination of
multiple criteria. Many of the problems are known to be computationally
difficult (e.g., NP-hard), even in deterministic settings on perfectly known
data, and become more challenging in the face of uncertainty. Working within
precise stochastic models of uncertain geometric data, the goal is to provide
solutions with provable guarantees, often in the form of approximation
algorithms for optimization problems. Specific problems to be studied include
variations on vehicle routing problems (e.g., stochastic traveling salesperson
problems (TSP) in stochastic settings), constructing robust geometric networks
on sites with locational uncertainty, and the optimal deployment of multiple
mobile robot agents to search a geometric domain for one or more targets whose
locations are unknown, but potentially described by a statistical distribution.
A new class of problems addresses the privacy aspect geometric routing, and
seeks to model and solve the problem of seeking solutions that are "least
predictable" in a precise sense, minimizing the possibility that one's intent
can be inferred from partial data: these least predictable path/tour
optimization problems are based on the use of intentional randomization to
advance privacy and security. Recognizing that geometric structure has played a
critical role in the design of efficient approximation algorithms on
deterministic data, an underlying goal of the project is to identify the degree
to which geometry can be exploited to yield better results than are possible in
general settings. This work will rely on methods from the fields of
computational geometry, combinatorial optimization, networks, and approximation
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.