* 2007320
* CNS Core: Small: A Hardware/Software Infrastructure for Secured Multi-Tenancy in FPGA-Accelerated Cloud and Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Christophe Bobda, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 527,963.00

With increasing world-wide use of cloud-based computing resources it is more
than ever necessary to have efficient, reliable, secured, and power-efficient
datacenters. In order to cope with the versatile demand in social media, content
streaming, banking, shopping, and high-performance computation, data centers
must accommodate heterogeneous architectures to cope with the versatility in
computing. FPGA devices have been recently introduced in cloud infrastructure to
provide acceleration for critical applications in artificial intelligence,
imaging, high-performance, and cryptography, with reduced power consumption.
Unfortunately, current cloud providers are still assigning entire FPGAs to
single customers, which leads to underutilization and increases in power
consumption and costs. The primary reason is the lack of secured and stable
approaches to enable the sharing of FPGA-resources among multiple cloud tenants,
many of whom could be malicious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at
addressing the problem of multi-tenancy in FPGA-accelerated clouds and
datacenters by providing the architecture and mechanisms for the efficient
sharing of FPGA devices among multiple users. Specifically, the investigators
will design and implement 1) hardware and software virtualization technologies
for the integration of segments of the same hardware into cloud hypervisors, 2)
isolation framework based on the NSA-developed Flux Advanced Security Kernel
(FLASK) to extend domain separation from software threads and virtual machines
down to provisioned hardware accelerators, and 3) temporal and spatial
management approaches of the hardware resources, from the admission control to
the execution on the FPGA device. The resulting cloud management framework will
be made available to schools, colleges, communities and commercial entities to
facilitate the adoption of heterogeneous cloud infrastructure that incorporates
FPGAs. While the 20-node FPGA-accelerated cloud installed at the University of
Florida will be used as testbed throughout the project, it will also serve as a
vehicle to develop new classes and provide training to students, both on and
off-campus. In this regard, the investigators will increase efforts to recruit
and engage under-represented groups using existing resources such as the George
Washington Carver Research program and the Florida-Caribbean Louis Stokes
Regional Center of Excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.