* 2007124
* CNS Core: Small: Re-engineering Applications for Tensor Processing Units
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Hung-Wei Tseng, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2024
* USD 495,000.00

To overcome the inefficiency of conventional processors for machine learning
(ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) computing applications, hardware
accelerators that provide operators to compute on tensors/matrices directly
emerge in all types of computer systems. Any application that naturally consumes
and produces tensors/matrices may take advantage of these accelerators. However,
these accelerators might only be used for ML/AI applications due to the lack of
an appropriate programming interface and system support. This project will
bridge the gap of making these accelerators available for more applications.
This project will redesign applications to use these accelerators to improve
performance and energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will (1) build real
systems using commercialized ML/AI accelerators (e.g., Google's Tensor
Processing Units (TPUs)), (2) develop a programming interface that allows
programmers to create any type of application on the built system, (3) redesign
the algorithms of applications to use efficiently the operators that TPUs offer,
(4) compose library functions and runtime systems to process efficiently tasks
but hide complexity from programmers, and (5) revisit the design of the storage
subsystem to supply data more efficiently. Through these aforementioned tasks,
this project will demonstrate the challenges and analyze the potentials of
extending the applications of TPUs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, if
successful, will provide the first general-purpose programming platform for
TPUs. By making the outcomes available to the public, this project will be
available to all research areas that depend on computation/analytics of
tensor/matrix datasets. In fact, the target applications in this project already
cover database systems, bioinformatics algorithms and physics simulations. This
project will also offer research/learning opportunities for a general audience,
interdisciplinary researchers, and minority groups by classroom teaching,
publications, talks and undergraduate summer interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research outcomes will be made through peer-reviewed conference and journal
papers. The code developed and the configurations of hardware platforms will be
publicly available through third party repository services
(https://github.com/escalab/) after the research outcome is published. A cloud
data storage service will be used to store all raw experimental data, copies of
source code and applications datasets for at least three years and make them
available upon appropriate requests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.