* 2007200
* FET: Small: Modeling, Simulation, and Design for Robustness and Performance in Semiconductor-Based Quantum Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jing Guo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 533,207.00

Quantum computing has the potential to eventually revolutionize computing
technologies and impact many research fields as well as daily life, including
discovery of new materials, design of new drugs, financial modeling, security
and cryptography, and artificial intelligence. Among various approaches for
hardware realization of quantum computing, semiconductor-based quantum computing
has the advantage to harvest and leverage the vast infrastructure and success of
the semiconductor chip industry, which promises low cost and small size.
Significant challenges, however, remain to controllably and precisely entangle
semiconductor spin quantum bits (qubits), transmit quantum information between
them, and eventually realize a large-scale semiconductor quantum computer. In
this project, new simulation methods and computer-aided design (CAD) frameworks
will be developed to address key hardware design challenges in semiconductor-
based quantum computing. Simulation and design tools will be developed and
disseminated online to extensively support the education and research activities
in semiconductor quantum computing. By developing new curriculum and engaging
students from high school to graduate levels, the project also contributes to
addressing the challenge of educating a new generation of quantum
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to: (i) develop a multiscale
simulation framework that incorporates 3D technology CAD simulations into
physics-based models for semiconductor quantum gates; (ii) develop a modeling
and simulation framework for quantum interconnects between semiconductor spin
qubits mediated by a photon channel via strongly coupled spin-photon interfaces;
(iii) simulate decoherence mechanisms in semiconductor quantum gates and develop
methods to minimize their impact; and (iv) model the variability and defect
mechanisms and their correlations in semiconductor quantum gates and circuits,
and translate insights gained from variability and defect-aware simulations to
techniques for mitigating the variability effects. This project will advance
modeling and simulation capabilities and develop an essential knowledge base for
designing semiconductor-based quantum computing hardware with enhanced speed,
fidelity, integration density, and reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.