* 2007581
* CNS Core: Small: Towards MIMO Power Line Communication for Scalability, Coverage and High Data Rate
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kannan Srinivasan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

This project exploits ubiquitous powerlines to enable high data rate
communication by allowing multiple devices to send / receive data
simultaneously; currently, only one device can send / receive data at a given
time. This technology is attractive in that it leverages existing power line
plant and can work with existing wireless access points to improve reliability,
coverage and data rate. It has deep implications for existing internet
technologies. It can be used as a backbone network for existing wireless access
points to share coordination information, control and data to significantly
improve wireless network reliability and data rate. The research outcome from
this project is useful not only to the networking community, but also to
powerline researchers, Internet service providers and Internet device
manufacturers. The proposed work can also enable Internet service in remote
rural areas where there is no cellular and cable internet service. If
successful, it will be the first project to demonstrate a scalable powerline
communication technology that allows multiple devices to send and receive data
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to demonstrate
multi-user multi-input multi-output (MU-MIMO) techniques on powerlines.
Preliminary observations of the spatial independence of channels suggests that
MU-MIMO is feasible. The project will build a new wideband coupler that will
interface a software-defined radio with the powerline. It will characterize the
powerline channel and study its impact on spatial independence. It will study
the transients and noise observed on the powerline from high-power appliances,
and their impact on the proposed techniques. It will also test the scalability
of the architecture as the number of users increases. The project will perform
experiments in a variety of environments such as homes, offices, schools and
warehouses. This project has the potential to enable Internet service in remote
rural areas where there is no cellular and cable internet service. The project
plans to develop new pedagogical methods to enhance the participation of
underrepresented groups at the undergraduate level, and a middle-school summer
curriculum that introduces wireless technology to those
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.