* 2007135
* SHF:Small: Machine Learning Approach for Fast  Electromigration Analysis and Full-Chip Assessment
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Electromigration (EM) has become one of the most critical design issues and
limiting factors for nanometer VLSI designs because of the shrinking size and
increasing power density of the interconnects as technology scales down to sub
5nm. Due to its importance, many advances have been made recently in EM modeling
and assessment techniques. However, fast and full-chip level EM analysis and
validation still remain a challenging problem as completely modeling the EM
failure process requires solving partial differential equations of hydrostatic
stress in large interconnects. This will become even more difficult for full-
chip level EM sign-off analysis. At the same time, machine learning, especially
deep learning based on deep neural networks (DNN) such as convolutional neural
networks (CNN), generative adversarial networks (GAN) and auto-encoders, is
gaining much attention due to transformative successes in the many cognitive
tasks. How to apply deep-learning techniques to learn and encode laws of physics
and help to solve nonlinear partial differential equations, however, still
remains in its infancy. The new EM optimization techniques will enhance the
integrated-circuit (IC) design industry’s ability to improve VLSI long-term
reliability amid continued aggressive transistor scaling and increasing power
density. This research will also contribute significantly to the core knowledge
and technologies of machine learning and data-driven based nonlinear dynamic-
system modeling and advanced numerical approaches. This award will enable the
investigator to hire more female and underrepresented minority students to
further contribute to the diversity in America’s science and technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore novel and
transformative EM modeling and full-chip EM-induced lifetime assessment
techniques based on data-driven deep learning and advanced numerical methods.
First, the research will investigate and design new deep-learning-based
techniques for transient hydrostatic stress analysis for multi-segment
interconnect trees. The project will explore DNN network structures such as CNN,
GAN, autoencoders, and physics-informed neural networks for both void nucleation
and post-voiding phases of EM failure processes in both circuit and full-chip
levels. Second, the project will develop fast analytic and semi-analytic
solutions for the stress-based partial differential equations for general multi-
segment interconnects considering Joule-heating and thermal-migration effects.
At the full-chip level, a coupled multi-physics analysis for fast EM sign-off
check of on-chip power ground networks will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.