* 2007251
* CHS: Small: The Ties that Relate Us: Modeling the Impact of Relationships on Social Contagion and Network Dynamics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Daniel Romero, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,925.00

This project aims to advance our understanding of online social structures by
systematically incorporating information about the nature of the relationships
between people in social systems into network structures in order to study
social contagion, thereby helping to establish a foundation for understanding
social processes through implicit and explicit relationships. Many social
processes, from friendship development to rumor dissemination and peer
influence, occur on complex structures of interconnected interactions and
relationships of different types among individuals. In order to model such
structures in a tractable way, researchers have typically relied on networks or
graphs, where nodes represent people and edges encode the idea that two people
are socially connected to each other in some way. These simple representations
of social connections have allowed us to formulate sophisticated predictive
models and algorithms and allowed us to understand the mechanisms behind many of
these processes like social contagion and information diffusion. However, the
ties that connect individuals are markers of potentially rich, multifaceted
relationships between two people often with implicit social dimensions,
affordances, and constraints that go well beyond what is directly encoded in the
network structure alone. Recognizing all the complexity involved in these ties
will improve our ability to accurately model and predict many social dynamics
that occur on networks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research consists of three
major phases: (1) developing new methods for detecting and quantifying the
strength of association between contagions and relationships; (2) developing new
models of information diffusion and social contagion on multiplex networks,
where edge relationships and topics are able to interact, with the goal of
achieving better prediction accuracy, and (3) relaxing the assumption of a
static network in order to develop new methods for predicting changes to
relationships types and interactional frequencies in dynamic, evolving social
networks. Existing models typically assume social dynamics are independent of
relationship type. These models will be generalized by relaxing this strong
assumption and developing datasets and models that facilitate exploration of how
social relationships affect social processes. This work will lead to new models
with stronger predictive powers as well as new findings and questions about
social dynamics on networks. Achieving these goals involves new methods for
inferring social relationships from observational data, new resources for
testing and validation, and new models for relationship-aware social processes.
Performing all of these at scale requires new techniques from machine learning
and natural language processing, and new models of human interaction and deep
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.