* 2007108
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Communication, Storage, Complexity, and Security: A Holistic View on the Fundamental Limits and Code Designs for Private Information Retrieval
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Hua Sun, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 218,259.00

Powerful and ubiquitous sensors and devices nowadays can collect data on all
types of human activities and natural phenomena. These data sets are usually
aggregated and stored in a distributed storage system, from which information
can then be retrieved as needed for processing and computation. Making such
systems private and secure is of paramount importance, which has motivated the
study of private information retrieval (PIR) systems, which can provide strong
privacy guarantees on the access to information in these databases.
Characterizing the level of guarantees will help assess the usefulness of a PIR
system. This project aims to develop a holistic information theoretic view of
PIR systems, which can provide important theoretical guidance on the design of
private, secure, and efficient information retrieval systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In the framework of this holistic view, this project seeks to
identify the information theoretic limits and develop efficient code
constructions for the optimal tradeoffs between important system constraints,
including communication, storage, complexity, and security. This holistic view
goes beyond many information theoretic studies that focus on a single aspect of
the system constraints, namely the communication cost. The project is expected
to significantly advance the state-of-the-art: it seeks to provide a better
balanced and comprehensive understanding on the tradeoffs between different
constraints in general information retrieval systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.