* 2007238
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Coded String Reconstruction Problems in Molecular Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Wojciech Szpankowski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The problem of reconstructing text strings from their fragments or masses of
fragments is of focal importance in computational biology as current DNA and
protein sequencing platforms are unable to read the content of long strings that
denote protein/gene sequences. One prototypical example of string reconstruction
arises in DNA assembly: there, one creates multiple copies of the same long
string and cuts the copies to read out short overlapping substrings that can be
put together by matching their prefixes and suffixes. The reconstructed string
may not be a perfect replica of the original string due to errors in the
fragmentation and matching processes. Furthermore, for many strings unique
reconstruction is inherently impossible. This represents a major issue for next
generation sequencing technologies used in fundamental biological research,
since in this setting it is impossible to ensure unambiguous results. The
successful code designs pursued in this project can resolve reliability and
content retrieval issues impeding implementations of emerging molecular
computing and storage paradigms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned
with developing novel coding methods for unique reconstruction of strings or
pools of strings based on their constituent substrings, subsequences and
substring compositions. The techniques employed represent a combination of new
graph-theoretic, combinatorial optimization and information theory approaches.
In particular, the project will investigate the use of balanced partial de
Bruijn strings for substring-based reconstruction, Catalan-like paths for
multiset composition reconstruction as well as coded multi-trace reconstruction
methods involving specialized modifications of deletion-correcting codes and
superposition codes. The coding schemes will be tested on DNA-based and
synthetic polymer-based data storage platforms under the development at the
University of Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.