* 2007283
* CHS: Small: Inverse Methods for Computer Graphics Material Appearance Design
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Holly Rushmeier, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 498,941.00

Material appearance is a critical feature of visual design systems in the
service of a wide range of industrial needs, from creating augmented/virtual
reality (AR/VR) training environments to designing physical products to
specifying the appearance of characters and objects in film and games. Visual
accuracy is needed for reliable training, and intuitive tools are needed to
minimize the time required to bring new systems online. But while design of the
geometry of physical products using computational tools is well-established, an
unresolved problem is that the appearance of objects shown in computer design
systems cannot reliably be matched in physical production. This project will
develop tools for appearance design that create accurate simulations and are
easy to use. Project outcomes will have broad impact, by enabling systems to
accelerate job training, by making design for manufacture efficient, and by
expanding access to production tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study appearance space to create a new type of material appearance design
system. But studying the full range of material appearance is a grand challenge,
so rather than attempting to develop a general theory, appearance space will be
studied in three contexts: the space of particular material classes; the space
of procedural models encoded as node graphs; and the space of physically
realizable bi-scale materials. In the context of material classes, image
examples of classes of materials (e.g., grass, shiny metals, silk fabric) will
be gathered and classified by unsupervised learning techniques to discover the
structure of each class and the overlap in appearance classifications. In the
context of node graphs used for appearance design, existing graphs for material
classes will be collected to find types and structures to drive the design of an
automatic system for node graph generation. And in the context of bi-scale
material appearance, classes of meso-scale geometries and micro-scale variations
will be studied to characterize the range of appearance they can produce. The
three studies will be brought together in a system that takes examples of
distant and close appearance, along with additional user-supplied class
qualifiers, and creates new node types and node graph structures to produces a
tunable model for the user to edit as needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.