* 2007435
* CHS: Small: Investigating the Characteristics of User Representations and Long-Term Experiences in Personal Space Depth Perception in Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Andrew Robb, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 498,982.00

Distances to objects of interest in Virtual Reality (VR) are often
systematically misperceived, and these perceived spatial distortions cause
difficulties in the operators' ability to execute fine motor actions, increased
errors in interaction and user frustration, thereby diminishing the
effectiveness of task performance and psychomotor skills training in VR
simulations, especially in applications such as simulated robot manipulations,
flight and driving simulation, and surgical training and rehabilitation
simulations. This project addresses the problem of depth perception in VR by
examining: (a) how properties of the virtual self-representations or embodiment
(also known as self-avatars) in VR affects depth perception in personal space,
which is the region of space extending to the limits of the operator's reach;
(b) how longitudinal or long-term experiences in VR influences or calibrates the
effects of self-avatars on depth perception in personal space VR interactions.
This research will directly address a grand challenge for engineering, as
determined by the National Academy of Engineering, which is to enhance VR. The
empirical data, measurement protocols, case studies and application guidelines
derived from this project will substantially augment the much-needed body of
knowledge in understanding the relationship between embodiment, visuo-motor
recalibration to self-avatar properties, and depth perception in VR. The
longitudinal research component will foster the exposure of undergraduate and
graduate students to advanced VR development and the process of conducting
rigorous user evaluation. The research and educational activities of the project
will lead to enhanced consumer experiences in VR by improving user experience
and usability of interactive applications for entertainment, psychomotor skills
learning and rehabilitation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is among the
first to thoroughly investigate visuo-motor recalibration to anthropomorphic and
anthropometric properties of self-avatars on near-field or personal space depth
perception in VR, and how their impact with calibration changes over time with
increased VR experience. The specific goals of this project are: (1) Investigate
the effects of the anthropomorphic and anthropometric properties of self-avatars
on scaling depth perception, body ownership and perceived reach capabilities in
VR. (2) Empirically evaluate to what extent self-avatar based interaction in VR
calibrates users' depth perception, body ownership and body schema. (3)
Investigate how the effects of self-avatars on calibration of depth perception
varies over time in longitudinal exposures, as users gain more experience with
the task and VR in general. (4) Integrate VR development, user study design,
quantitative and qualitative research methods in undergraduate and graduate
education. The empirical investigation of self-avatars in personal space VR
interactions and data from longitudinal experiences will generate a rich set of
guidelines and recommendations for VR developers, researchers and consumers in
utilizing the projectâ€™s derived techniques, metrics and measurement protocols to
enhance user performance and validate research findings. This project will also
enable students to experience hands-on and at-home learning and experimentation
of VR systems, gathering much needed data on how longitudinal experiences affect
spatial perception and enabling students to develop a strong sense of what
constitutes a good VR design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.