* 2007482
* SHF: Small: Personalizing API Documentation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Brad Myers, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 532,000.00

Application programming interfaces (APIs), including libraries, frameworks,
toolkits, software development kits and web services, are used throughout most
programmers' code. Since programming is a human activity, the usability of the
APIs has a big impact on the effectiveness of the programmer and the resulting
code: poor usability of APIs has been shown to result in bugs and security holes
in code, as well as to reduce the programmer's productivity. Further, today's
programmers must be learning new APIs all the time, as they switch projects or
start using new packages or web services. A longstanding, but often overlooked,
complaint about the usability of APIs is in the documentation. To be effective,
API documentation must inform programmers, who have varying levels of expertise,
how to correctly and effectively use the API. This project will create and
empirically evaluate a system that automatically estimates the knowledge needs
to use an API, and the needs and learning style of the user, to create
personalized documentation focused on what the user needs to know. The project
has the potential to significantly improve API usability and API learning, which
could improve programmer effectiveness and productivity, and reduce bugs and
security flaws, which would have a significant impact on all computerized
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves fundamental research to
identify and represent the knowledge that a programmer has, and programmers'
learning styles, as it relates to APIs, based on user-centered studies and
computational techniques including mining software repositories and natural
language processing. From these sources, the system will identify how to create
personalized documentation, which presents the right information in an
appropriate format, without requiring the documentation writer to do much more
work. The research will also identify new ways to support process-oriented
learning and tinkering so they are both more effective. The research includes
validating all of these for effectiveness through appropriate user studies using
real and large APIs in collaboration with the research team's industrial
partners. The research also aims to support diverse learning styles that are
often the styles favored by underrepresented populations that tend to be
unsupported in software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.