* 2007674
* FET: Small: Scalable transcriptional programs through feedback regulation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Domitilla Del Vecchio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 460,721.00

The ability to reliably program living cells is going to have tremendous impact
on a number of applications. For example, in biosensing and bioremediation,
engineered microorganisms will sense and degrade environmental pollutants or
pathogens; in personalized medicine, patient-derived cells will be reprogrammed
to a cell type of interest to cure various diseases; in human performance,
programmable probiotics will sense stress and fatigue level and release
mitigating drugs. Programming biology to achieve these sophisticated
functionalities requires complex computation to selectively classify
environmental cues, process them, and enable appropriate cellular responses.
Increased complexity often requires increased scale of the logic programs that
implement function. To augment the scale of the genetic programs that one can
encode in living cells, many parts are required such that they do not interfere
with one another. Although, many orthogonal parts can be designed, they often
require a common resource for implementing their specified activation or
repression function. It has become apparent only recently that, because of loads
to this common resource, increased scale will often compromise functionality
since individual parts will have insufficient amount of resources. The goal of
this project is to address this problem, thus enabling scalable transcriptional
programs. Specifically, this project will create feedback controllers of dCas9
level, a protein resource shared among many genetic parts, which compensate for
load effects and distribute the required amount of dCas9 protein to each
subsystem. As a consequence, increased system scale will be possible without
compromising functionality. This, in turn, will enable reaching the level of
sophistication and reliability of system’s function needed for concrete
applications. The project will ultimately produce a broadly applicable tool that
many labs will be able to readily use to achieve truly scalable transcriptional
programs using dCas9. This project will support interdisciplinary education of
graduate and undergraduate students at the cross-roads of control design and
synthetic biology. Education and outreach mechanisms will include research
supervision, teaching a biomolecular feedback systems course including materials
from this project, organizing a workshop bringing control theory and synthetic
biology communities together, and presenting a booth on genetic circuits at the
Cambridge Science Festival. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ultimate objective of
this project is to enable robustness, modularity, and hence scalability of
CRISPR/dCas9 transcriptional programs by ensuring that the composing logic gates
retain their expected functionality when additional gates are included in the
program. Engineered CRISPR/dCas9 systems are a promising tool to create large-
scale transcriptional programs, given that one can design single guide RNAs
(sgRNAs) to target dCas9 to any desired DNA sequence to perform transcriptional
repression (CRISPRi) or activation (CRISPRa). This allows, in principle, an
unlimited library of orthogonal parts. However, it has become apparent that
increased numbers of sgRNAs in a circuit reduces each sgRNA’s ability to repress
its targets, since sgRNAs load dCas9 such that when dCas9 is bound to one sgRNA
it is not available for other sgRNAs. This loading phenomenon couples
theoretically independent gates and results in severe performance degradation.
To solve these problems, it is necessary to devise engineering approaches to
mitigate effects of dCas9 loads. This project will design regulated dCas9
generators, wherein a feedback controller regulates unbound dCas9 level to a
constant value, independent of the presence of gRNA loads. Repression circuits
will be considered first and activation circuits along with mixed circuits will
be addressed in a second step. The performance of the regulated dCas9 generators
will be demonstrated on increasingly complex layered logic gates, including
cascades and NAND gates. These regulated generators will ensure that any one
gate’s functionality is preserved when additional gates are included in a
system. Ultimately, the use of regulated dCas9 generators will enable increased
scale, complexity, and reliability of CRISPR/dCas9
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.