* 2007181
* OAC Core: Small: Efficient and scalable tools for design and analysis of active matter systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shanker Balasubramaniam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2024
* USD 513,999.00

The term "active matter" denotes a novel class of non-equilibrium materials made
up of constituents that are self-driven, powered by converting the energy in the
environment (typically chemical energy) to mechanical work (locomotion or
swimming). They are abundant in nature, from the animate to the inanimate; this
terminology can be used to describe flocks of birds or swarms of bacteria that
self-organize to chemically active colloidal particles. The common
characteristics of active matter are collective motion, anomalous fluctuations,
and mechanical properties that cannot be explained by equilibrium physics. To
date, most studies have been on small systems or a limited number of particles
with the goal of understanding the underlying behavior with over-simplified
property descriptors. This project seeks to develop a framework that will enable
both understanding and exploiting the properties of active matter systems; to
take this engineering leap forward, the project team intends to develop a
publicly available virtual laboratory, the Fast Active Matter Simulator (FAMS),
that will enable prototyping of novel active matter systems via efficient
discrete particle methods. To enable widespread dissemination, the project will
create local K-12 outreach programs, leverage REU opportunities for
undergraduate students, recruit under-represented students, and incorporate
computational techniques into our undergraduate and graduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will transform the
state-of-the-art in active matter research, from understanding simple canonical
systems to design tools that would enable engineering/manipulation of active
matter to build systems. To do so, one needs to account for the morphology of
particles, ambient environment, external forces, etc. As the problem is
inherently multiscale, one needs to develop rigorous methods that are efficient
across these scales, and fully resolve the long- and short-range interactions by
incorporating the details of particle shapes, complex geometries of obstacles,
and confinement boundaries. To realize the above objectives, the project team
will perform research and development in four different areas; (a) higher-order
representation of both geometry and physics on the geometry via isogeometric
methods so as to guarantee fidelity without high cost, (b) casting these
representations within a boundary integral equation based framework, (c)
integrating with a set of acceleration techniques to reduce memory and
computational bottlenecks to facilitate analysis of realistic aggregates, and
(d) integration with existing libraries to leverage parallel algorithms for
linear algebra (dense and sparse). The project will use this framework to
characterize material properties and collective dynamics. These new methods will
transform the state-of-the-art in active matter research, from understanding
simple canonical systems to building tools that would enable
engineering/manipulation of active matter to build virtual “living”
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.