* 2007141
* RI: Small: Representation Learning for Semantic Mapping and Safe Robot Navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2024
* USD 448,515.00

Autonomous robot systems offer tremendous potential for transforming various
industry sectors, including transportation, construction, mining, and
agriculture. The operational conditions in these domains, however, are
unstructured and dynamically changing. This poses a major challenge for current
robot system designs as they depend on static offline environment models and
rigid dynamics models that do not improve with operational experience. The
impact of autonomous systems in these domains is also limited by hand-designed
safety rules that fail to account for the complexity and uncertainty of real-
world operation. This project will develop new theoretical and algorithmic tools
for advancing the ability of autonomous systems to comprehend their surroundings
online from sensory observations and adapt their operation safely in response to
changing conditions. On the educational front, the project aims to increase the
participation of underrepresented undergraduate students in education and
research activites related to robot autonomy in human environments and develop
new talent in the STEM fields, which will be critical for the future of the U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovations of the project include
techniques for online inference of object shapes and robot dynamics models from
sensory observations as well as control design for the learned robot dynamics,
subject to safety constraints from the observed objects. First, an implicit
surface model of object shape, compactly encoded with a latent feature vector is
proposed. An online optimization algorithm to estimate the object poses, shapes,
and robot motion jointly is developed. This algorithm enables semantic
environment understanding and specification of safety constraints for autonomous
navigation. Second, the spectral properties of the Koopman operator and the
versatility of Bayesian neural networks are leveraged to design self-supervised
robot dynamics learning algorithms. These algorithms provide an adaptive way of
estimating robot dynamics from online data, while relying on approximation error
bounds to guarantee that the control design satisfies the safety constraints
provided by the perceptual system. These innovations will enable autonomous
robot operation in unknown environments that is adaptable, due to the use of
learned robot and object models, and safe, due to the use of perception- and
uncertainty-aware constraints in the control design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.