* 2007676
* AF:Small: Semidefinite Programming for High-dimensional Statistics
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Prasad Raghavendra, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With the deluge of data in almost all areas of human endeavor, there is a
growing need for efficient algorithms to uncover underlying patterns and make
inferences from the data. The field of statistics has long studied the task of
making inferences from data, while largely ignoring issues of computational
efficiency, but instead focusing on the quantity of data needed. As data gets
increasingly high-dimensional, noisy and corrupted, computational efficiency
becomes a vital concern. This project will use the powerful technique of
semidefinite programming arising from optimization towards computational tasks
in high-dimensional statistics. Specifically, the goal of this research is to
develop a systematic approach for using semidefinite programming to design
algorithms in high-dimensional statistics. The project will lead to an exchange
of problems, definitions and technical tools between the areas of algorithms,
statistics and statistical physics. The project includes synergistic educational
and outreach activities such as devising a graduate class on complexity of
statistics, facilitating undergraduate and graduate research
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three central themes to this research work.
First, exploiting structure, how can algorithms based on semidefinite
programming (SDP) exploit distributional assumptions about the input? More
precisely, what is the correct way to encode information about the prior
distribution of the input into the SDP-based algorithm? Second, how can
algorithms be designed that are robust to noise, outliers or large deviations in
the data? In its extreme form, how algorithms be designed with guarantees even
in presence of an overwhelming number of outliers? Finally, using techniques
inspired by statistical physics, many statistical problems are conjectured to
exhibit a sudden change in their computational complexity -- a "computational
phase transition". Can the lens of SDP be used to shed more light on these
computational phase transitions? The proposed research would not only lead to a
flurry of new SDP-based algorithms for this class of problems, but also
potentially yield algorithms that provably match the performance of belief-
propagation/message-passing algorithms, an algorithmic approach believed to be
optimal for Bayesian inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.