* 2007068
* Collaborative Research: Backyard Worlds - Characterizing Our Nearest Neighbors Through Citizen Science
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Evgenya Shkolnik, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2022
* USD 11,912.00

Brown dwarfs are objects that form like stars, but are not massive enough to
shine with starlight. Recent discoveries point to an undiscovered population of
brown dwarfs and rogue planets in the solar neighborhood. The Backyard Worlds:
Planet 9 citizen science project (BYW) engages with volunteers from around the
world using infrared images from the Wide-Field Infrared Survey Explorer to
identify overlooked brown dwarfs in the immediate vicinity of the Sun. Over
150,000 volunteers have already contributed to the BYW project, identifying more
than 1600 previously unknown brown dwarfs. The team will use this treasure trove
of brown dwarf candidates uncovered through the BYW project to identify
astrophysically interesting sources for detailed individual studies. The team
will also extend the reach of the BYW project by creating educational materials
based around the BYW science case and investigation strategy to be employed at
the American Museum of Natural History and made available to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a robust ground-based
follow-up program to complement the Backyard Worlds (BYW) archival research
project. Through a combination of photometry and spectroscopy, the team will
observe an array of high-priority brown dwarf candidates for further analysis.
These observations will allow for detailed individual studies of new exotic
objects (e.g., extremely cold brown dwarfs, co-moving companions) to determine
their physical parameters (e.g., effective temperatures, ages, approximate
distances) and will provide the data needed for a more accurate determination of
the local brown dwarf space density. These efforts will leverage the hard work
of citizen scientists to identify the nearest, optimal brown dwarfs as targets
for detailed characterizations with the forthcoming James Webb Space Telescope
and ground-based extremely large telescopes (ELTs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.