* 2007755
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Social Virtual Reality Technology to Improve Networked Meetings
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Joshua McVeigh-Schultz, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 125,996.00

Meetings are essential to getting things done in the workplace. Workplaces are
adopting networked meetings, such as video conferencing, to save costs, support
multi-location teams, and reduce pandemic health risks. Yet, video conferencing
is limited in how it supports team communication and connection. This project
explores building social virtual reality (VR) technology to improve networked
meetings. VR shows promise as a technology for supporting meetings, in new ways,
because it puts team members in a shared media space, which allows for familiar
communication tactics (such as turning toward someone who is talking and
gesturing with your hands). VR also allows adding helpful enhancements to
meeting situations, such as changing how the room looks (from a boardroom to
breakroom), and providing easy-to-use digital tools (such as anonymous voting or
timers). This project will develop social VR tools to improve face-to-face
meetings by helping participants balance participation, time manage, come to
decisions, stick to an agenda, and achieve social connection and support for
ideas. These innovations have the potential to use VR to make online meetings
more effective and satisfying. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate how social
VR technology can enhance networked meetings, this project will (1) use a
research-through-design approach to iteratively conceptualize and develop novel
technical social augmentations in networked VR, motivated by theories of team
meetings and interpersonal communication; (2) perform controlled laboratory and
more ecologically valid field studies; and (3) develop theory and implications
for design of social augmentation networked meetings in VR. The team will build
an extensible VR testbed to enable iterative, rapid prototyping. Thus, expected
research contributions for socially augmented VR networked meetings include a
testbed, prototypes, lab and field study findings regarding the efficacy of
particular social augmentations, theory, and implications for
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.