* 2007154
* SHF: Small: Next-Generation Fully Integrated Power Management Circuits: Enabling Faster and More Efficient Computing and Communication in Smaller and Lower-Cost Mobile Electronics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Cheng Huang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

The semiconductor industry has increasing demands for faster and more efficient
computing and communication with next-generation System-on-Chips (SoCs) and 5G
new radios in thinner, smaller and lower-cost devices. The existing Power
Management Integrated Circuits (PMICs), which are essential to supply power to
different system components, cannot keep up with the needs of future
applications, and become the most significant bottleneck in system development
in respect of speed, form-factor and cost. This project aims to develop new
designs of high-frequency voltage regulators fully integrated with all the
components, including power inductors and capacitors, embedded in the integrated
circuit package. The dynamic speed will be enhanced to enable optimal power-
saving strategies for SoCs, which are essential to relax power and thermal
constraints for higher performance. The enhanced speed will enable high-
bandwidth envelop-tracking techniques, which will greatly reduce the power
overhead in supplying radio-frequency power amplifiers in high-speed
communication systems and improve the overall efficiency. The form factor and
cost will be dramatically reduced. Besides, since power supply is fundamental in
any electronic device, this project will potentially benefit a wide range of
scientific, industrial, and medical applications. In addition, the research,
education and outreach activities will also contribute to training the future
science and engineering workforce and broadening participation in STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the research goal, this project will
develop fully integrated voltage regulators with multiple innovations, e.g., 1)
new power inductors: develop near-free and high-quality power inductors with in-
package parasitics to enable the freedom to expand the number of phases for
faster speed, higher power capacity and better efficiency without increasing the
form-factor and cost; 2) new topologies and design strategies: a) develop
maximum efficiency-tracking strategies to determine the optimal number of phases
at the design stage, as well as in operation; b) develop multi-level topologies
for one-stage voltage conversion directly from the battery to the load; 3) new
controller and circuits: a) push the small-signal bandwidth to the theoretical
limit by developing a self-learning compensator; b) maximize the large-signal
speed by developing a smart hybrid array and a burst-mode operation; c) design
control and circuit techniques to switch the multi-phase and multi-level power
stages with optimal efficiency; d) develop dynamic voltage stress management for
stacking and multi-level topologies to support a wide voltage range with ensured
reliability under high-frequency and high-current operations. The designs will
be realized in silicon and measured with detailed performance
characterizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.