* 2007829
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Small: Anomaly Detection and Performance Optimization for End-to-End Data Transfers at Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Tevfik Kosar, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2024
* USD 240,982.00

Despite continuous efforts and investments to upgrade the networking
infrastructure of research and education institutions to meet the needs of
large-scale science applications, the data transfers on these networks often
perform very poorly. Understanding the underlying reasons for poor transfer
performance is important yet challenging due to the sophisticated design of
today's cyberinfrastructures. This project offers a set of novel models and
algorithms to detect and mitigate performance issues of data transfers in
research networks. The proposed suite of tools helps researchers and system
administrators to pinpoint the root cause of performance problems of data
transfers so that necessary actions can be taken swiftly to minimize their
impact on ongoing transfers. The project will also integrate the research into
all levels of education, including science projects with K-12 students,
development of new curriculum modules for graduate- and undergraduate-level
courses, and summer workshops specifically for minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the true underlying reasons for poor
transfer performance is key to mitigating them and delivering the promised
transfer speeds. However, the involvement of multiple end systems, dynamically
changing background traffic, and the complexity of today's networking
infrastructures turns it into a complicated and time-consuming process. This
project develops a novel anomaly-detection and performance-optimization
framework for end-to-end data transfers at scale. The framework helps to
predict, understand, diagnose, and optimize wide-area file transfers in today's
extreme-scale cyberinfrastructures. To achieve this goal, it derives deep-
neural-network-based predictive models that can relate transfer settings to
throughput. These models are then used to estimate the optimal configuration for
new transfers. The framework also gathers performance metrics for end-system and
network resources periodically to keep track of system utilization. When a
transfer anomaly is detected, the collected metrics are fed into anomaly-
classification models to identify the root causes. Once the underlying reasons
of performance problems are identified, the framework launches a real-time
optimization process to reconfigure the transfer settings such that the impact
of anomalies can be alleviated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.