* 2007842
* Enhancing the Teacher-Curriculum Relationship in Problem-Based Mathematics Classrooms by Connecting Teacher and Student Digital Collaborative Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Phillips, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,887,525.00

The project will create a digital environment for middle school mathematics
teachers to promote collaboration. The digital environment for the teachers
links to a student collaborative environment and contains the same problem-based
curriculum materials. The environment helps teachers to collaborate and learn
from one another. This occurs when teachers plan, teach, and reflect on student
learning. The online, digital platform will help teachers work together more
easily in networks that might be at different schools. The resources online will
include problem-based curriculum materials, classroom artifacts from students,
and resources created by teachers. The project will learn about how teachers use
resources, collaborate in the digital environment, and support each other
through the network. With more curriculum resources being created for online
teaching and learning, the project will help understand how mathematics teaching
and learning can be best supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design-based
research project in mathematics studies a digital, collaborative environment for
teachers that is combined with a student collaborative platform for a middle
school problem-solving curriculum. The goal is to design and develop the digital
collaborative platform so networks of teachers can create, use, and share
teaching resources for planning, enactment, and reflection on student thinking.
The project will include middle school teachers in the design process. The
environment for students enables student thinking to be visible to other
students and the teacher. This allows the teacher to archive and then examine
student reasoning and thinking. The new environment will allow that work to be
shared with other teachers in a professional learning community. The research
question is: how do teachers in networks access, generate, use, and share
teaching resources (including classroom artifacts) as needed to support
mathematics teaching (planning, enactment, and reflection of student thinking)?
The project will use teacher interviews and artifacts from the collaborative
environment for mixed methods data collection and analysis. Teacher reflection
resources will be used to understand how they are thinking about students’
mathematical work and how they are using the platform resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and teachers, through the
research and development of new innovations and approaches. Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.