* 2007911
* CIF: Small: Resource-Efficient Statistical Inference in Networked Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yuejie Chi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 09/30/2024
* USD 497,666.00

Recent years have witnessed tremendous growth in the need of distributed
information processing, where the data are collected, stored, and processed in
and through a large network of distributed agents. Examples include training
better machine intelligence using mobile devices to improve user experiences,
monitoring environments using a network of sensors to reduce and mitigate
wildfire, improving the coordination of unmanned aerial vehicles in
surveillance. This project embarks on a new framework to address emerging
challenges in processing the ever-growing large-scale datasets in a resource-
efficient manner that have been unaddressed until now. The investigators will
actively recruit and train students with diverse backgrounds including
underrepresented minorities and women in STEM through long-term mentoring and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will substantially
advance the algorithmic practice of statistical learning and inference from
high-dimensional distributed data, by developing resource-efficient distributed
statistical inference algorithms in network environments that provably achieve
the optimal trade-offs in statistical error, computation and communication
costs, thereby enabling scalable processing of decentralized and heterogenous
data. Calling for a tight integration of high-dimensional statistical inference
and large-scale decentralized optimization, this project consists of three major
thrusts: (i) develop resource-efficient decentralized statistical estimation
algorithms with provable convergence guarantees; (ii) develop systematic
treatments to ensure algorithmic convergence even in the presence of highly
unbalanced and heterogeneous data, as well as promote diversity for
heterogeneous agents using graph regularization; (iii) promote optimal and
adaptive early stopping criteria for decentralized nonparametric estimation. The
tools and techniques developed herein will further foster the interplay between
a broad range of fields including high-dimensional statistics, large-scale
optimization, statistical signal processing, and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.