* 2007604
* CIF: Small: Strategic Information Provision for the Control of Cyber-Socio-Physical Transportation Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Cedric Langbort, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,315.00

Modern transportation networks are systems whose proper operation depends on
tight interactions between human, algorithmic, and physical elements and whose
regulation (be it to reduce congestion or encourage the use of energy-saving
modalities) must thus accordingly involve all components, including mechanisms
that target human decision-making. Existing approaches typically either rely on
monetary payments (e.g., tolls) or information provision (using, e.g., variable
message signs or routing apps) to influence commuters' choices. A major
difference between these two types of mechanisms is that the former is strategic
(since monetary payments/taxes are computed and implemented with the explicit
goal of inducing a particular socially beneficial behavior), while the latter is
not (since the information provided is simply a report of the actual state of
the road). The goal of this project is to develop tools for the principled
design of information provision mechanisms which are adapted to the specific
conditions and constraints of such cyber-socio-physical (CSP) systems and
actively craft messages to align them with socially efficient
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project builds on the existing
frameworks of Bayesian Persuasion and Information Design from Economics and uses
Control and Information Theory tools, viewpoints, and insights to extend these
approaches to the challenging realm of CSP systems in general, and traffic
networks in particular. Specifically, this project formulates new models of (1)
non-Bayesian and bounded rational decision making occurring in this context and,
(2) strategic messaging under non-classical information structure and addresses
the corresponding information design problems. The project also (3) develops the
necessary tools to incorporate message personalization as a means of introducing
informational decoupling without causing disparate impact among
commuters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.