* 2007073
* CNS Core: Small: Test Framework for Easy and Effective Use of Network Verification
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ratul Mahajan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,980.00

As more people, devices, and services connect to the Internet, computer networks
continue to increase in scale and complexity, which then leads to frequent
outages and security breaches. In recent years, formal modeling and analysis has
emerged as a promising approach to eliminate a broad class of network incidents.
However, today, this approach is difficult to use and provides no feedback on
how well it is being employed or the degree of protection it provides. This
project aims to develop methods and metrics that enable easy and effective use
of formal network analysis. It will develop a test framework which network
engineers can use to easily specify correctness conditions for their networks
and quantify how effectively the network is being tested. Consistent with NSF’s
mission, these capabilities will help secure and fortify computer networks,
which have become an integral part of modern society and
business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a high-level, the project will develop
capabilities similar to those in test frameworks for software. However, networks
are different from software, and the project will thus need to develop new
domain-specific methods and metrics. Key areas of investigation include 1) an
operational model for networks that can provide a basis for scientifically
measuring test coverage; 2) coverage metrics that quantify how well different
aspects of the network are being evaluated by a suite of tests; 3) a high-level
language to easily express network invariants and facilitate coverage
computation; and 4) a practical system that embeds these concepts and integrates
with existing network verification tools to make formal analysis accessible to
average network engineers. The work will be informed by close collaboration with
industry and networks engineers that are either already using formal network
analysis or motivated to do so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.