* 2007606
* Shock formation and interface motion in fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Steve Shkoller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 10/31/2023
* USD 245,000.00

Many flow patterns in nature and technology are distinguished by the presence of
sharp interfaces. Examples of such patterns include surface water waves,
unstable fronts separating fluids with different densities, velocities, or
temperatures, and shock wave fronts across which the fluid experiences
significant changes in pressure, temperature, and velocity. This project will
focus on three fundamental areas of fluid dynamics: (1) a precise description of
the mechanisms that lead to shock wave formation and a detailed description of
the resulting shock singularity, (2) the evolution of water waves (such as ocean
waves) with time-dependent and deformable angled crests and an explanation for
the formation of cusps in these waves, and (3) the development of fast-running
computational models for the motion of material interfaces between two gases
that chemically react and a description of the resulting mixing zone of these
gases. These models will run about 100 times faster than traditional numerical
schemes, and can be used to model fireballs, wildfires, clouds, and variety of
other reacting flows. The project will also provide research opportunities for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop analytical and
numerical methods to study several important fluid mechanics problems involving
sharp interfaces: (1) A detailed study of the formation and propagation of shock
waves for the 3D compressible Euler equations. This shall be achieved by
establishing the asymptotic stability of a generic shock profile in modulated
self-similar variables, controlling the interaction of wave families via: (i)
pointwise bounds along Lagrangian trajectories, (ii) geometric vorticity
structure, and (iii) high-order energy estimates in Sobolev spaces. (2) Study of
crested waves in the 2D free-surface rotational incompressible Euler equations
and formation of cusp singularities in finite time. (3) Development of fast-
running computational models of the classical Rayleigh-Taylor (RT), Kelvin-
Helmholtz (KH), and Richtmyer-Meshkov (RM) instabilities in the presence of
combustion. These instabilities are highly unstable and very expensive to
simulate using traditional computational tools. For RT, small perturbations of
the material interface initially grow according to the linear theory, before the
system enters the nonlinear regime, in which the light fluid bubbles into the
heavy fluid, while the heavy fluid spikes into the light fluid. The velocity of
the resulting flow is discontinuous at this interface, which initiates KH. This
causes the interface to roll up into complex vortical structures and eventually
leads to turbulent mixing. In the presence of combustion, a large and unstable
mixing zone is created. Each of these instabilities arises in numerous important
applications, including in astrophysics, inertial confinement fusion, and ocean
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.