* 2007390
* Collaborative Research: Physics and Applications of Lyman-Alpha Emission of Star-forming Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Renyue Cen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 431,461.00

Observations of Lyman-alpha emitting galaxies (LAEs) provide clues to the
formation and evolution of star forming galaxies, and the large-scale structure
of the Universe. Zheng and Cen will simulate the Lyman-alpha emission for
hundreds of simulated galaxies. This work will establish a theoretical framework
for interpreting LAE observations. The team is actively engaged in public
outreach. Cen participates in a program at the Rose-Hayden Planetarium of the
American Museum of Natural History in New York City. Zheng will work with the
Refugees Exploring the Foundations of Under Graduate Education in Science
program at the University of Utah. The program serves under-represented middle
and high school students through hands-on science workshops and activities
designed to prepare the students for college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zheng and Cen
will employ a high-resolution cosmological hydrodynamic galaxy formation
simulation combined with an efficient Monte Carlo Lyman-alpha radiative transfer
code to investigate Lyman-alpha emission properties of LAEs and the clustering
of LAEs. Observational astronomers will use this theoretical framework to
interpret Lyman-alpha emission from circumgalactic and intergalactic media,
investigate the role of LAEs during the epoch of reionization, and test the use
of LAEs to map large scale structure. The simulated data will also be used to
refine LAE detection algorithms, evaluate systematic uncertainties in on-going
and future LAE surveys, and provide simulated data to test survey analysis
pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.