* 2007952
* Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Gregory Payne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 143,074.00

Non-technical description: This grant funds a workshop to bring together
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) grantees and program managers from the
National Science Foundation (NSF), the Department of Energy (DOE), the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the Air Force Research Laboratory
(AFRL), the Office of Naval Research (ONR), and various other federal agencies
with a stake in the MGI. As NSF's response to the MGI, the Designing Materials
to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) program seeks to foster tight
collaborations between materials researchers with expertise in synthesis,
experiment, theory, computation, and data science. These collaborations are
founded on highly iterative feedback loops in which experimental results
directly inform theory and computation, and vice versa, with the goal of
accelerating the discovery and development of new materials. This workshop
provides researchers a forum to share their research results and discuss cross-
cutting topics related to establishing and sustaining research collaborations.
Results from the workshop will be made available to the broader materials
community and the public in the form of an electronic (PDF) Conference
Proceeding booklet that will include abstracts from the posters and
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Researchers that
participate in projects that operate under the philosophy of the Material Genome
Initiative (MGI) provide leadership to the broader materials research community
through the implementation of strategies to realize the Initiative's mission of
reducing both the cost and time it takes to bring a new material to market. The
goals of the workshop are to: 1) Promote collaboration among MGI PIs, 2)
Accelerate materials research through data-driven approaches including
artificial intelligence, machine learning, and natural language processing, 3)
Transition fundamental research along the Materials Development Continuum, and
4) Proactively address educational and diversity issues. Overarching themes
identified through presentations, break-out sessions, and discussions will be
presented in a report for dissemination to the broader materials research
community and the public. MGI projects are developing tools that are made
available to aid research of the larger community and this workshop presents an
effective means to implement this task. The workshop, which will be held in
College Park, Maryland on March 30-31, 2020 follows in a series of successful
workshops, the latest being held in College Park, Maryland on March 26-27,
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.