* 2007707
* CNS Core: Small: Boomerang: A Symbiotic Software Architecture for Real-Time Distributed Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Richard West, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 497,693.00

This project focuses on the development of a real-time distributed embedded
system (RTDES) for timing and safety-critical applications, in areas such as
semi-autonomous and driverless cars, robotics and manufacturing. The proposed
system, called Boomerang, aims to enforce spatial and temporal isolation between
tasks of different criticality levels on the same hardware. This will ensure
tasks with a severe consequence of failure are isolated from less important
tasks, while being able to meet their timing requirements. Boomerang uses a
collection of lightweight partitioning hypervisors running on each host to
securely divide machine resources among different guest domains. It will support
the co-existence of a real-time operating system (RTOS) and one or more legacy
systems such as Linux or Android on each physical host, to provide a mutually
beneficial symbiotic relationship for the task at hand. The legacy systems will
gain access to real-time capabilities, while the RTOS will be empowered with a
rich collection of features that would take years to
develop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boomerang is being evaluated in the context of
DriveOS, an automotive system for a high-performance, potentially autonomous,
electric car being built with an industrial partner. Beyond DriveOS, Boomerang
will provide opportunities for new classes of cyber-physical applications in
smart manufacturing, robotics, and transportation systems, among others, where
decisions are made by machines without recourse to human inputs. Boomerang will
offer opportunities to build new distributed systems for neuromorphic computing
applications, allowing real-time task pipelines to process large-scale sensor
inputs and produce outputs similar to how a brain communicates between sensory
and motor neurons. Lessons learned will lead to more safe, secure and robust
distributed systems, with capabilities to learn and make informed decisions with
respect to their environments. A Boomerang RTDES envisions end-to-end processes
operating with potentially sub-millisecond latencies, making it suitable for
situations where human control would be insufficient. Through this project, new
courses on real-time computing and new research opportunities for undergraduate
students are being developed. The project is also working with a number of
outreach efforts on the Boston University campus such as the Drone Racing Club,
BU BUILDS, SheHacks, and the Spark! Initiative to increase student interest in
computing and entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.