* 2007715
* III: Small: Opportunistic Learning on Wheels: Peer-wise Training of Machine Learning Models among Connected Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Fan Ye, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,556.00

Vehicles are becoming computers on wheels, instrumented with rich varieties of
sensors producing large amounts of complex data for driving control, road and
weather conditions. Machine learning models become indispensable to enable the
vehicles to interpret the data, recognize the environments and make control
decisions. Training robust, accurate models in vehicular environments pose new
challenges due to constant vehicle mobility; low-rate, unreliable, intermittent
peer-wise and cloud communication; and extremely diverse road/weather
conditions. Recent federated learning methods have started to address
constrained cloud communication. However, they do not exploit peer collaboration
among resource-rich vehicles, or consider spatial-temporal correlation in data
quality, quantity and diversity, thus cannot fully utilize the rich datasets
produced. This project specifically exploits unique opportunities in vehicular
environments to training robust, accurate models using rich datasets. It will
support the education and training of both undergraduate and graduate students
in the important discipline of modern machine learning methods, the mentoring of
high school students in scientific exploration, and exchange of latest advances
with the industry and possible pilot studies for technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a novel opportunistic
learning (OL) paradigm: peer-wise vicinity vehicles exploit the opportunistic
nature of encounters, connectivity and data availability, and use that to
orchestrate peer collaboration and cloud assistance to train robust, accurate
machine learning models jointly. Vicinity vehicles exchange training updates
peer-wise and with the cloud to produce aggregate models. Based on short/long
term vehicular mobility and connectivity, vehicles and road-side boxes migrate
or pre-fetch training states to handle departure and arrival of vehicles.
Incentive mechanisms derived from explore-exploit learning of drivers' cost
distributions will motivate vehicle participation, maximize training utility
while preserving driver privacy. This project will produce a holistic set of
foundational algorithms and systems for training accurate, robust machine
learning models in highly dynamic vehicular and edge environments beyond what
existing federated learning methods can achieve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.