* 2007159
* SHF: Small: An Integrated Hardware-Software Architecture for Efficient, Low-Power, Spatially Collaborative Computing in Augmented Reality
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Li Xiao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 466,000.00

Emerging mobile applications are increasingly focused on technology interacting
with and augmenting the real-world environment the user occupies. Augmented
reality is a technology that places virtual objects on a user’s view of the real
world with a wide range of applications such as navigation, gaming, and
education. Augmented reality as a technology is inherently extremely
computation-heavy, leading to latency, accuracy, and energy-consumption issues
on resource-constrained smartphones. Image-recognitio- based augmented reality
compounds this issue by requiring the computation of the entire image-
recognition pipeline. In addition, mobile hardware is not designed with
augmented reality and heavy image-based computations in mind. Mobile caching,
multicores, GPUs and other mobile architectures are not being utilized to their
full potential to help resolve the issues plaguing mobile augmented reality.
This project explores methods to utilize the unique mobile architecture of off-
the-shelf smartphones in new ways to realize augmented reality on a wide variety
of mobile devices. Specifically, augmented reality has become an important tool
for educators at all levels from K-12 all the way through collegiate and post-
graduation education. This project will allow for this new educational
technology to be more widely utilized in the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to enable smartphones to support augmented reality
via efficiently and seamlessly computing image-recognition and world-tracking
tasks simultaneously, with three research components. (1) Investigate the
foundational issues of smartphone-based augmented-reality through approximate-
tracking to provide high-quality object tracking at reduced computational and
energy loads. (2) Research software-defined caching techniques to utilize the
unique nature of mobile augmented reality to provide caching specially designed
for highly collaborative device-to-device augmented reality. (3) Explore
hardware-based techniques relating to GPGPU computation and cache management to
facilitate fast and efficient image-recognition and augmented-reality
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.