* 2007861
* Collaborative Research: FET: Small: Hierarchical Computational Framework for large scale RNA Design Pathway Discovery through Data and Experiments
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Giulia Pedrielli, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

RNA nanostructure design has received unprecedented attention due to the number
of emerging applications in different scientific fields, such as diagnostics,
therapeutics, synthetic biology, biological materials, and molecular
programming. However, the design and synthesis of long RNA molecules with
improved stability, programmable geometries, and controllable functions is an
incredibly challenging task. The difficulties of large RNA design are due to
their long sequences and complex interactions between bases. In addition, once a
structure is designed, conducting experiments is time-consuming and expensive.
It is invaluable to develop a platform with effective design algorithms and
tools for RNA design with high efficiency and accuracy. This project will
advance national health prosperity and welfare, providing the required knowledge
for the design and synthesis of long RNAs with the desired functionalities and
improved stabilities. These RNAs will have an important potential impact in
applications such as drug delivery and cancer therapy. The team will develop new
computational methods enabling support to the discovery of next-generation
nanostructure in a more efficient and informed manner. It will also improve the
understanding and knowledge of fundamental rules that characterize the folding
of large-scale RNA sequences. The project will involve algorithm development
along with experimental activities. As a result, educational material will be
developed across science and engineering programs bringing a diverse group of
students together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most existing RNA-design algorithms
focus on conserved, naturally evolved 3D RNA motifs. These algorithms employ the
idea of a “block”, which consists of nucleotides (nts) at the scale of ~10nts,
and investigate the possible bindings among nucleotides pairs within and between
the blocks (block-driven approach). Current approaches suffer from the low
accuracy for prediction of large RNA molecules folding (&gt;200 nts). This is a
critical issue because there is a compelling need to generate longer sequences
to fully exploit RNA functionalities such as catalysis, gene regulation,
organization of proteins in large machineries, and their use in material and
biomedical sciences. Several challenges make the task of designing large-scale
RNA structures hard. As an example, RNA compounds can be stable even when they
are not minimum free-energy configurations. Also, experiments have shown how
alternative configurations can exist for the same RNA sequence, with different
associated levels of minimum free energy. It is therefore necessary to come up
with approaches, experimental as well as computational, that can be agnostic to
a reward function, e.g., embed data-driven information to determine the
likelihood of an RNA configuration to exist. This multidisciplinary project will
tackle two main challenges for the development of the design of RNA structures.
(i) Perform optimization without explicit knowledge of a reward function. The
concept of optimization driven by empirically developed experts will be
developed in this project. (ii) Scale the methods in (i) to high-dimensional
cases. A bio-inspired concept of tile is employed to create a computationally
efficient algorithmic framework to generate and explore tiles, which will be
evaluated using expert-driven rollout over chains of tiles. The produced
algorithms will be subsequently validated using existing RNA databases. New RNA
building blocks will be proposed and constructed through the algorithmic
framework, to be validated as an assistant tool to the design of single-stranded
RNA origami structures with increasing size and complexity that could
potentially rival the natural RNA machineries or designer DNA
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.