* 2007498
* CIF: Small: Deep Stochastic Geometry: A New Paradigm for Wireless Network Analysis and Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Martin Haenggi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

The use of wireless networks is rapidly extending towards applications with
strict reliability and/or latency constraints. For example, in 5G cellular
systems, standards not only specify average data rates but also the minimum
rates that 95% of the users should be able to achieve. Meanwhile, for vehicular
safety messaging or in manufacturing, extremely high reliability under strict
latency constraints is required. In contrast to these developments, the
theoretical tools available for wireless network analysis and design mostly
focus on network-wide averages, which makes them unsuitable for these new
applications. As a result, there is an urgent need to develop a theory for
networks with strict performance constraints and guarantees. This project
focuses on the development of such a theory, which will allow a sharp
performance analysis and enable researchers and engineers in industry to
characterize the user experience much more efficiently than by lengthy and
expensive simulations. Accordingly, it is expected to have a significant impact
on the design of future wireless systems. In addition, it will help train future
generations of students in emerging wireless technologies and analytical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In view of the increasing density,
irregularity, and uncertainty in the locations of wireless transceivers, a
probabilistic approach to modeling and analysis that includes the network
geometry as its key ingredient is warranted. Stochastic geometry is the natural
mathematical tool for modeling and analysis. However, its use has been largely
restricted to the derivation of average performance metrics, which do not
capture the disparity in the link or user performances nor incorporate
reliability or latency constraints. To address these shortcomings, this project
develops a new theoretical framework, called deep stochastic geometry, that
focuses on spatial distributions rather than merely averages. Deep stochastic
geometry enables a direct evaluation of the performance of user or link
percentiles and the performance under constraints. As such, it is a theory of
guaranteed performance, in contrast to the existing theory of average
performance. At the heart of the new theory are so-called meta distributions,
which are distributions of conditional distributions (given the network
geometry). Meta distributions naturally emerge when the different sources of
randomness in a network are separated according to their time scales. The
specific research activities include the development of efficient numerical
methods and simulation techniques to calculate meta distributions, finding
effective approximation techniques, the extension of meta distributions to joint
distributions, and, finally, the combination of multiple metrics into a
comprehensive approach to characterize and optimize network performance under
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.