* 2007669
* CIF: Small: Foundations of Serverless Computing: Optimizing Latency and Utility
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Serverless computing platforms represent the fastest growing segment of cloud
services, and are predicted to dominate cloud computing in the near future.
These platforms run user-specified functions and automatically manage the
underlying compute resources for the users. Serverless computing has the
potential to impact fields as diverse as scientific computing, large-scale
optimization, deep neural networks (DNNs), and video encoding in real-time due
to its ease of management, inexpensiveness, massive scalability and flexibility
in terms of compute power. In order to harness the full potential, however,
several fundamental challenges must be addressed concerning several unique
attributes of serverless computing, namely ephemeral machines, low memory
footprint, heavy communication costs, and substantially different pricing
policies. This project approaches these unique challenges by combining cutting-
edge techniques from distributed computing with innovative concepts from coding
theory, information theory, optimization, and game theory. The broader societal
impact of this project is best appreciated by considering that nearly everyone,
knowingly or unknowingly, benefits from the efficacy and ubiquity of cloud
computing which has come to underly everything in modern digital life from web
searches to online transactions. As serverless platforms are expected to
dominate cloud computing in the near future, this project is expected to provide
significant benefits by increasing efficiencies and reducing the user costs of
cloud services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal takes a principled and
foundational approach to minimizing latency and costs in serverless computing.
This will lead to the development of theory and algorithms driven by theoretical
principles which are informed by coding and information theory, resource
allocation and optimization, randomized linear algebra, as well as mechanism
design and game theory. The project consists of two major components: (a)
Robust, efficient, and massively scalable distributed computing algorithms for
latency minimization in serverless systems by integrating the power of coded
computation into an optimization framework; and (b) Optimal pricing schemes for
cost minimization, which leverage incentive mechanisms for pricing that maximize
the total utility across customers, and enable cloud service providers to
achieve favorable trade-offs between quality-of-service and
revenue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.