* 2007741
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Internet-Scale Measurement of TCP/IP Implementation Weaknesses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jedidiah Crandall, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 225,000.00

This project will uncover network protocol implementations that are common on
the Internet and are susceptible to side channel attacks. This can have serious
security implications for applications such as Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)
and Domain Validation ((DV), that proves an organization owns an Internet domain
such as www.example.com before issuing a certificate that the organization can
present to web browsers as authentication). A side channel is a mechanism where
information flows where it was not intended to flow according to the design of a
system. An analogy might be a foreign government counting the number of pizza
deliveries to the Pentagon and inferring last-minute planning for a big event
when the number of pizzas increases sharply. In other contexts, side channels
have led to fundamental breakdowns in the basic security mechanisms that
separate processes in an operating system (see Meltdown and Spectre, which are
vulnerabilities in the way computers enforce the most basic separation of
security contexts), and have been used to crack even then strongest
cryptography. The TCP and IP protocols lay the foundation for the Internet, but
are known to be susceptible to side channels if certain requirements are not
met. Requests for Comments (RFCs), (the documents that develop and define
Internet standards) describe how, for example, certain numbers must be chosen in
an unpredictable manner, or limiting the rate at which packets are sent must be
applied in a specific way, in order to mitigate the effects of TCP/IP side
channels. Failure to follow these RFCs undermines the most basic assumption of
Internet security: that in order for an attacker to infer the existence of,
interfere with, or inject their own data into a communication the attacker must
control a part of the network in between the two parties that are
communicating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Violating this basic assumption can be
devastating for Internet users that are acting in the U.S.'s interest, such as
journalists, activists, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) overseas that
use tunneling of some kind to bypass Internet controls in their own country. A
major technical challenge that the project will address is to explore the
astronomically large number of possibilities for how sequences of probes sent by
researchers might result in predictable patterns in the responses given by
different Internet hosts. Predictable patterns indicate a vulnerability because
the security model assumes an attacker will not be able to guess the numbers
that protocols use for sequencing and other purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines expertise in network security and data mining to search the
Internet for patterns where there should be none. Through a combination of
carefully designed experiments to measure how Internet hosts respond to
different combinations of probes, temporal data mining to uncover patterns, and
an infrastructure for measuring the entire Internet longitudinally, the project
will reveal how custom network stacks have created a situation where a
significant fraction of Internet servers do not protect against side channel
attacks. These custom TCP/IP implementations are commonly developed for the
cloud, "middleboxes" such as load balancers and firewalls, and the Internet of
Things. The proposed work will address this situation through the ethical
disclosure process, engaging Internet standards bodies, and educating
researchers and users about these threats. Educational activities and outreach
will leverage the unique population of the Southwestern U.S. and the expertise
of the PIs to support diversification of the field and workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.