* 2007462
* AF: Small: Computational Complexity Lower Bounds: Time, Space and Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ran Raz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

While computers have revolutionized our world, the resources&lt;br/&gt;required
to perform computational tasks are poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;Developing a
mathematical theory of computation is crucial in our&lt;br/&gt;information age,
where computers are involved in essentially every&lt;br/&gt;part of our life.
Computational complexity, the study of the amount&lt;br/&gt;of resources needed
to perform computational tasks, is essential&lt;br/&gt;for understanding the
power of computation and for the development&lt;br/&gt;of a theory of
computation. It is also essential in designing&lt;br/&gt;efficient communication
protocols and secure cryptographic protocols,&lt;br/&gt;and in understanding
human and machine learning. Proving lower&lt;br/&gt;bounds for the resources
required by different computational&lt;br/&gt;models, and for different
computational tasks, is among the most&lt;br/&gt;exciting, most challenging and
most important topics in theoretical&lt;br/&gt;computer science. The project
will study computational complexity&lt;br/&gt;lower bounds, focusing on two
research directions: Lower bounds&lt;br/&gt;related to learning; and, studying
the relative power of quantum&lt;br/&gt;and classical computational
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more details, we will focus on the following
directions. (1)&lt;br/&gt;Memory-Samples lower bounds for learning:
memory/samples lower&lt;br/&gt;bounds for online learning algorithms is a very
exciting research&lt;br/&gt;direction that has been studied in a line of recent
work. For&lt;br/&gt;example, it was proved that any algorithm for learning
parities&lt;br/&gt;requires either a memory of quadratic size or an exponential
number&lt;br/&gt;of samples. The project will further study memory/samples
lower&lt;br/&gt;bounds for learning and their relations to other topics
in&lt;br/&gt;computational complexity. (2) The relative power of quantum
and&lt;br/&gt;classical computational models: The project will study gaps
between&lt;br/&gt;quantum and classical complexity in various models. In
particular, it&lt;br/&gt;will investigate separations between quantum and
classical communication complexity,&lt;br/&gt;as well as the relative power of
quantum and classical algorithms&lt;br/&gt;in the context of memory/samples
trade-offs for learning. (3)&lt;br/&gt;Circuit complexity lower bounds related
to learning: The amazing&lt;br/&gt;success of machine learning, and in
particular deep learning,&lt;br/&gt;motivates a study of closely related
computational models. The&lt;br/&gt;project will study linear-threshold circuits
and other models of&lt;br/&gt;circuits that are related to
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.