* 2007737
* CNS Core: Small: Semeru: A memory-disaggregated managed runtime
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Harry Xu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Modern computing relies heavily on cloud computing systems. The cloud computing
systems are powered by large datacenters. Each datacenter contains thousands of
machines deployed across the globe. These datacenters are often equipped with
heterogeneous hardware devices designed for different kinds of workloads. The
ability to use these many machines and devices efficiently and reliably is key
to the quality of the services they may provide, and therefore paramount to
cloud computing system providers. Recently, resource disaggregation has been
proposed as an effective means to improve datacenter reliability and resource
utilization. Resource disaggregation builds each resource type as a standalone
resource, called a â€œblade", and connects different resource blades with a
network. The Semeru project develops runtime and operating system (OS) support
that allows users to run managed cloud applications efficiently in resource-
disaggregated datacenters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semeru focuses on three major
thrusts for improving locality for applications and garbage collection (GC) that
manages memory for these applications. First, it develops a unified memory
abstraction between the Central Processing Unity (CPU) and memory servers,
referred to as the Unified Java Heap. This allows CPU and memory servers to see
the same virtual address space for the Java heap. Second, it develops a
distributed garbage collector (GC) that offloads part of the GC to memory
servers, utilizing their idle and weak compute capability to perform continuous,
close-to-data object tracing. Object tracing can significantly improve the GC
performance. Third, it co-optimizes the runtime and OS kernel so that the OS can
provide efficient swapping support as well as new system calls for the runtime.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Semeru project builds a memory-disaggregated runtime
for managed cloud workloads, making it possible to translate low-level hardware
advances to visible performance benefits that managed cloud applications can
enjoy. The development of the project includes a postdoctoral scholar as well as
several graduate and undergraduate students, including students from minority
groups. It not only advances the state of the art of resource disaggregation,
but also trains current and future computing system
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project produces a set of artifacts
including technical reports, published papers, as well as code repositories.
These artifacts are all made available online at
http://www.cs.ucla.edu/~harryxu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.