* 2007501
* CHS: Small: Envisioning and Prototyping Artificial Intelligence Product and Service Innovations with User Experience Designers
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* John Zimmerman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 532,000.00

Design innovations follow technical advances. Philips’ 1962 invention of the
cassette recorder was a technical advance. Design innovations followed, placing
cassette audio recording and playback capabilities into new forms people found
useful and valuable. These included the boombox, car stereo, Walkman, and home
answering machine. Artificial intelligence (AI) has achieved many technical
advances, but insufficient design innovation. To enable their innovation
capabilities, design teams need to better understanding what AI can do. This
research will address current breakdowns in the innovation process. It will
develop new taxonomies, tools, and theory—to unleash the creative skills of
designers in industry and academia—for envisioning and prototyping innovative
uses and forms for AI products and services. The research team will disseminate
refined versions of the new AI design innovation resources through online
training modules, undergraduate and graduate courses, courses for professional
user experience (UX) designers, and workshops with professionals at
practitioner-focused events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For AI innovation, the
research team will perform these design activities: (1) develop and evaluate a
taxonomy of AI capabilities, while addressing algorithmic bias and privacy; (2)
develop and evaluate a taxonomy of design patterns for how AI system outputs are
presented to potential innovators, including approaches to explainable AI; (3)
co-design new tools for wireframing AI system behaviors, documenting AI
concepts, and communicating with and across AI development teams, through
prototyping workshops with professional UX designers; and (4) develop theory and
design implications through field evaluations of the AI design innovation
taxonomies, tools, and communicative forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.