* 2007398
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Scrutable and Explainable Information Retrieval with Model Intrinsic and Agnostic Approaches
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Vivek Srikumar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Information Retrieval (IR) systems are important for people for information
access. For example, intelligent search engines are widely used in Web-based
services such as web search, product search, and job search. Recently,
sophisticated data and complicated black-box models have made modern IR systems
less transparent to users. However, as more and more people rely on IR systems
to guide their daily life and decision making, there has been growing needs of
explainable search results, both for technical communities and the general
public, so that they understand why certain search results are provided.
Meanwhile, governmental agencies are demanding IR systems to provide not only
high-quality results, but also reasonable justifications, so as to enhance the
trustworthiness of the systems. This project focuses on developing algorithms
and frameworks to improve the scrutability, explainability, and transparency of
modern IR systems. It will inspire large-scale academic-industry collaboration,
which benefits billions of users by facilitating the development of reliable and
explainable information access services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop general and reusable frameworks for scrutable and explainable IR.
Research in this project will be performed on two directions. The first
direction aims at new retrieval models for model-intrinsic explanation. This
includes developing transparent inference process and decision boundaries for
retrieval actions, scrutable functions that support result exploration with user
feedback, and traceable information flow to distinguish the contribution of
model inputs. The second direction aims at building analytical and simulative
framework for model-agnostic explanation. This includes post-hoc explanation
systems with external knowledge, and a simulation framework over black-box
retrieval models with explainable outputs. Besides model-intrinsic and model-
agnostic approaches, this project will also investigate crowd-sourcing tasks and
systematic metrics to compare the effectiveness of intrinsic and agnostic
explanations. The research outcomes will include multiple public benchmark
datasets and evaluation platforms for explainable IR, which will contribute to
the research community for sustainable and reproducible future
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.