* 2007454
* CNS Core: Small: Next Generation Tiered Spectrum Licensing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Alhussein Abouzeid, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 428,404.00

Wireless mobile broadband is a key driver for innovation and economic growth.
Sustaining this growth is challenging and requires both technological and
regulatory innovations that increase the wireless spectrum utilization, in order
to be able to accommodate more data traffic within the finite spectrum resource.
The exponential increase in traffic demand is expected to continue with the
deployment of 5G networks and beyond, hence placing additional challenges that
need innovative solutions. Despite more than a decade of intense research
activity on dynamic spectrum sharing, there are still fundamental open questions
regarding spectrum policies and their impact on spectrum utilization. This
project helps meet these challenges, by providing tools and mathematical
foundations that enable regulators, and the research community, to understand
and design efficient spectrum sharing policies leading to wireless broadband
networks that are more capable of carrying more traffic than what is envisioned
today. In addition, the project designs new education courses and material that
prepare the next generation of the workforce to design and operate such high-
performance networks. It also includes activities to reach-out to K-12 students
and increase the number and diversity of US citizens in science and engineering,
which is essential for sustained economic growth and
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal is that it develops a stochastic modeling and optimization approach to
study the techno-economic aspects of spectrum licensing policies, with a focus
on layered/tiered licensing architectures. In this approach, the revenue
processes and customer demands are modeled as stochastic processes. A regulator
is modeled as an entity that attempts to set spectrum policies that maximize
spectrum utilization given various levels of knowledge, or lack thereof, of the
stochastic and complex dynamics of the market. This sets up a stochastic
optimization framework that makes it possible to compare different spectrum
regulatory policies as a function of the market. In addition, it also
characterizes the optimal values of the parameters of the spectrum policies that
achieve the optimal (maximum) spectrum utilization for a given market. It also
provides real-time randomized algorithms for operators to optimize their
spectrum portfolios without prior knowledge of the market/spectrum dynamics.
Thus this framework captures both regulator and operator perspectives. The
research provides tools to enable regulators, and the research community, to
explore "what-if" licensing policies, which is currently not possible except
through primarily qualitative and subjective case/empirical studies. The plan
includes extensive validations and comparisons against publicly available data
sets and simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.