* 2007256
* AF:Small:Unifying Information Aggregation and Information Elicitation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Grant Schoenebeck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 349,907.00

Crowdsourcing is an approach to solving problems via distributed effort. In the
future, crowdsourcing mechanisms should prove useful in gathering and
aggregating information in a variety of contexts including basic scientific
research, reputation systems, peer grading, and many decision-making contexts
including purchasing, product development, pricing, etc. This project will
design practical crowdsourcing mechanisms to incentivize users to report
accurate data, even when the veracity cannot be directly verified. A key part of
this is accurately measuring the quality of the information reported. Building
mechanisms sufficiently robust for dealing with diverse types of agents is
necessary for the success of this proposal. Thus, it has applications beyond
crowdsourcing to big data more broadly (interpreting data from diverse sources
of varying reliability) and algorithmic fairness. The research efforts will be
integrated with the educational and outreach activities of the investigator, who
has a record of broadly disseminating cutting-edge research to high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students through teaching, outreach programs, and
personal mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in the field of
information elicitation show how to use information-theoretic concepts to
truthfully elicit unverifiable information from agents. The heart of these
results is first to employ clever techniques to indirectly measure ``mutual
information" between agents, then to compensate agents proportionally to the
mutual information measurement. There is also increasing work in learning
theory, especially to enable learning with noisy or adversarial data. The goal
of this proposal is to create a bridge between the information-elicitation and
information-aggregation tasks. By using an information-theoretic underpinning we
can unify the progress of these fields, and, in many instances, fuse these tasks
together. The project will undertake the following. 1) Design full pipeline
systems by uniting the techniques of information elicitation and aggregation
into one streamlined process. 2) Examine how to better measure information-
theoretic concepts required for truthful elicitation algorithms. 3) Address
important concerns such as algorithmic fairness, optimal and realistic payments,
and robustness. Moreover, this proposal will help to better integrate
information theory into the computer-science community, which is essential in
the era of data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.