* 2007836
* III: Small: Labeling Massive Data from Noisy, Incomplete and Crowdsourced Annotations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Xiao Fu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 414,942.00

Alongside the prosperity of deep learning, the demand for reliably labeled data
is unprecedentedly high. Label acquisition is a highly nontrivial task---data
labeling is tedious, labor-intensive, and prone to mistakes. Crowdsourcing
techniques that integrate annotations from multiple annotators to improve
accuracy have been essential for labeling large-scale data. However, existing
crowdsourcing techniques face pressing challenges such as heavy workload of
annotators, high computational cost, and a lack of strong theoretical
guarantees.  This project will develop a series of analytical and computational
tools for accurately labeling massive datasets from noisy, incomplete, and
crowdsourced annotations---with provable guarantees. Leveraging advanced
nonnegative matrix factorization theory, this project will offer solutions that
are efficient and effective under critical conditions. The outcomes are expected
to have broad and substantial positive impacts on the currently label-hungry
artificial intelligence industry and the data annotation workforce. For example,
the algorithms designed for handling structured data (e.g., speech) will largely
benefit timely applications, e.g., intelligent assistants such as Alexa and
Siri. The ability of reliably working under largely incomplete data will help
design new data dispatch schemes leading to significantly reduced annotator
workload. The project will also offer many training opportunities for
undergraduate students, with an emphasis on engaging those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of theory and methods, many aspects of
crowdsourced data labeling (e.g., sample complexity, noise robustness, and
identifiability of the underlying statistical model) are still poorly
understood. This project will provide a suite of theoretical and computational
tools that advance these aspects. To be specific, the first thrust will build up
a coupled nonnegative matrix factorization (CNMF) framework that bridges the
classic Dawid-Skene model for crowdsourcing and advanced nonnegative factor
analysis theories. This will establish firm theoretical foundations for
crowdsourcing under critical conditions, and lead to theory-backed algorithms to
attain substantially improved sample complexity and noise/incomplete data
robustness. The second thrust exploits domain-dependent knowledge, e.g., data
structure and annotator dependence, to come up with situation-aware
crowdsourcing techniques for enhanced performance. The third thrust designs
stochastic optimization strategies to provide scalable implementations for the
CNMF framework, and evaluates the proposed methods over a variety of real-world
applications. The analytical and computational tools developed in this project
will provide strong provable guarantees and refreshing algorithmic solutions for
long-standing challenges in crowdsourced data labeling. In addition, the CNMF
theory and algorithms are exciting new directions for computational linear
algebra, whose impacts can go well beyond this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.