* 2007662
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Tracking User Behavior, Cognitive Burdens, and the Impact of Behavioral Nudging on Security Updates by Young and Older Adults
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Joseph Stephens, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Computer security significantly depends on user behaviors, including choices
about whether and when to apply software updates. Many security problems,
including high-profile data breaches, are caused by failure to update vulnerable
software, even after security issues are known and patches are available. In
order to make computing more secure, there is a need to better understand the
decision-making processes of users regarding their choices to apply, delay, or
ignore security-related software updates. For example, how are decisions about
software updates affected by other tasks the user is currently performing? How
is the decision-making process different for users who are older adults versus
users who are young adults? This project seeks to answer these questions with
experiments that place young and older adult users in a variety of security-
related software updating situations to test specific theories of how task-
related factors and cognitive aging influence behavior. The research team
includes computer scientists and cognitive psychologists, and will innovatively
combine knowledge from these two areas. The project serves the national interest
both by advancing scientific knowledge of decision making processes, and how
that knowledge may be applied to promote public welfare through increased
computing security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses multiple,
complementary methods to increase understanding of cybersecurity behaviors of
non-expert users in personal computing environments, including: systematic
evaluation of the security update ecosystem to identify factors that may affect
cybersecurity behaviors; surveying non-expert users to measure attitudes and
expected behaviors in response to various software update scenarios; development
and field testing of specific software update scenarios in personal computing
environments; and development and testing of behavioral nudge interventions
hypothesized to increase compliance with security-related software updating.
These methods are employed to test the efficacy of protection motivation theory,
cognitive load theory, and locus of control theory in the cybersecurity domain,
and the results will contribute to the development of efficacious security-
related software update strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.