* 2007718
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Reuse and Migration of GUI Tests
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jianwei Niu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

Software applications with Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) have become
essential in people's daily lives, and sufficient testing is a necessity to
ensure their quality. When performed manually, GUI testing is a costly and
tedious process requiring many human testers to explore the user interface and
check whether the output is as expected. In contrast, existing automated testing
techniques are less effective due to the lack of availability of domain
knowledge that human testers typically possess. In this project, the
investigators will explore the reuse and migration of manual GUI tests, an
alternative route to complement existing automatic GUI testing research. The
intuitive observation behind the project is that developers tend to use similar
GUI designs in different platform versions of a same application or different
applications within the same domain. Therefore, it is possible to reuse the
exploration sequences, input values, and expected output with proper adaptations
taking into account the subtle implementation differences between applications.
The project is expected to enhance the coverage and productivity of GUI-testing
processes, leading to GUI applications with higher quality and fewer defects.
Additionally, the incorporated training and education activities will provide
opportunities for participants to acquire research experience and become highly
qualified researchers and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the PIs are going to answer the research question: whether and how existing GUI
tests can be reused in automatic GUI testing with necessary adaptation. In
particular, the investigators will work on the generation of GUI-code embeddings
to represent the semantics of GUI views and develop novel GUI-view mapping
techniques to map GUI views among different applications. The investigators will
also study how input-value constraints and event-sequence constraints in
existing GUI tests can be extracted as domain knowledge, how such knowledge can
be translated across platform and application boundaries, as well as how the
translated knowledge can be incorporated into the automatic GUI-test generation
process of the target application. Moreover, the investigators will develop
techniques to identify the potential reusability of existing test oracles based
on measuring their fitness with the new context, and techniques to create new
test oracles by summarizing common behaviors of software applications in the
same domain. The findings of this project are intended to shed light on the more
general problem of reusing and migrating any test cases such as unit tests and
integration tests, as well as the solution to the open problem of creating
meaningful test oracles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.