* 2007538
* Collaborative Research: The Circumgalactic Dictionary: An Interpretation Guide For Circumgalactic Medium Observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Varsha Kulkarni, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 224,769.00

The history of the formation of a galaxy like our own Milky Way is recorded in
the properties of gas between the visible stars in the galaxy. The gas is in low
density clouds and is difficult to study. This surrounding gas is usually
detected by observing its silhouette in the light of background quasars, known
as “quasar absorption lines”. The investigators will develop tools to help
astronomers to better interpret the chemical history of this gas. They will
develop tools to use quasar absorption lines to determine the gas composition,
temperature and density. These tools will better determine where the gas clouds
are in these galaxies and how clouds of gas are moving. By comparing the
properties of these clouds of gas, they seek to understand the history of
galaxy’s transformation of hydrogen and helium into more complex atoms. During
this study, the investigators will train graduate and undergraduate students in
a variety of astronomical and machine learning techniques. The investigators
will reach out to K-12 students and the community at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will generate synthetic quasar
absorption spectra from galaxy formation simulations for a range of galaxy
masses and properties. They will analyze these simulated spectra in the same
manner as astronomical observations. By correlating observed spectra with
synthetic absorption systems, they will determine the conditions responsible for
the absorption. In the simulations the particles will be tagged by their
physical properties (phase, chemical composition, 3D location, kinematics) and
history (e.g. from a galactic outflow or part of pristine in-fall). Using state-
of-the-art algorithms including a machine learning approach, they will provide a
probabilistic mapping between the observables and the true physical properties
and history of the gas. The resulting mapping code will be tested on real
observations and provided to the astronomical community to enable them to
interpret current and future observations. This project will combine expertise
in galaxy simulations, observational quasar spectroscopy, and machine learning,
and provide new research and outreach opportunities in a geographical region
underrepresented in astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Astronomy Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.