* 2007682
* AF: Small: Challenges in Communication Complexity and Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Raghu Meka, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The project addresses central questions within two closely related areas:
communication complexity, and pseudorandomness. What is the minimal amount of
communication needed to complete a computational task when the input is split
between different parties? Such questions have profound applications both in
theory and in practice, especially as communication is increasingly becoming the
bottleneck in large-scale computation. A goal of the project is to prove meta-
theorems and develop generic techniques that reduce understanding communication
to much simpler 'decision-theoretic' problems. Randomness versus determinism in
the universe is an ancient philosophical debate. In computing, however,
randomness seems to be winning hands down with amazing applications in
cryptography, e-commerce, data analytics, algorithm design, and networking.
Which of these applications absolutely need randomness? Which of them can still
be simulated if we do not have random bits or have access only to defective
random bits as in data from radio-active decay? The project will study these
fundamental questions when optimizing for memory as a resource: Can we simulate
randomized algorithms deterministically with only a small overhead in memory?
The investigator will develop and make freely available educational material on
these cutting-edge research problems and guide undergraduate and graduate
students on performing research on these topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
detail, the project aims to develop a comprehensive theory of 'lifting theorems'
in communication, which reduce proving communication lower bounds to proving
query-complexity lower bounds that are often simpler. The project will focus on
the two central open problems in this area: lifting for constant-size gadgets,
and lifting for semi-definite optimization. The investigator will also explore
new applications and connections between multi-party communication complexity
and leakage-resilience in cryptography and extractors. The project also seeks to
design optimal pseudorandom generators for small-width branching programs, which
would be a significant step toward understanding the trade-off between
randomness and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.