* 2007686
* SHF: Small: A Mechanism for Extending A Programming Language with Interactive Syntax
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Matthias Felleisen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 449,948.00

Software developers write programs as linear text. At the moment, this way of
programming is the dominant way of instructing computers in industry. While the
computer does not care in which format instructions are entered, the format
greatly matters to the developer who must read a program many months later to
understand and improve the code. The problem is that a good amount of this
linear program text describes geometric relationships among different pieces of
the program's problem domain, say a piece of a map or a tabular arrangement of
information. No effort on the part of a software developer can ever express such
relationships in a textual way that makes them easy to decipher. The goal of
this project is to demonstrate that form of textual-visual programming will
greatly improve the communication between developers across
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a mechanism for supplementing
textual programming languages with visual and interactive elements: miniature
graphical user interfaces (GUIs). Using this mechanism, developers can create
mini GUIs for specific problem domains such as, for example, two-dimension
tables of conditional actions. Other developers add instances of these mini-GUIs
to their code and interact with them to enter specific details. When the code is
supposed to be run, the translator collaborates with these visual elements to
render them as ordinary instructions. When the code is to be read, the visual
nature expresses the geometric relationships much more directly than linear
text. The project team will evaluate the mechanism across several dozen
application areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.