* 2007274
* Collaborative Research:CNS Core: Small: Intermittent and Incremental Inference with Statistical Neural Network for Energy-Harvesting Powered Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jingtong Hu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 266,000.00

The maturation of energy-harvesting (EH) technology and the recent emergence of
viable intermittent computing, which stores harvested energy in an energy
storage and supports an episode of program execution, creates the opportunity to
build sophisticated batteryless computing systems. This project aims to realize
artificial intelligence (AI) in such batteryless devices. However, there are two
main challenges: 1. most existing Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are hard to fit in
resource-constrained microcontrollers. 2. DNNs usually require multiple
execution episodes to obtain one inference result and it may take indefinite
amount of time due to the weak and unpredictable harvested power. To address
these challenges, this project is developing multi-exit DNNs, which can output
incrementally accurate inference results during each execution episode. Three
tasks will be carried out to lay the technological foundation for intermittent
incremental inference on EH-powered IoT devices. First, novel power trace aware
compression, online pruning and adaptation algorithms will be developed to
ensure efficient deployment of multi-exit DNNs on intermittently-powered
devices. Second, new multi-exit statistical and incremental neural networks
(MESI-NN) will be developed to further reduce the latency and improve the
accuracy and energy efficiency. Third, new neural architecture search algorithms
will be developed to automatically search the best MESI-NN architecture. This
project will be evaluated with real system and applications such as image
classification, keyword spotting, and activity recognition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realizing AI in EH-powered batteryless devices can enable
persistent, event-driven sensing capabilities in which the main device (e.g. a
battery-draining camera) can remain off until awaken by the EH-powered device
when it detects events of interest. The societal impact of the proposed research
is to significantly extend the lifetime of sensors and devices deployed in
remote areas, which will drastically benefit various consumer, business,
scientific and national security applications. This project will expose students
to related cutting-edge knowledge and hands-on research opportunities and
elevate their competence and confidence in facing of today's highly competitive
global job market. The education impact of the proposed research includes the
integration of various education activities based on the resources available to
the two PIs such as DAC System Design Contest; outreach for local K-12 students
through Pitt’s Investing Now summer school and ND’s CS curriculum for K-12
students in Indiana; undergraduate research with emphasis on minority
participation, and course integration of the research
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.