* 2007922
* Collaborative Research:CNS Core:Small:Towards Efficient Cloud Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Xu Liu, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 10/31/2020
* USD 249,840.00

Cloud computing frameworks enable a wide range of services while sharing
computation resources and infrastructure costs. To achieve these benefits, cloud
computing frameworks rely on layers of abstractions to reduce the complexity of
distributed and heterogeneous computational infrastructure. Abstractions hide
resource management complexities and improve programmability. However,
abstractions make cloud frameworks less observable, resulting in various forms
of inefficiencies. This project will address the challenges of practical cloud
monitoring techniques to guide cloud application development and system
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the inefficiency patterns
in cloud computing infrastructures and applications. More specifically, it will
provide novel measurement techniques to enable monitoring these inefficiencies
across the cloud layers of abstraction. Additionally, the project will develop
tools that will provide actionable insights for high-performance cloud
frameworks and application development. This project has three thrusts. First,
it will measure language-level abstractions for intra-application
inefficiencies. Second, it will explore the inefficient communication patterns
among microservices for inter-service optimization. Third, it will develop tools
to analyze inefficiencies in the entire stack of cloud software layers of
abstraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bridge the knowledge gap
between application developers and system designers to provide more efficient
cloud environments. It will advance the state-of-the-art cloud monitoring
techniques and address the current and future challenges in the cloud computing
community. The tools developed from this project will have broad interest from
industry, research institutes, and laboratories for efficient code execution and
high system throughput. Furthermore, the project will disseminate the obtained
knowledge through hands-on training sessions and tutorials. Finally, the project
will facilitate curriculum development with a particular focus on involving
minority and under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
maintain a website at https://www.probir.info/cloudprof. The website will host
all the project outcomes, including the publications, open-source code,
toolkits, datasets, documentation, and tutorials. The website will be accessible
to the public throughout the project lifetime and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.