* 2007231
* CNS Core: Small: New Caching Paradigms for Distributed and Dynamic Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Over the last few decades, Content Distribution Networks (CDNs) have been used
to cache data of popular interest closer to the end-users in order to make them
rapidly accessible whenever requested. This results in substantial time savings
from an end-user’s perspective when retrieving popular content like video feeds.
It also helps to reduce the bandwidth demands on the overall network. This is
achieved by developing efficient mechanisms that employ popularity-based
indicators to store or evict content from the cache memory. However, with the
advent of emerging technologies such as the Internet-of-Things (IoT) and
cyberphysical systems, the dynamics and requirements of networks are witnessing
significant changes that call for fundamentally new caching solutions that
extend beyond the purview of CDNs to the wireless edge and the end-user devices.
These new networks will be composed of a large number of highly mobile devices
(e.g., mobile phones) with intermittent, delay-sensitive, and personalized
demand to be supported over resource-limited wireless channels. To address these
new challenges, this project undertakes the task of democratizing caching by
proposing a systematic methodology that encompasses the wireless edge and the
end-users in the design of provably good caching strategies for increasingly
dynamic and disparate networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated
by the observation that caching within and at the endpoints of networks must
differ fundamentally from each other, as well as from existing caching
strategies optimized for today's CDNs. In particular, the project identifies and
systematically investigates complementary scenarios that must employ different
caching principles based on the position of the memory space and the nature of
demand it receives. In each scenario, the project takes a holistic approach to
the design to incorporate generation and demand dynamics, wireless communication
capabilities and limitations, variety of uncertainties in the traffic and
environment, and quality-of-service requirements. This research is multi-
disciplinary and will bring together elements from queueing, scheduling, anomaly
detection, coding, learning and control theories towards the design of
integrated and adaptive caching solutions. This interdisciplinary research will
be integrated into the curricula and will help train the next generation of
engineers and academicians with the tools it takes to succeed in solving
increasingly complex and challenging problems. The investigators are committed
to recruit women and under-represented minority students in their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.