* 2007878
* FET: CIF: Small: Distributed Quantum Information Processing using Structured Operators
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Sandeep Sadanandarao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 449,991.00

Many quantum communication/computing algorithms require quantum computers
performing logical operations simultaneously on a sufficiently large number of
quantum bits which have been combined into a superposition state. Unfortunately,
the current state-of-the-art quantum computers can only operate on tens of
qubits for storing and processing tasks. One of the biggest obstacles toward
building a scalable quantum system is decoherence, a term that encompasses all
the processes contributing to the decay of information coded in a quantum
register. As the number of qubits is increased, the decoherence rate increases,
and hence quantum information becomes more fragile. One way to overcome this
challenge is to employ the distributed paradigm, where a network of limited
qubit-capacity quantum computers, connected through classical and quantum links,
are used to solve problems in a distributed manner by casting known centralized
algorithms into their distributed versions. This may have significant impact on
the society in terms of superior computing and communication platforms. One of
the goals of this project is to provide bridge among different disciplines such
as quantum mechanics, information theory, and abstract algebra, and thereby
contribute to furthering collaborations between communities. A concerted effort
is made to involve women and under-represented minority students in this
project,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a foundational
approach to address some of the challenges in distributed quantum information
processing, communication, and computation from a quantum information-theoretic
perspective. The research effort of this project is based on two interconnected
yet complementary research thrusts. In one thrust of the project, the problem of
distributed measurement compression is addressed based on a novel Markov
structured quantum measurements and the technique of random binning. Other
implications of this approach, both concerning fundamental problems and
practical applications are highlighted. In the second thrust of the project, a
novel approach for studying distributed reliable (lossless) compression and
computation of quantum sources is considered. As a part of the second thrust,
the quantum-to-quantum rate distortion problem is addressed from a new
perspective -- by exploring the duality connection between the problem of
quantum error correction over a quantum channel and rate-distortion compression
of a quantum source. This project also addresses problem of distributed function
computation in the context of quantum-to-classical rate-distortion
coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.