* 2007029
* FET: Small: Embracing the dropouts in high-throughput genomics analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Peng Qiu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 264,900.00

Genomics is a fast evolving field that has led to many advances in data-
acquisition technologies at the molecular level and analytics algorithms for
high-dimensional data, as well as discoveries of biological insights and
mechanisms. This project aims to develop data-analytics algorithms to address
computational challenges in genomics. Genomics analyses often generate complex
datasets that are large in size and high in dimensionality. In addition, the
datasets often contain considerable amounts of missing values, which makes
computational analysis and biological interpretation quite challenging. In
almost all existing computational algorithms, the missing values are treated as
a problem to be fixed. In contrast, this project takes a novel view of the
missing values, and considers them as useful signals. This is a unique
perspective, opposite to the common assumptions on missing values in the
literature. Developing and establishing this perspective has the potential to
reveal new biological insights, inspire new directions for algorithmic
developments, and generate educational and training opportunities in terms of
both course materials and research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to examine the utility of missing values in two types of genomic
analyses. Aim 1 of this project focuses on single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis.
Since signals at the single-cell level are typically quite low and stochastic,
single-cell RNA sequencing often produces gene-expression datasets that are
highly sparse, with the percentage of zeros typically greater than 90%. This aim
will develop and validate algorithms to identify and cluster cell types based on
the missing values in single-cell RNA sequencing data. Aim 2 of this project
focuses on bulk-tissue RNA-sequencing analysis. Although bulk-tissue RNA
sequencing provides stronger signal than single cells, missing values also exist
in bulk-tissue data, mainly due to tissue specificity of gene expression. This
aim will examine the patterns of missing values across large-scale gene-
expression datasets spanning across multiple tissue types and diseases, and
explore the utility of missing values in correlating with clinical variables of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.