* 2007928
* NSFGEO-NERC: Ancient life in moving fluids: elucidating the emergence of animal ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Simon Darroch, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 335,062.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fossil record
shows that complex life first evolved in the oceans, 571 million to 541 million
years ago. Understanding how, when, and why these organisms evolved, as well as
their relationships to living animals, is crucial for deciphering the origins of
modern biodiversity and ecosystems. However, key fossils from this time interval
are poorly understood. This research project will analyze half-a-billion-year-
old fossils using an innovative new approach that combines computer modeling and
simulation with geological fieldwork. The results obtained will transform our
understanding of the oldest animal fossils on Earth, filling critical gaps in
our knowledge of the early evolution of life. In collaboration with teachers in
Davidson Co., TN, this information will be used to create learning modules for
teaching the basic tenets of evolution, adaptation, 3D modeling, and fluid
dynamics to students in grades 11–12, which will be made freely available to the
public, educators and students in the US and UK. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
emergence of animal ecosystems during the late Ediacaran (~571–541 million years
ago) was a pivotal episode in evolutionary history. However, most of these
Ediacaran organisms disappeared immediately before the Cambrian, in what may
represent the first mass extinction of complex life. There are thus two key
questions that will provide fundamental insights into the origins of modern
ecosystems: 1) where do Ediacaran organisms fit in the tree of life? And, 2)
what drove their extinction prior to the onset of the Cambrian? We will address
these questions by combining new data collected during fieldwork with
computational fluid dynamics and fluid–structure interaction simulations
performed on both individual organisms and whole communities. This project will
improve knowledge of the early evolution of complex ecosystems, while at the
same time pioneering the development of a rigorous new approach for examining
how marine organisms evolved in response to moving fluids. In addition to
facilitating international research collaboration, the PI team will work
together with local high school teachers in Rutherford County, Tennessee, to
produce learning modules focused on 3-D modeling and fluid dynamics, suitable
for communicating key evolutionary principals to school students (16–18 years
old) in the US and UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.