* 2007998
* SHF: Small: Practical and Formal Foundations for Intermittent Computer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Limin Jia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Intermittent, energy-harvesting, battery-less devices are cheap, small, and low-
maintenance devices for building computing, sensing, and communicating systems
that will serve as the foundation for future internet of things, edge computing
and sensing, and cyber physical systems. However, intermittent software
execution can make a device unreliable, due to the device's hard-to-predict
power failure and recharge cycles, complicating deployment to high-assurance
applications. This project defines the first formal models to precisely
characterize the behavior of intermittent systems, formalizes desired
correctness properties, designs and implements new sophisticated intermittent
systems that are correct, and constructs benchmarks representative of real-world
applications of intermittent systems. This project's impacts are that its
technical developments make intermittent systems capable of complex tasks, and
at the same time, safer and more reliable, thereby allowing wider deployment
into cyber-physical and internet-of-things
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical contributions of this
project are in its formal models of intermittent computing, starting with a
sequential model, then extending to concurrent operations in the presence of
peripheral devices with timing requirements. These models characterize system
behavior precisely, allowing for correctness proofs of deployed systems.
Adapting these models to scheduling, this project develops the first provably
correct energy collection and computation scheduler for intermittent systems.
The project establishes rules for verifying feasibility of a set of computing
tasks with respect to energy constraints, and allows for graceful degradation
when no schedule is feasible. Benchmarks produced by this project aggregate and
thoroughly characterize independently developed applications, enabling direct
comparison between systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.