* 2007784
* SHF: Small: Automatic Qualitative and Quantitative Verification of CUDA Code
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jan Hoffmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,996.00

General-purpose programming on Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) has become
prevalent in fields such as machine learning. As a result, NVIDIA has developed
the CUDA (Compute Unified Device Architecture) framework to support programmers
in effectively using GPUs by implementing specialized functions, called kernels,
in a dialect of C++. However, the unusual executionmodel of CUDA may result in
performance anomalies that would be difficult to predict for novice CUDA
programmers. The objective of this project is to develop reasoning techniques
and automated tools for predicting the resource usage of CUDA kernels. The
outcomes of this project will greatly benefit software programmers, including
novices, in writing more efficient kernels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The difficulty
in analyzing the performance of CUDA, as opposed to other imperative languages,
is that the same code runs in parallel on many threads that store independent
copies of local program variables. This project is developing novel analyses
that can reason about multiple copies of program variables when necessary for
precision but elide this information when possible to maintain scalability.
Furthermore, the performance of CUDA code crucially depends upon its ability to
hide latency of, for example, memory operations, by quickly switching among many
threads. Reasoning precisely about execution times of CUDA kernels therefore
requires reasoning about the latency of such operations and the behavior of the
GPU's thread scheduler. The tools and analyses developed in this project can
open the emerging field of General-Purpose GPU programming to a wider array of
developers and improve the quality and efficiency of code in several important
domains of computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.