* 2007597
* CIF: Small: Fundamental Limits of DNA-Based Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ilan Shomorony, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 484,140.00

The demand for data storage continues to increase at a rapid pace, posing
significant challenges to current data centers and spurring significant interest
in the development of new storage technologies. DNA, the molecule that carries
the genetic information of all living matter, has become a promising medium for
long-term archival data storage due to its longevity and very high information
density. This new approach to data storage presents unique challenges. Unlike
typical hard drives, where data bits are stored in a well-ordered linear
fashion, storing data on DNA requires the synthesis of a large number of DNA
molecules that are then mixed out of order in a liquid solution. This makes the
process of reliably reading the data after storage significantly more expensive
and computationally complex. The goal of this project is to understand the
fundamental limitations and capabilities of DNA as a storage medium. In
particular, this research seeks to characterize basic tradeoffs between cost,
information density, reading and writing speeds, and reliability, aiming to
develop new coding strategies that can unlock the full potential of this
innovative approach to data storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate the fundamental limits of DNA storage systems by focusing on three
main objectives. The first objective is to develop an information theory
framework to formally analyze these systems. DNA storage systems will be modeled
via the abstraction of a shuffling channel, which captures the fact that, in
DNA-based storage, many blocks of data are shuffled out of order. The capacity
of these channels will be characterized under different noise models and
properties of optimal coding schemes will be studied. A particular question of
interest is how to design capacity-optimal indexing strategies that allow the
proper reordering of the data. Since the cost of synthesizing long DNA strands
is the main obstacle to practical DNA storage, the second research objective
will deal with systems that store data on many very short DNA strands, each of
which is too short to encode any meaningful information. For that reason, new
strategies to encode information in the concentration of different DNA molecules
in the solution will be proposed, and their fundamental capabilities
established. The third research objective will focus on the computational
challenges associated with the joint processing of a large set of DNA sequences.
In particular, basic tradeoffs between storage capacity and computational
requirements will be established, and recent algorithmic advances in large-scale
sequence alignment will be leveraged towards the development of computationally
efficient decoding algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.