* 2007775
* OAC Core: SHF: SMALL: ICURE -- In-situ Analytics with Compressed or Summary Representations for Extreme-Scale Architectures
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,07/31/2020
* Gagan Agrawal, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Systems for High Performance Computing (HPC) have been providing rapidly
increasing computing power. However, this growth has also led to systems where
the memory and data movement bandwidth is relatively lower. This makes analyzing
the data from scientific simulations very challenging. A paradigm called in-situ
analytics has emerged in response. This project is further improving this
paradigm, by using what can be referred to as homomorphic compressions. The idea
of homomorphic compression is to compress the data in a way that queries can be
directly executed on the compressed data (without need for decompression). This
project is developing such compression methods, developing techniques to perform
such compression efficiently on Graphic Processing Units (GPUs), techniques for
query processing using such compressed representations, and finally, an overall
system that will simplify development of in-situ analytics implementations.
Overall, this project will be making analysis of data from simulations more
effective on the upcoming systems for HPC. This project will seek to broaden
participation in computing through direct participation in the project
development teams by undergraduate and graduate students from under-represented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems for High Performance Computing (HPC) have
been providing rapidly increasing computing power. However, this growth has also
led to systems where the memory and data movement bandwidth is relatively lower.
This makes analyzing the data from scientific simulations very challenging. A
paradigm called in-situ analytics has emerged in response. This project is
further improving this paradigm, by using what can be referred to as homomorphic
compressions. The idea of homomorphic compression is to compress the data in a
way that queries can be directly executed on the compressed data (without need
for decompression). The resulting framework, ICURE, can facilitate in situ
analytics on accelerators themselves, reduce overall memory requirements for the
analytics, reduce total data movements costs, and even reduce the time cost of
performing the analytics. Achieving the goals of ICURE involves many open
challenges. The first is the choice of summarization structure and its
constructions. This project experiments with two different summary or concise
representations: bitmap indices and an integrated value index. The second issue
is analyses methods using summary and compressed representations, where the
focus is on the use of these representations for a variety of analyses tasks:
computing aggregations, correlations, value-based joins, time-step selection,
and interesting subregions analysis. The third issue is automating placement and
quality. Driven by the consideration of providing the lowest interference
between the simulation and analytics, this project automates decisions on
placement of specific analytics operations and data within the node of HPC
system. Similarly, automatic selection of sampling level driven by desired
accuracy and overheads of the analyses is performed. This project will seek to
broaden participation in computing through direct participation in the project
development teams by undergraduate and graduate students from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.