* 2007989
* Louis Stokes B2B Alliance: Tampa Bay Bridge to the Baccalaureate Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2025
* Natavia Middleton, St. Petersburg College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. The Tampa Bay Bridge to the Baccalaureate
Alliance (TB-B2B) will build on the successful activities in their first project
to focus on evidence-based strategies to improve recruitment, and success in
mathematics. In addition, they will provide mentoring training for faculty
paired with a research study on faculty motivation and engagement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TB-B2B will build on the lessons learned from the current
project to restructure Alliance activities with an increased focus on
recruitment at Alliance institutions, using evidence-based strategies to improve
success in mathematics, and mentor training for faculty. Activities from the
previous project to support student retention through advising, mentorship and
peer connections will continue, including undergraduate research experiences,
career exploration and professional development. All of these activities will be
supported by a network of regional partners, including four year institutions,
research centers and STEM enterprises. Comprehensive project evaluation with the
support and participation of the leadership team, an Alliance Data Team, and an
external evaluator will form the basis for achieving project goals and
disseminating successful strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TB-B2B is led by St.
Petersburg College in partnership with Hillborough Community College and State
College of Florida Manatee-Sarasota, with the University of South Florida as an
informal partner. TB-B2B builds on the foundation established in their first
project to increase transfer of URM STEM majors to four year institutions to
bolster the region-wide effort in STEM degree attainment and career achievement
to increase the diversity of the regional STEM
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.