* 2007174
* Monte Carlo Stellar Evolution Models and Isochrones
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Brian Chaboyer, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 383,527.00

From determining the radius of exoplanet hosting stars, the ages of individual
stars, to the age of distant protogalaxies, the use of stellar evolution models
is ubiquitous in astrophysics. Stellar models require the use of a variety of
physical parameters (such as nuclear reaction rates and opacities) and make a
variety of assumptions (such as the nature of convection). The Principal
Investigator and his students at Dartmouth College will use the best data
available to test and improve stellar models. Their Monte Carlo approach will
provide an estimate of the uncertainties associated with stellar modeling. The
proposed research will form the core of student's PhD thesis. Through
Dartmouthâ€™s Women in Science Project, first year undergraduate women, jointly
mentored by the PI and the graduate student, will be employed to assist in the
project. The PI has developed an astronomy foreign studies program, which takes
Dartmouth students to South Africa for an intensive 10-week introduction to
astronomy and a rich introduction to South African culture, history, and
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test and improve
stellar models by comparing the predicted colors and absolute magnitudes of the
stellar models to relatively local stars which have accurate parallax distances
obtained by the Gaia satellite in its most recent data release (DR3). It is
important to have an understanding of the uncertainties associated with stellar
models and isochrones. Instead of generating a single set of stellar models and
isochrones which are based upon the best estimates for the various input
parameters to stellar evolution models, a Monte Carlo approach will be used. For
each physical stellar parameter (mass and chemical composition), a suite of a
1000 stellar evolution models will be generated by randomly sampling the
uncertainties in the various input parameters (opacity, nuclear reaction rates,
etc.) used to generate the models. This suite of stellar evolution models will
be used to generate a suite of isochrones, and from these the user will be able
to extract not just the best estimate for a given quantity (such as the radius,
luminosity or age of a star), but also their associated 68% and 95% confidence
limits. These uncertainty estimates can be incorporated into subsequent analysis
by those who use the stellar models and isochrones to ensure that the
uncertainty in derived quantities (such as age) reflect not just observational
uncertainties, but also uncertainties associated with the theoretical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.