* 2007131
* SHF: SMALL: Collaborative Research: Reconfigurable and Programmable Processor Architectures for Brain-Computer Interfacing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Amirhossein Alimohammad, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 320,000.00

One of the primary motivations of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) is to restore
behavioral functions for patients who are unable to move or communicate through
normal neural pathways because of strokes or chronic diseases. Restoring a full
range of movements for paralyzed patients requires recordings from a relatively
large population of brain neurons. Wireless transmission of large amounts of
neural data for off-line processing on a computer imposes heat-related tissue
damage and hinders real-time control of the prosthetics. In this SHF
collaborative research, a foundation is laid for finding an optimal balance
between real-time neural-signal processing using a brain-implantable electronic
device and wireless data transmission for offline processing on a machine or
computer so that the total power/energy consumption of the brain-implanted
integrated circuit is minimized. This research focuses on a transformative BCI-
specific processor architecture utilizing custom digital circuits to drastically
relax power-hungry wireless data transmission while controlling prosthetics in
real-time. The impact of research findings on education and society include:
broadening the participation of underrepresented high school students using the
new "Brain Chips" outreach program; enhancing educational learning via the "lab-
at-home" approach; engaging the local community and broader society, especially
those with disabilities, via workshops at the Disability Center San Diego; and
contributing to rehabilitation and improving the quality of life of millions of
patients suffering from neurodegenerative diseases or
paralysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research creates a hybrid processor that is
both software-programmable to efficiently execute neural-signal processing
algorithms and hardware-reconfigurable to adopt a configurable instruction set
architecture (ISA). The software-programmability supports the continuing
evolution of approaches and algorithmic improvements while utilizing lower
silicon area. Rather than optimized algorithms mapped onto a fixed-processor
architecture, the processor optimally matches the specific requirements of the
BCI algorithms at runtime by adopting a configurable ISA instead of a fixed and
predetermined set of instructions and hence attains greater energy efficiency.
The processor also utilizes various dedicated hardware architectures, including
artificial and spiking neural networks, for area and energy-efficient processing
of neural signals, transmitting only the translated commands directly to
prosthetic devices and thus, minimizing the wireless communication
overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To find and assess candidate neural-signal
processing algorithms for real-time operation on the brain-implantable
processor, this multidisciplinary research boosts the search in the large design
space of neural-signal processing via a software-based performance and accuracy
analysis tool that will reliably measure their important characteristics. By
quantitatively comparing the potential neural-signal processing algorithms using
meaningful efficiency and accuracy metrics, the BCI-specific processor and
dedicated hardware architectures will be optimized for energy-efficient
operation. The hybrid processor architecture and the design specifications are
optimized by testing the BCI system at the Washington National Primate Research
Center at the University of Washington in macaque
monkeys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.