* 2007827
* SHF: Small: Understanding and Exploiting Software Defined Networks (SDN) in High Performance Computing (HPC) Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Xin Yuan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,431.00

In modern society, many science and technology domains such as physics, biology,
and meteorology rely on powerful supercomputers to perform simulations and data
analysis to advance knowledge and to serve the society. These supercomputers use
specialized hardware and are expensive to build and operate. This project aims
at developing novel techniques to build high-performance and low-cost
supercomputers by exploiting the capabilities of the Software Defined Networking
(SDN) technology that has demonstrated its effectiveness in data centers to
reduce cost of setup and management. If successful, this research will change
how supercomputers are constructed, and lower the cost. This will make high-
performance computing (HPC) accessible to a broad audience and help the advances
in many domains. The project will also support education through a curriculum
development effort that integrates research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SDN manages network traffic and resources in a logically
centralized manner, enabling it to seek globally near-optimal resource
management solutions for a given optimization objective. This can lead to
improved performance over existing interconnection network technologies,
including the proprietary ones in high-end HPC systems. Additionally, SDN's
widespread commodity use will accelerate technological advances with improved
performance and reduced cost in comparison to proprietary technologies. In this
project, effective SDN techniques that can lead to higher performance than the
current HPC systems are developed; the performance bounds of SDN under different
constraints in the HPC environment are established. Additionally, practical
techniques that can be deployed with the current technology are developed and
evaluated. These techniques spread across different layers of the software stack
including network, operating system, and run-time system, and work in concert to
exploit the SDN capabilities. Finally, a working proof-of-concept SDN-capable
HPC system that incorporates the developed techniques is implemented and
deployed. Through analysis, design, development, and experimentation, the
strengths and weaknesses of SDN in comparison to the networking technology in
HPC systems are clearly identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.