* 2007556
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Efficient Algorithms for Multi-Robot Multi-Criteria Optimal Motion Planning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Pankaj Agarwal, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 464,750.00

Robotics is widely perceived today as a key component to flexibility and
competitiveness in large-scale manufacturing, to enhanced industrial efficiency
and safety, and to more precise and effective agriculture, to name just a few
reasons why governments, industry, and academia promote robotics. Fleets of
robots are being rapidly adopted in logistics, and are expected to become
commonplace in other domains such as agriculture, inspection and guarding, and
last-mile delivery. Notwithstanding the proliferation of multi-robot systems,
the state-of-the-art in efficient motion-planning for teams of robots is rather
limited, and is even more limited when one aims to optimize the motion plans.
Even modest contributions to optimal multi-robot motion planning can have a
tremendous impact in terms of saving energy, reducing costs, improving response
in critical situations, increasing productivity and competitiveness. The goal of
this project, jointly funded by NSF and US-Israel Binational Science Foundation,
is to develop algorithmic foundations for optimal multi-robot motion-planning in
a planar continuous domain. The interdisciplinary nature of this project is
likely to appeal to a broad set of both graduate and undergraduate students with
diverse backgrounds. The material generated from this project will be
disseminated through multiple courses, organizing workshops, and developing
course materials, surveys, tutorials, and publicly available open-source
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances our understanding of the
computational complexity of various multi-robot motion-planning problems by
investigating three different classes of problems. First, it investigates
optimal motion planning under a simple objective function such as the total
length of paths traveled by all robots. Next, it studies optimal motion planning
under a more complex objective function that aims to optimize multiple criteria
such as the total length of paths and the clearance of the robots. In addition
to these so-called "one-shot problems", the project also considers scenarios
where a perpetual sequence of motion-planning requests need to be fulfilled,
namely new requests appear while the robots in the fleet are already in motion,
fulfilling other motion-planning requests. A major thrust of the project is on
developing fast, simple, robust approximation algorithms for optimal motion
planning. The project combines techniques from discrete and computational
geometry, robotics, approximation algorithms, probabilistic techniques, and
calculus of variation to investigate optimal motion planning for multi-robot
systems. The project goes beyond the traditional worst-case-analysis to
understand under what circumstances optimal motion-planning problems are
computationally tractable. It will also explore dimension-reduction techniques
to circumvent the curse of dimensionality, which arises in the standard analysis
of multi-robot systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.