* 2007316
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: QUANTUM SPIN CHAINS. EXTENT AND PERSISTENCE OF MAGNETIC INTERACTIONS AS A FUNCTION OF LENGTH AND SPIN
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Ivan Schuller, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 05/31/2021
* USD 219,763.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;This research is in the field of organic materials and
low-dimensional systems. It consists of the fabrication of ultra-short chains of
7 to 200 atoms in length, to test theoretical models and explore the emergence
of new magnetic properties. This study provides a broader and deeper
understanding of the magnetic behavior of low-dimensional systems and may have a
direct impact on the development of a new generation of spintronic devices. This
research has an active educational component. The project involves two graduate
students who perform research for their Ph.D. thesis topic and two physics
undergraduate students per semester. During these activities, students receive
training at first synchrotron and neutron facilities and are exposed to state of
the art advanced experimental techniques. Community outreach efforts associated
with this project involve a partnership with high schools in San Antonio school
districts and the production of short videos on different topics related to
nanotechnology using a comical approach. These efforts are aimed to increase
scientific knowledge in high school students and provide tools for science
educators across the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed to study
three fundamental problems in magnetic 1D chains: 1) the determination of the
extent and persistence of short- and long-range magnetic interactions as a
function of the chain's length and defects, 2) the control and modulation of the
spin along the chains, and 3) the exploration of proximity effects in varying
composition magnetic/non-magnetic metal chains. To achieve these objectives, the
PIs have developed a method for the fabrication of macroscopic arrays of 1D
chains that allow precise control of their length, composition, and spin.
Specifically, this research focuses on the ultra-short (and poorly explored)
chain of ~7 to 200 atoms long. Monoatomic and varying composition chains are
grown by Organic Molecular Beam Epitaxy (OMBE) using metallo-phthalocyanine
(MPc) superlattices (SLs). MPcs are a family of planar organic molecules with
one metal atom located in the molecule's center surrounded by organic support.
Many metal ions (Fe, Ni, Cu, Co, and Mn) can be substituted into the MPc giving
rise to many isostructural compounds with different electronic (spin)
configurations and physical properties. These molecules stack face-to-face
giving rise to 1D metal chains when grown by OMBE. The orientation of the chain
and its length can be controlled by substrate choice and thickness of the
deposited MPc layer respectively. Moreover, using a SL structure, the chain
composition, and spin can be varied by intercalating other magnetic and non-
magnetic MPc layers. This project includes structural characterization (XRD and
HRTEM) and magnetic measurements (SQUID, VSM, and AC susceptibility) in a broad
temperature/field. Synchrotron techniques such as XMCD are used to obtain
element-selective magnetic measurements and electronic configuration of the
metals ions forming the varying composition chains. NEXAFS and DFT calculations
allow determining the spin configuration of these
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.