* 2007959
* AF: Small: Solving and Simplifying Algebraic, Differential, and Difference Equations.
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mark van Hoeij, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 349,999.00

Problems in science are often reduced to mathematical equations.&lt;br/&gt;There
are many computer programs for solving various types of equations.&lt;br/&gt;The
equations themselves often come from computer computation, so they&lt;br/&gt;can
be large. This project aims to simplify large equations, reducing
them&lt;br/&gt;when possible to smaller ones that can be solved more
easily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When computers construct formulas and equations to
tackle problems in science,&lt;br/&gt;their first expressions need not be the
simplest ones. It is likely that simpler formulas&lt;br/&gt;or equations exist.
Finding them makes subsequent computations easier and faster.&lt;br/&gt;The
types of equations that this project aims to simplify are differential
equations,&lt;br/&gt;recurrence relations, and algebraic equations in two
variables. A common theme for&lt;br/&gt;each of these types of equations is that
in order to simplify them, a key step is a&lt;br/&gt;technical analysis of their
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer algebra systems can automatically
find exact solutions for various types&lt;br/&gt;of equations. They are an
important part of the infrastructure for research&lt;br/&gt;and education.
However, they often produce unnecessarily complicated answers.&lt;br/&gt;The
techniques developed in this project will help to simplify not only
equations,&lt;br/&gt;but solutions as well, making them more useful for research
and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.