* 2007428
* SHF: Small: New Algorithmic Paradigms in Dynamic Analysis of Multithreaded Software
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mahesh Viswanathan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Building reliable, bug-free software is an important and challenging problem.
Dynamic analysis of system traces is one among several facets of a multi-pronged
strategy that tries to address this problem through scalable, automated analysis
methods that identify bugs in software. Here one observes a deployed system or a
component under test, to extract a trace of relevant events, which is then
automatically analyzed to determine if the execution is symptomatic of a bug in
the system. This project develops sound, predictive dynamic analysis techniques
to detect races, atomicity violations, deadlocks, and other concurrency
properties that scale to traces with a large number of
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on offline dynamic analysis,
wherein a stored trace of a program is examined. These traces are often very
large to ensure that the trace exercises large parts of a production-scale
software. Therefore, to minimize storage needs, these traces are compressed.
This project develops algorithms to analyze such compressed traces directly
without first uncompressing the trace and then analyzing it. Such an algorithm
will be provably fast since they will run in time that is linear in the size of
the compressed trace. The project develops instructional material to be used by
the investigators in outreach activities for the local Girls Who Code chapter,
and will be available on teacher forums throughout the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.