* 2007284
* CNS Core: Small: Bringing the Cloud to the Masses: Models, Algorithms, and Systems Targeting Deep Learning for the IoT Era
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Radu Marculescu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,000.00

An estimated one trillion Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices are expected to
impact multiple market segments by 2035. Such a rapid growth in IoT devices
necessitates new breakthroughs in machine learning approaches to fully exploit
the compute power offered by these devices. However, the significant
computational requirements of existing deep learning approaches represent a
major bottleneck for their large-scale deployment on hardware-constrained edge
devices. To improve this state of affairs, this project seeks to develop new
models, algorithms, and prototypes that can enable faster and computationally
inexpensive inference on resource-constrained mobile/IoT devices. These new
models can ultimately help preserve user’s privacy by conducting inference on a
network of edge devices instead of sending data to the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through its proposed research and curriculum, this
project enables a complete symbiosis between software, architectures, and system
meant to transform not just parallel computing, but also real life applications
ranging from data centers, to IoT and personal devices. Indeed, developing such
“lightweight” machine learning systems can ultimately enable the democratization
of access to application-specific hardware and make such systems widely
available. All these contributions aim at helping transitioning traditional
cloud computing into computing at the edge. Through curriculum related
innovations, student competitions, and other outreach activities, this project
is poised to raise awareness and increase participation of various
underrepresented groups to this area of engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.