* 2007826
* Equilibrium with Randomized Strategies in Learning Theory and Mathematical Finance
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ibrahim Ekren, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 218,846.00

The objective of the research project is to contribute to the understanding of
the interaction between agents that might have contradictory interests. The
project addresses two topics where the optimal strategies of the agents are
obtained via particular randomization. The first topic is in financial
mathematics and concerns the asymmetry of information in financial markets. In
this framework, the main question of interest is to understand how the agents
interact and how the price processes evolve if some of the agents have superior
or inferior information. The research project is expected to lead to novel tools
of risk management in financial markets. The second topic is in learning theory
and considers the interaction between an agent (the learner) who aims to predict
the outcome of future events based on additional information on these events and
an adversary who aims to make the task of the learner as difficult as possible.
In this prediction with expert advice framework, the objective of the
investigator is to derive optimal learning strategies for the learner. Graduate
students are involved in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To be more specific,
regarding the first topic, the investigator will establish the existence of
equilibrium in financial markets with long-lived asymmetric information. Unlike
the classical formulation of the problem via Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations,
the investigator will find an equilibrium by using tools from convex analysis
and optimal transport. Then, the properties of the equilibrium strategies and
pricing rules will be studied in various extensions of the problem such as
stochastic liquidity and risk-averse agents with natural distributional
assumptions. For the second topic, the interaction between the learner and the
adversary will be stated as a zero-sum stochastic game. Then, the long-time
behavior of these games will be studied using tools from partial differential
equations, stochastic analysis, and mean-field theory. An important objective
will be to find simple characterizations of asymptotic Nash equilibria and to
assess the performances of classical learning
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.