* 2007797
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: New Theory and Applications of Non-smooth and Non-Lipschitz Riemannian Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Shiqian Ma, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 02/28/2023
* USD 316,750.00

Non-convex optimization problems are ubiquitous in fields as diverse as data
science, machine learning, and information science and engineering, thereby
creating a need for algorithms to efficiently solve such problems. This project
will study an important but less developed area in non-convex optimization,
namely non-smooth and non-Lipschitz Riemannian optimization. The outcomes of
this project will provide insights into important classes of non-convex
optimization problems, and will lead to the development of new tools for solving
them. New teaching material on non-convex optimization problems will be produced
for educating the next generation students in this important class of
applications. The societal impact of this exploration will be to benefit new
applications in areas such as gene expression, autonomous driving and cancer
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While existing theory and algorithms for
Riemannian optimization usually require the objective function to be
differentiable, in contrast this project focuses on non-smooth and non-Lipschitz
Riemannian optimization. In particular, the project will study several
algorithms for non-smooth optimization that are less developed in the Riemannian
setting, including the manifold alternating direction method of multipliers, the
inertial manifold proximal gradient method, the stochastic manifold proximal
point algorithm, and the manifold prox-linear algorithm. For Riemannian
optimization with a non-Lipschitz objective, the investigators will derive the
corresponding optimality conditions and then design two algorithms that are
based on a smoothing technique, namely the Riemannian smoothing gradient descent
method and the Riemannian smoothing trust region method. The proposed algorithms
will be implemented to solve real-world applications such as the clustering of
single-cell RNA sequencing data, and 3D object detection and 3D tracking in
autonomous driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.