* 2007095
* Collaborative Research: RI: Small: Deep Constrained Learning for Power Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Pascal Van Hentenryck, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

In the last two decades, artificial intelligence has achieved remarkable
progress in a variety of disciplines such as computer vision and natural
language understanding. This project aims at leveraging robust artificial
intelligence for transforming the electrical power grid, the largest machine
built by humankind. Indeed, the integration of substantial renewable resources
in power generation raises substantial computational challenges and, in
particular, the solving of complex optimization problems with increased
frequency. The project proposes a new paradigm, Deep Constrained Learning, to
solve these large-scale optimization problems in real time, while ensuring
efficient and reliable grid operations. If successful, the project may
fundamentally transform how the grid is operated and bring significant economic
and environmental benefits. While the development of Deep Constrained Learning
is grounded in energy applications, the project findings may generalize to a
broader class of engineering applications with hard physical or operational
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a scientific standpoint, Deep Constrained
Learning (DCL) is a tight integration of machine learning and optimization that
delivers, in real time, reliable near-optimal solutions to large-scale nonconvex
optimization problems. The project contributes to new scientific and engineering
knowledge along two directions. It first demonstrates how DCL provides a
principled way to accommodate hard constraints in deep learning by combining key
methodologies from optimization into the training cycle of deep neural networks.
Second, it shows how to exploit domain knowledge for model reduction, allowing
DCL to handle the size and complexity of real power
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.