* 2007066
* SHF:Small:A Language-based Approach to Faster and Safer Serverless Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Arjun Guha, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Cloud computing, which allows a customer to rent virtual servers from cloud
providers, is the infrastructure that powers a wide variety of Internet
applications used by consumers, businesses, and the government. Unfortunately,
traditional cloud computing requires significant system-management expertise to
ensure that applications are reliable, secure, and cost-effective. In contrast,
"serverless computing" is a new approach to cloud computing that automates a
significant portion of system management, and has seen explosive growth over the
last few years. Despite being a promising advance, serverless computing
introduces new problems, and is more limited in scope than traditional cloud
computing. This research project develops tools and techniques to make
serverless computing more cost-effective, more reliable, and more broadly
applicable.

The intellectual merits of the project are the development of (1) the
mathematical foundations of serverless computing, (2) analysis tools to help
programmers find and eliminate software bugs in serverless software, (3) new
abstractions that enable a broader class of software to use serverless
computing, and (4) new runtime systems that make serverless computing faster and
cheaper. The project's broader significance and importance are that (1) it helps
programmers make their serverless applications more reliable and secure, (2) it
benefits cloud-computing providers by making serverless computing cheaper and
faster, and (3) it encourages further research in this new area by enabling the
publishing of research results and the release of open-source software. The
project also involves high-school outreach workshops to broaden participation in
computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.