* 2007023
* Collaborative Research:  Spectral Synthesis for Broad Absorption Line Quasars - Feedback and Physics for Everyone
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Donald Terndrup, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 140,940.00

Black holes exist in the centers of most large galaxies. Studies of galaxy
evolution show that black holes and galaxies evolve together. This evolution
requires interactions between the black hole and the galaxy, for example, winds
emerging from the black hole can interact with the gas in the galaxy. In this
project, a novel computer code called SimBAL will be used to study quasar winds.
SimBAL uses machine learning techniques to analyze the light emitted by the
quasar. The SimBAL method will be used to study two large samples of quasars to
measure the properties of quasar winds and to learn whether the winds are
energetic enough to influence the evolution of the host galaxy. As part of this
project, the SimBAL code will be prepared to be released to the public so that
anyone can use it. The research will involve undergraduate students, including
under-represented students. The investigators will also teach courses in data
analytics to undergraduates and will develop tools to evaluate gains in data
literacy during the semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Black holes exist in the
centers of most large galaxies. Studies of galaxy evolution show that black
holes and galaxies evolve together. This evolution requires interactions between
the black hole and the galaxy, for example, winds emerging from the black hole
can interact with the gas in the galaxy. In this project, a novel computer code
called SimBAL will be used to study quasar winds. SimBAL uses machine learning
techniques to analyze the absorption lines found in about 10% of quasar spectra.
The SimBAL method will be used to study two large and complementary samples of
quasars. The properties of the winds, such as the velocity, the amount, and the
location of the winds will be measured. The overarching goals are to determine
how the winds are accelerated, and whether the winds are energetic enough to
influence the evolution of the host galaxy. As part of this project, the SimBAL
code will be prepared to be released to the public so that anyone can use it.
The research will involve undergraduate students, including under-represented
students. The investigators will also teach courses in data analytics to
undergraduates and will develop tools to evaluate gains in data literacy during
the semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.