* 2007811
* Collaborative Research: MINERVA - A dedicated, global, precision radial velocity machine for TESS
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jason Eastman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2024
* USD 552,552.00

A research collaboration between Harvard University, George Mason University,
the University of California-Riverside, and the University of Montana will use a
telescope network to observe planet candidates orbiting nearby stars. The planet
candidates have been identified by NASA's Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite
(TESS). Planets will be confirmed, their masses and orbits will be measured. The
work will help create improved theories of the formation and evolution of
planets with a broad range of environments. Some of the planets confirmed will
be the ones that provide the best chance of detecting life in the future. The
award will fund students to participate in Harvard's Banneker Institute. This
undergraduate summer program focuses on recruiting under-represented minorities
for a program of research, graduate school preparation, and social justice
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation will employ two dedicated
robotic arrays of four 0.7-meter telescopes (MINERVA-North and MINERVA-
Australis) in both hemispheres for all sky access to confirm and characterize
TESS planet candidates. The facilities will perform a large scale survey to
measure the orbital obliquities of approximately 180 planets, enabling a more
robust understanding of formation and migration of planets as a function of the
properties of the host star and their planets. MINERVA will also measure planet
masses and orbital eccentricities, and search for additional planets in each
system. The confirmation and characterization of new planetary systems around
the bright TESS host stars will identify the best possible targets for future
detailed follow up. The planets confirmed and characterized will be the ones the
next generation of space-borne exoplanet missions and ground-based extremely
large telescopes will prioritize to measure the detailed atmospheric
compositions and will provide the best chances of detecting biomarkers. The
survey will allow a more detailed understanding of planet formation and
migration as a function of stellar and planetary properties. The nature of
exoplanet observations generates opportunities for projects ideal for student
involvement at all levels. In addition, MINERVA's dedicated array of small
telescopes provides a unique platform to develop valuable instrumentation
experience. MINERVA provides a scientific backbone for undergraduate research
opportunities, undergraduate theses, post-baccalaureate research experience, and
graduate research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.