* 2007065
* Islands no more: the important mergers of nearby galaxies and their effects
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Eric Bell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 454,023.00

Galaxy shapes can change dramatically as galaxies interact and collide with each
other. In these collisions, the smaller of the two galaxies is torn to pieces
and is spread into a faint ‘stellar halo’ that surrounds the larger of the two
galaxies. The larger of the two galaxies survives but can be scarred by the
collision. The largest collisions can cause new stars to form and can destroy
galaxy disks. This research group at the University of Michigan will combine new
observations with computer modeling of the past collisions experienced by
nearby, well-studied galaxies. This insight will improve our understanding of
galaxy growth, and these methods will be used by other astronomers using huge
new datasets from the Vera C. Rubin Observatory. The investigators will measure
the positive effects of adding research experiences to large introductory
college science courses. If scaled-up to other institutions, this approach has
the potential to enhance interest in science and science
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this project, the investigators will use
Hyper Suprime-Cam on the Subaru optical telescope in Hawaii. They will construct
deep and wide-area maps of the stellar halos and satellite systems of a diverse
sample of five galaxies with masses similar to the Milky Way mass. They plan to
use these new data and models of galaxy growth to develop new metrics of the
collisions experienced by a galaxy. With knowledge of these collisions in hand,
they can better understand the long-term effects of these collisions on these
five specific galaxies. Importantly, they seek to confirm, or refute, tentative
correlations between past collisions and satellite galaxy numbers. These
properties may signal important missing ingredients in small-scale cosmology and
galaxy formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.