* 2007949
* CHS: Small: Formal Design of Human Robot Collaboration in Safety Critical Scenarios
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Hai Lin, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,848.00

Human-robot collaboration technologies aim to combine the strengths from humans
with those of robots. Robots excel at handling repeated routines with much
higher precision and speed, and longer endurance. Humans, on the other hand,
have superior perception capabilities and are much better in face of
uncertainties and unexpected situations. For example, a scratch on a transparent
glass can be easily detected by human eyes but presents an extremely hard
challenge for computer vision. Finding principles to help design effective
collaboration between humans and robots (or humans and computers in general) is
core to advances in cyber-human systems. In addition, many cyber-human system
applications, such as joint assembly manufacturing, driver assistance, and
robot-assisted surgery are safety critical and need to achieve complex high-
level tasks with guaranteed performance. This project aims to derive a provably-
correct human-robot collaboration design theory that can guarantee the
accomplishment of high-level complex missions. Research from this project can
benefit society by increasing the safety and trustworthiness in the many real-
world applications involving human-robot and human-computer collaborations such
as service robots, automated manufacturing systems, emergency responses, and
exploration of unknown spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adopts a new
model, called vector auto-regressive partially observable Markov decision
process (VAR-POMDP), to manage uncertainties, and it uses non-parametric
Bayesian methods to learn the model from data. With the learned model, an
automatic high-level task planning in human-robot collaboration with respect to
formal specifications is studied. The team of researchers will further study how
to achieve online (real-time) adaptations of the overall system when robots are
interacting with different individuals or facing uncertain environments. Beyond
theoretical studies, the team will develop software tools and evaluate the
effectiveness of the design theory through a real robotic test-
bed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.