* 2007853
* Collaborative Research: Automated Search and Follow-Up of Electromagnetic Counterparts to Gravitational-Wave Events in O4
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Daniel Reichart, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 346,916.00

Einstein first predicted that merging stars produce gravitational waves. The
capability to detect these gravitational waves has only existed in the last few
years. Large detectors in the US and Europe, and soon also in Japan, localize
where in the sky these waves are coming from. Telescopes then search these parts
of the sky for visible light. In 2017 the first such optical counterpart to a
gravitational-wave event was discovered using a single aperture telescope This
project proposes to expand the effort to ten search telescopes and nearly two
dozen follow-up telescopes, spanning four continents and five countries. Through
this effort, investigation of how the heaviest elements in the universe are
produced, and a new means to measure how quickly the universe is expanding will
be explored. This project also provides innovation in undergraduate curriculum
by having students (both science majors and non-majors) collect and analyze data
from a telescope network to make specific scientific measurements. Additionally,
the PI plans to upgrade the dynamic-sky exhibit of the Morehead Planetarium and
Science Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project implements a large-scale,
multi-component observing program designed to take advantage of smaller
LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA localizations within ≈100 Mpc in O4 to identify the optical
counterparts of gravitational wave (GW) events more quickly; to collect pre-
identification measurements as well, and dense, multi-wavelength post-
identification light curves; and to collect post-identification spectroscopy.
This observing effort will capitalize on the planned facilities’ unique design
and broad geographic distribution, and proven success, to identify these
counterparts as quickly as possible. Counterpart information will be reported to
the broader astronomical community immediately, and possibly within only minutes
of LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA triggers if prompt emission is sufficiently bright. Earlier
observations are critical to understanding NS-NS, and NS-BH, merger events, and
r-process nucleosynthesis. Measurements of the ejecta's polar component relative
to its tidal component, or of the non-thermal afterglow, could also yield
viewing-angle information, which in combination with the GW data could result in
a “clean” measurement of the distance, and hence in a new, local method of
measuring Hubble's constant (the systematics of one such approach will be
studied here). This project supports graduate students, embeds research aspects
into the undergraduate curriculum, and will make improvements in public
demonstrations of the time variable sky at a local
planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the goals of the Windows
on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.