* 2007854
* CNS Core: Small: Toward Real-Time Stream Processing in Edge Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kyoung-Don Kang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Timely analysis of real-time sensor data streams is essential to key
applications in the Internet of Things (IoT), such as smart health,
transportation, and energy. Although advanced stream processing engines (SPEs),
such as Apache Storm, Flink, and Spark Streaming, provide powerful stream
processing frameworks in a cloud, sending sensor data to the SPE for analysis
over the wide area network may incur many deadline misses and create bottlenecks
in the core Internet. A viable alternative is real-time sensor data stream
processing in edge devices; however, it is challenging to support timing
constraints using limited resources available in such devices. Real-time
scheduling theory is not directly applicable, since it is agnostic to data
semantics and usually based on worst-case assumptions for predictability that
would be too pessimistic and resource inefficient in edge devices. The problem
is becoming increasingly serious as the number of IoT devices and data volume
increases rapidly. The proposed work aims to bridge the widening gap by
investigating cost-efficient approaches for soft real-time stream processing at
the edge. This project explores novel approaches to scheduling, sensor stream
processing, and load sharing to significantly decrease deadline misses and
communicational as well as computational resource consumptions, while enhancing
the reliability of real-time stream processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is expected to provide an enabling technology for important IoT
applications with great societal impacts, such as those in healthcare,
transportation, and energy that produce immense real-time sensor data streams,
by substantially improving the timeliness and reliability of real-time stream
processing with less resource consumptions compared to state-of-the-art SPEs.
The investigator will use select research results to continue education and
outreach efforts that include broadly disseminating publications and code that
will be produced by this project, developing new courses and teaching materials
on real-time stream processing, recruiting underrepresented groups of students
to work on the project, and encouraging the younger generation to study computer
science and pursue careers in industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.