* 2007012
* Understanding the baryonic profile of gas in and around dark matter halos, with application to fast radio bursts, metal absorption lines, and weak lensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Matthew McQuinn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 497,285.00

Galaxies are immersed in large halos of ionized gas of unknown size and
densities. In the next few years, observations of transient fast radio bursts
will provide sparse maps of the gas distribution, complementing existing metal
absorption line data sets. McQuinn and his collaborators will develop the tools
necessary to interpret these combined data sets. The team will use both fully
cosmological simulations and simpler models to understand how violent galactic
feedback processes from stars and black holes shape these gas halos and
influence galaxy formation. McQuinn and collaborators will mentor freshman
undergraduates enrolled in the Pre-MAP program at the University of Washington,
with the goal of engaging them in research early in their careers. Five
undergraduate students will be offered summer research internships. The team
will also give a series of public lectures in the Seattle
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous theoretical studies of the gas halos around
galaxies have primarily relied on comparing metal absorption line observations
with the predictions of complex cosmological simulations with particular
implementations of stellar and black hole feedback. The team will develop more
flexible models for the gas distribution, which will use empirical inputs as
well as inputs motivated by zoom-in simulations. These models will be compared
to FRB and metal absorption line measurements to make more general statements
about the spatial distribution of the enriched gas. The models will also be used
to understand how the distribution of gas around galaxies could affect
cosmological constraints from weak lensing
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.