* 2007011
* CHS: Small: Towards Usability in Robotic Assistance: A Formalism for Robot-Assisted Feeding while Adjusting to User Preferences
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Siddhartha Srinivasa, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 495,116.00

Nearly 56.7 million (18.7%) of the non-institutionalized US population had a
disability in 2010. Among them, about 12.3 million needed assistance with one or
more activities of daily living (ADLs), such as feeding, bathing, or dressing.
Robots have the potential to help with these activities of daily living but
every user is different and they have diverse needs and preferences. For long-
term care, it is essential that such an assistive system can adapt to diverse
situations and user preferences. This project focuses on the feeding activity
and is based on this central tenet that by leveraging user feedback and contexts
from previous feeding attempts, a robot should be able to learn online how to
adapt to new food items, user preferences, and environments. Through improved
access to independent living, the results of this project can positively impact
millions of people worldwide. The long-term promise of this research is to have
robots in society that can seamlessly and fluently perform complex manipulation
tasks in cluttered, complex, and dynamic human environments in real
homes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project formalizes robot-assisted feeding using
a general framework based on contextual bandits that allows directly optimizing
for user preferences online. The online contextual bandit framework applied to
acquiring and transferring food items provides the foundation to leverage user
feedback to benchmark, learn, and develop methods for a natural dining
experience, and exploring different contexts for generalizing bite acquisition.
The models directly optimize for the user experience through user feedback, and
adapt to a range of social and environmental factors with the intelligent use of
embedded sensing. The project explores solutions which balance the trade-off
between high quality but costly expert assistance and cheaper learned solutions
in the form of a shared-autonomy system. Critical issues include the diversity
of user preferences both temporally and ethnographically, designing for the
experience across the entire learning procedure, and processing high-dimensional
contextual information. The tangible result will be an intelligent assistive
feeding robot whose performance can generalize to different activities and adapt
to user preferences. An intelligent assistive feeding robot that relies on user
feedback and rich sensor information will advance integrating complex user
experiences and social environments into a coherent learning robotic system.
Contextual bandits, a highly optimized generalization of multiple hypothesis
testing, have broad potential in human-robotic, and human-AI systems in general
to efficiently adapt to specific user needs in real
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.