* 2007106
* CNS Core: Small: Event Identification in Evaluation of Internet Outages
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* John Heidemann, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 491,316.00

The EIEIO (Event Identification and Evaluation of Internet Outages) project will
develop new algorithms to (1) improve coverage of Internet outage detection to
cover millions of Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) (the primary current
Internet) networks that are today uncovered, and extending coverage to Internet
Protocol version 6 (IPv6) (the new protocol used by about 30% of America today).
(2) analyze this raw data to determine identifiable outage events. (3) relate
these events to real-world causes using other datasets. The results of this work
will be additional information about Internet reliability, allowing citizens to
make informed choices of provider, governments to assess the services their
citizens receive, and ISPs to evaluate their offerings and justify improvements.
Data from this work will help society understand the impact of natural disasters
(such as hurricanes) as they are occurring and will be made available to
researchers at no cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding Internet reliability
is critically important to us. Recent methods have emerged that directly measure
Internet-wide reliability, but the EIEIO (Event Identification and Evaluation of
Internet Outages) project proposes three steps to move our understanding
forward: (1) Improving IPv4 coverage to include millions of networks that cannot
be reliably measured today, and extending outage detection to IPv6; (2)
converting the millions of raw observations into identifiable events; (3)
relating these events to real-world causes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the EIEIO project is to fundamentally expand Internet
outage detection in these three ways. The EIEIO project will develop new
algorithms to increase IPv4 coverage with more sensitive analysis, examine
passive and active measurements that reach to IPv6. The EIEIO project will
develop clustering algorithms that group raw data to events at Internet scales
(millions of events over months of data). The EIEIO project will improve
confidence in these results with careful comparison of outage observations and
events from multiple data sources, including different observation methods and
external data sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EIEIO project will help increase
confidence in our ability to use fine-grain observations of Internet outages for
IPv4 and IPv6 and provide data that will help network architects change network
designs to improve network resilience. Results from the project could help
citizens selecting network providers to make informed choices about their
network purchases, governments to assess the service their citizens receive, and
ISPs compare their offerings and justify improvements. Network outage data can
assist first responders and citizens to understand natural disasters (such as
hurricanes) as they are occurring. This project will also quantify network
reliability to assist policy makers evaluating telecommunications policy and
economics, and to carry out long-range planning. Finally, this data will
motivate improvements by ISPs to Internet reliability, improving the Internet
for all users. Data generated from this project will be made available to
researchers at no cost and used to support education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.