* 2007638
* School on Electron-Phonon Physics from First Principles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Emmanouil Kioupakis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2022
* USD 117,867.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a summer school activity to
train graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, faculty members, and research
scientists in modern approaches to predictive calculations for materials and
particularly their electronic properties. The school is currently planned to
take place June 14 to June 20, 2021 at the University of Texas - Austin. The
organizers have flexible backup plans including conversion to a virtual summer
school, to compensate for Covid-19 related contingencies. The focus of this
summer school will be on calculating how electrons interact with oscillations of
atoms in the crystal, or phonons starting from fundamental understanding of
electrons and atoms, the building blocks of materials. The electron-phonon
interaction plays an important in determining the temperature dependence of many
electronic and optical properties of solids, and plays a central role in
technologically important phenomena, from charge and heat transport to
superconductivity and light-driven phase transitions. With rapid progress in
materials design and data-driven materials discovery there is a growing need for
more advanced computational methods that start from the atomic level together
with their implementation in software to describe complex functional properties
of materials and materials systems with predictive accuracy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This summer school will bring together expertise from
across the nation and the world to introduce participants to advanced first
principles methods for calculating electron-phonon physics and related materials
properties, including lectures on the quantum mechanical theory of systems of
many particles, software implementations, and hands-on training sessions. The
school will be followed by a hackathon event guided by experts from the Texas
Advanced Computing Center, and devoted to creating and maintaining sustainable
cyberinfrastructure. There is currently no specialized training available in
this area; this school fills a significant gap in the education of the next
generation of physicists, chemists, materials scientists, and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This school will contribute to developing a
globally competitive STEM workforce by exposing participants to advanced
techniques in computational materials modelling and design. By training
participants into best practices in scientific computing and software
development, the school will contribute to educating scientists and engineers
that will go on to build tomorrow’s cyberinfrastructure. This school will also
foster partnerships between academia and industry by delivering training in
techniques that can be employed in an industrial setting, and by doing so it
will contribute to increasing the economic competitiveness of the United States.
Participation of underrepresented minorities, women, and persons with
disabilities will be encouraged and prioritized&lt;br/&gt;in order to increase
diversity in STEM. An event dedicated to diversity and inclusion will be
held&lt;br/&gt;during the school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a summer school activity to train graduate
students, postdoctoral scholars, faculty members, and research scientists in
modern approaches to predictive calculations for materials and particularly
their electronic properties. The school is currently planned to take place June
14 to June 20, 2021 at the University of Texas - Austin. The organizers have
flexible backup plans including conversion to a virtual summer school, to
compensate for Covid-19 related contingencies. This school will introduce
researchers to state-of-the art techniques for predictive first principles
calculations of electronic, optical, and transport properties of materials at
finite temperature. By the end of the school participants will be able to
compute electron-phonon couplings, band structures including zero-point quantum
fluctuations and temperature effects, optical properties including phonon-
assisted quantum processes, critical temperature and superconducting gap of
phonon mediated superconductors, electron and hole mobilities in semiconductors,
the resistivity of metals, and polaronic properties. These properties are
essential for designing the materials that will underpin future technology,
including solar cells, displays, touch screens, superconducting cables, portable
electronics, batteries, and quantum computers. There is currently no specialized
training available in this area; this school fills a significant gap in the
education of the next generation of physicists, chemists, materials scientists,
and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This school will contribute to developing a
globally competitive STEM workforce by exposing participants to advanced
techniques in computational materials modelling and design. By training
participants into best practices in scientific computing and software
development, the school will contribute to educating scientists and engineers
that will go on to build tomorrow’s cyberinfrastructure. The school will also
foster partnership between academia and industry by delivering training in
techniques that can be employed in an industrial setting, and by doing so it
will contribute to increasing the economic competitiveness of the United States.
Participation of underrepresented minorities, women, and persons with
disabilities will be encouraged and prioritized in order to increase diversity
in STEM. An event dedicated to diversity and inclusion will be held during the
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Division of Materials Research
within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences is jointly
supported by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate
of Computer and Information Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.