* 2007100
* OAC Core: Small: Collaborative Research: Conversational Agents for Supporting Sustainable Implementation and Systemic Diffusion of Cyberinfrastructure and Science Gateways
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Kerk Kee, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,975.00

By designing a chatbot that harnesses the power of machine learning to connect
scientists/educators with existing tools, datasets, and other experts, this
sociotechnical project aims to remove significant user support barriers in the
US STEM community. A chatbot called Vidura will be developed to provide
personalized user support to novice and expert users in the form of a
conversational agent to facilitate interdisciplinary research and education
collaborations. The chatbot investigations in the project benefit the
investments in science gateways (SG) and cyberinfrastructure (CI) made by the
NSF and other federal agencies for over two decades. Vidura chatbot works around
the clock and makes the greatest impacts when user support by human agents
(i.e., domain specialists or CI support persons) is not available and/or is too
costly as a science gateway surges in user uptake. The Vidura chatbot will
initially be prototyped in CyNeuro, a neuroscience SG, but will be made
accessible to be adapted in SGs across multiple domains to benefit the broader
research/education communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates
human communication science, conversational agent design, recommender
algorithms, machine learning techniques, domain topic modeling in a synergistic
way that advances social science, computer science, and neuroscience. In
addition, this sociotechnical project provides research opportunities to benefit
undergraduate and graduate students in both social and computer sciences and
creates new interdisciplinary courses. The project activities will benefit
students with diverse backgrounds as it will be carried out at two large public
universities, one of which is a Hispanic serving institution. The project
objectives and activities will focus on answering three main research questions:
(i) How to design a chatbot for gathering user requirements and creating user
profiles with proficiency in order to provide personalized expert service
support and maintain adoption? (ii) How to equip the chatbot communication and
custom dialogue flows during support actions with underlying recommender
algorithms using un-supervised machine learning within/across science domains?
(iii) How to implement a chatbot framework in research and education workflows
of data-intensive/computation-intensive application communities (such as the
neuroscience community, as well as in CI provider communities of SGCI, XSEDE,
NSG, CyVerse, and JetStream) to evaluate utility across domains and identify
best practices for ongoing relevance? The project findings will ultimately
advance knowledge on how to enable conversational agents implemented as chatbot
interfaces with pertinent underlying recommender algorithms in order to provide
expert services to scientific domain users with reduced cost and increased
convenience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.