* 2007057
* Collaborative Research: How are Rhyolites Generated? Evaluating Models for the Volcanic-plutonic Connection in the Searchlight Magmatic System, Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 09/19/2019,08/31/2023
* Ayla Pamukcu, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2023
* USD 132,855.00

Eruptions of high-silica rhyolite magma are explosive, violent, and potentially
extremely hazardous events. However, questions of how, under what conditions,
and over what timescales the magma bodies that source these eruptions are
assembled remain debated. Resolving these issues is critical for understanding a
variety of magmatic and crustal processes, ranging from the geochemical
stratification of the crust to monitoring the volcanoes that source such
dangerous eruptions for future hazards. A significant challenge to answering
these questions lies in the difficulty in documenting the physical (e.g.,
temperature, pressure) and geochemical conditions in magmatic systems through
time. Geophysical measurements on modern volcanoes can provide 'snapshots' of a
magmatic system, but they cannot shed light on long-term changes that occur over
tens of thousands to millions of years. One way to bridge this gap is to study
ancient volcanoes where faulting and erosion have exposed both the material that
erupted from the volcano and the un-erupted material that comprises the roots of
these systems within the Earth's crust. Used in combination, these extrusive and
intrusive deposits can be a powerful tool to understand longer-term processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate one such ancient volcano
near Searchlight, Nevada (USA). More specifically, the PIs will produce a high-
resolution (&lt;50,000 years) temporal record spanning the magmatic system's 1-2
million year lifetime, with which they will establish the history of magma
emplacement in the crust, geochemical trends, and the relative timing of the
eruption(s). To do this, the researchers will utilize high-precision U-Pb zircon
geochronology, whole-rock and mineral geochemistry and barometry, and thermal
models. This record will shed light on the timescales over which magmas
accumulate and are stored within the Earth's upper crust, the processes that
occur in and affect the magma body prior to eruption, and potential eruption
triggers. Funding will also support two postdoctoral researchers (1 female),
research opportunities for undergraduate students at Princeton and Northeastern
Universities, and participation in Princeton University's Teachers as Scholars
program, which introduces local K-12 teachers to the Earth sciences and helps
them in building science curricula for use in their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.