* 2007210
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Decentralized Edge Computing Platform for Privacy-Preserving Mobile Crowdsensing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Dapeng Wu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 171,847.00

Mobile crowdsensing leverages mobile devices (e.g., smartphones and wearables)
to collect sensing data from users and measure spatiotemporal phenomena (e.g.,
air quality and traffic speed). Yet, existing crowdsensing solutions are mainly
built on a cloud-centric approach that raises significant security and privacy
challenges. For example, accurate and real-time situational awareness of
flooding and wildfires is important for incident commanders and residents to
fight these natural hazards, and mobile crowdsensing can provide large-scale
monitoring of hazards by pictures and/or input provided by mobile users.
Although most users are willing to help, they may hesitate to participate in
such a crowdsensing task due to privacy concerns, as their private information
including GPS locations may be leaked during the transmissions to a cloud server
or from the storage on the server. This project investigates a hardware and
software architecture for aggregation-free and privacy-aware mobile crowdsensing
by integrating software and hardware design, edge computing, distributed
spatiotemporal optimization, and machine-learning-based privacy protection.
Without aggregating raw sensor data to a central server, this project passes
latent representations of user data among edge servers until they recover the
data of all areas by spatiotemporal interpolation. The educational components of
this project include local-outreach programs (e.g., the University Minority
Mentor Program at the University of Florida and the research week fair at the
University of California, Merced) and summer internships to enhance research
opportunities for underrepresented populations, including minority and female
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a novel software and
hardware architecture that integrates spatiotemporal prediction and distributed
optimization into edge computing for aggregation-free and privacy-aware mobile
crowdsensing. This project designs a machine-learning pipeline that predicts
sensing measurements with partially-available crowdsensed data, at the same time
providing privacy-awareness without aggregating sensor data to a central server.
An edge computing platform is developed to efficiently manage the above machine-
learning pipeline and automatically scale up the computing resources of multiple
edge servers. Two important applications, natural hazard (flood) and public
health (body temperature) monitoring, will be implemented to evaluate system
effectiveness and demonstrate societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.