* 2007009
* AF: SMALL: Topics in Bridging Continuous and Discrete Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* David Williamson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2024
* USD 429,681.00

One well-known result in discrete mathematics is that the countries for any map
can be given one of four colors so that any two countries sharing a border will
have different colors. In mathematics, this result is usually stated as saying
that any planar graph is four-colorable. The proofs of this result that are
known involve checking hundreds of individual cases; the first proof of this
result (given in 1976) was one of the first well-known mathematical proofs to
involve computers in doing the checking. This project attempts a different route
to obtain this proof, one that involves using the optimization of continuous
functions to obtain a result that at first glance appears not to involve
continuous quantities at all (since in the end one only wants to use one of four
colors per country). The goal is to eliminate all the case-checking that went
into the original proof. Such a proof would give further confidence to
mathematicians that the original proofs did not miss any important cases. The
project includes other problems that have this flavor of using continuous
optimization to obtain results in optimizing discrete quantities. These include
other results in trying to minimize the number of colors used in coloring
general (non-planar) graphs, and finding practical algorithms to solve certain
types of linear systems of equations. The research will be used as a means of
outreach to undergraduates, and involve them in their project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project explores several new directions for
progress on the interface of discrete and continuous optimization. The first
returns to the technique of using semidefinite programming, an extension of
linear programming, over the complex numbers to break through a nearly 20-year
old barrier in coloring 3-colorable graphs. The second considers finding a
direct proof of the famous theorem about four-coloring planar graphs via
semidefinite programming. The third considers an eigenvector-based approximation
algorithm for the maximum-cut problem due to Trevisan and looks for possible
improvements and extensions. The fourth looks at an algorithm for solving
Laplacian systems of equations due to Kelner, Orrechia, Sidford, and Zhu, and
considers possible directions that might make the algorithm competitive with
current linear-system solvers. These directions include batching updates and
looking at a dual version of the algorithm. The fifth and final direction looks
at an early result in spectral graph theory due to Hoffman and Singleton, and
considers whether one remaining open issue in that paper can be
resolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.