* 2007656
* NSF-BSF: Collaborative Research: RI: Small: Multilingual Language Generation via Understanding of Code Switching
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Melinda Fricke, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2023
* USD 154,193.00

Human language technology has recently matured to the extent that computational
systems can generally interact with users in ways that are natural to humans,
not just to machines. However, most people in the world today are multilingual,
and current approaches to language technology do not reflect the reality that
multilingual communication is ubiquitous; that is, current technology can
interact naturally with monolingual speakers, but not with multilingual ones.
Computational systems should be able to generate language that sounds equally
natural to these users, and this includes being able to accommodate nonnative
speakers. This project first creates a large-scale, broad coverage dataset,
reflecting conversations between humans and an automatic system that is
sophisticated enough to generate fluent multilingual (i.e. 'code-switched')
utterances, but is simple enough for controlled experiments. The dataset is far
larger than ones that are currently available, and is based on a much more
detailed understanding of language-switching strategies. Second, this dataset is
used to develop new methods to incorporate code-switching into contemporary
deep-learning language generation, including dialogue systems, question
answering, assistive technologies, summarization and machine translation. This
innovation should benefit a dramatic number of multilingual computer users,
including less privileged users who are currently required to interact with
machines in a language they do not speak fluently. Successful completion of the
research program will pave the way for the development of natural language
technologies that are more accommodating to such users, building bridges over
the digital divide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project
is to develop multilingual and contextualized language generation technologies
that are more controllable and more adaptable to multilingual users. The project
achieves this goal by completing the following objectives. (1) It develops
psycholinguistically-grounded, scalable approaches to collecting corpora for
studying how multilingual speakers adapt to each other's linguistic choices in
text conversations. These methodologies are employed to collect large-scale,
rich datasets of multilingual human-machine conversations. These datasets, as
well as additional corpora of human code-switched interactions, should shed new
light on the theoretical understanding of cross-lingual usage patterns, allowing
for better understanding of how people employ code-switching in written
language. (2) It uses the linguistic insights obtained through this endeavor to
define classifiers that predict code-switching. (3) Novel approaches are
developed for efficient, large-vocabulary neural language generation that
incorporate these classifiers, allowing generation systems to introduce code-
switching in a way that sounds natural to multilingual users. Consequently, this
project should dramatically advance our understanding of code-switching,
especially in the relatively unexplored territory of written dialogue. In
addition, its contributions benefit a broad range of applications that rely on
language generation, including dialogue systems, question answering, assistive
technologies, summarization and machine translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.