* 2007403
* CNS Core: Small: Ensuring Privacy by Runtime Analog Sanitization of Solid State Storage Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Aleksandar Milenkovic, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 496,925.00

Non-volatile flash memories, the basic building blocks of solid-state storage
devices, offer small form factors, high-capacity, high-speed, and low-power
permanent storage solutions in a wide range of computing systems found in
consumer electronics, automotive, military, industrial, healthcare, and
enterprise segments. Unfortunately, deleting data instantly from physical flash
memories is not always straightforward as it incurs hefty overheads and
increases wear level, especially in solid-state drives (SSDs). According to a
recent report, 42% of used SSDs sold on eBay held sensitive recoverable data,
even though data deletion or sanitization methods were in place. Whereas
standard data deletion methods make the data inaccessible to the user through
standard interfaces, our recent research efforts demonstrate that the deleted
data is partially or fully recoverable by means of physical characterization of
flash memory cells. This underscores the need for finding new ways to ensure
that deleted data is promptly, permanently, and irreversibly re-moved from flash
memories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is investigating new cost-effective
instant data sanitization techniques for flash memories. The proposed techniques
take advantage of (a) timeline of recent flash operations; (b) physical
properties of flash memory cells cap-tured by state decay models and (c) partial
flash program and erase operations. These techniques will be tailored to uti-
lize the unique properties and architectures of flash-memory chips found in
commercial storage applications. The proposed techniques will be applicable to
different types of flash memories, will require no or minimal changes in
hardware, and will not increase the wear level of flash memories nor
significantly increase the latency of common flash operations. Techniques for
cost-effective data sanitization of flash memories in run-time will benefit
consumers, industry, and government alike by ensuring that deleted data is not
recoverable at any time during the productâ€™s life cycle. These techniques will
be deployed in the firmware of flash memory controllers. A direct outcome of
this proposal will be the training of three graduate students in the important
area of hardware-oriented security and memory systems. The investigators are
developing teaching materials to introduce hardware-oriented security topics in
embedded systems, computer systems architecture, and hardware reliability
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.