* 2007807
* FET: Small: Methods and Algorithms for microRNA Sensing: Interdependency Discovery and Inverse Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Faramarz Fekri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 425,000.00

Recent studies have shown that a small group of microRNA (miRNA) often acts as
(disease) biomarkers whose concentration changes from the normal state can be
used as one of the most promising methods of detecting various diseases such as
cancer, infection and heart diseases at early stages. Further, several efforts
have been made to use miRNAs as a predictive tool in response to medical
treatments, and as therapeutics themselves. Moreover, miRNA-driven signaling
cascade plays a crucial role in the context of diseases, and its understanding
remains a challenge. Several past works suggest that miRNAs in a group or
cluster collaboratively control the regulatory patterns, especially when they
share specific target messenger RNAs. All of these underline the importance of
miRNA sensing and discovery of miRNA-to-miRNA interactions as a complex
regulatory network in a large genome-wide scale. However, measuring 1000+ gene
expression levels individually using sophisticated sequencing technologies
renders such solutions very costly and intractable. The team of investigators
will develop an integrated framework consisted of biosensors and machine-
learning models for both the recovery of miRNAs concentrations and discovery of
their interdependency structure in regulatory networks by analyzing measurements
from a small group of low-cost biosensors. The research impacts are expected to
be significant in several areas. 1. On technology and products: Understanding
miRNA-miRNA interactions and being able to monitor miRNA expression levels is
likely to contribute to the development of diagnostic tools for several types of
cancer, cardiac damage, muscle damage and other muscle pathologies, diabetes,
liver injury, and many infection diseases. By providing effective miRNA sensing
and monitoring mechanisms, the research has potential to reduce the cost of
health care. 2. On education and learning: (i) Training of graduate and
undergraduate students, (ii) Broadening the participation of women and
minorities in this field, (iii) Disseminating the research results, (iv)
Providing internship opportunities for k-12 teachers, (v) Enhancing scientific
and technological understanding by participation in and organizing multi-
disciplinary conferences and workshops, (vi) Establishing collaborative efforts
with both the industry and academia, and (vii) Possible technology transfer of
the solutions developed for miRNA sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research aims at establishing an integrated framework consisted of a measurement
system as a front end and machine-learning algorithms as a back end to achieve
two high-level interrelated goals: (i) To develop the foundation for machine
learning solutions that would analyze measurements from an array of small number
of low-cost biosensors (whose design is guided by the proposed machine learning
framework) and discover miRNA-to-miRNA interdependency structures in a large
population of miRNAs (e.g., over 1000 miRNAs), (ii) To develop a framework for
solving the inverse problem of recovering miRNAs' molecular concentration levels
from a low dimensional measurement by the proposed sensor array, via leveraging
miRNA-to-miRNA dependency structures. Although aimed at biology applications,
the research will advance the theory and design principles in several fronts
with a broad effect in many other applications. Specifically, (1) The research,
for the first time, will investigate and develop the theory of learning the
structure of probabilistic graphical models in both parametric and non-
parametric scenarios under indirect low-dimensional observations. (2) It will
also introduce a novel paradigm based on density evolution on graphs that can
tap into the prior (dependency) structure of a high-dimensional signal to design
and optimize a compressive measurement system for the high-dimensional signal
recovery. (3) The proposed work will advance theory and algorithms for solving
the inverse problem by taking into account certain structures in the high-
dimensional signal (e.g., conditional independencies induced by graphical
models, sparsity). (4) The research, for the first time, will lead to
development of cheap, modular, and fast-acting array of biosensors for miRNA
measurement whose design principle is integrated with and influenced by the data
analytic counterpart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.