* 2007323
* Collaborative Research:  Cosmic Ray Feedback From Plasma to Circumgalactic Scales
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ellen Zweibel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 268,766.00

The self-regulation of star formation through feedback, the launching of
galactic winds, and the interactions between galaxies and their circum-galactic
medium, are fundamental and interrelated components of galaxy formation and
evolution. The primary agents of feedback are the thermal and turbulent energy
of interstellar gas, radiation, and magnetized cosmic rays. Cosmic rays exchange
momentum and energy with the background medium and may be better coupled to the
ionized gas than are the photons, but the physical and computational tools
needed to include them in galaxy models are still at an early stage, and have
not yet been fully studied. This project addresses this “cosmic ray gap” by
developing and implementing new tools for studying the plasma physics of cosmic
rays as it applies to star formation feedback. The team will organize outreach
events to improve general scientific literacy, including planetarium shows and
public lecture series. Undergraduates and graduate students will be involved in
all aspects of the research, providing broad professional training. Workshops
will foster collaborations among participants who share closely related
interests in the physics of cosmic rays, magnetic fields, and interstellar and
intra-cluster feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators have
complementary and overlapping expertise in plasma astrophysics theory,
computational astrophysics, cosmic ray physics, and the astrophysics of galaxy
evolution. This study will cover processes on length scales from the sub-AU
microscopic plasma scales to the 100 kpc circum-galactic scales, and will
combine state of the art fluid dynamical and hybrid fluid–kinetic numerical
simulations with analytical theory. The research goals include: (1) find
improved prescriptions for including cosmic rays in models of stellar feedback;
(2) quantify an “Eddington Limit” for the cosmic ray flux necessary to unbind
the interstellar gas in a galaxy; (3) construct models of the circum-galactic
medium that include cosmic rays; (4) make predictions for observational tests of
the role of cosmic rays. For comparison with data, the investigators will
calculate the non-thermal gamma-ray and radio synchrotron emission from models
with cosmic rays; the gamma-ray results will be used to interpret observations
with Fermi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.