* 2007434
* Collaborative Research: Early Career Principal Investigator Coring Training Cruise
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Evan Solomon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 24,084.00

Collection and analysis of seafloor sediment samples is a fundamental tool in
marine geology. Sediment sampling is key to the study of earthquake hazards,
climate change, and the deep biosphere. This project will focus on training
scientists for seafloor sampling best practices. Practices encompass planning
and executing an oceanographic field expedition involving collection of deep-sea
marine sediments. The shore-based training will introduce participants to
critical aspects of cruise planning and site selection. Such selection uses
basic geophysical techniques, access to data, and use of core repositories.
Participants will design a science-driven cruise plan with guidance from an
experienced team of mentors. Then, the participants will sail on a UNOLS global
class vessel to gain hands-on experience. The experience includes working with
site survey, sampling equipment, and shipboard data collection. The training
will conclude ashore with a review of the scientific outcomes of the cruise. The
post-cruise component will allow for hands-on training. The training will
include analytical, interpretive and archival techniques. The training will set
the stage for efficient and successful future research using the collected
materials. Participant selection will focus on promoting equity and diversity in
marine geoscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In August of 2019 a detailed survey was
conducted to quantify interest in early career coring training for prospective
NSF principal investigators. Nearly a hundred responses were submitted in a
period of less than two weeks, highlighting community need and demand for a
training opportunity that encompasses cruise planning, site selection, shipboard
operations, core processing and curation. This proposal is to provide a sediment
coring principal investigator (PI) training for early career scientists (ECS).
Training will consist of a coupled workshop and field program: a field-based
coring program of ten days aboard a UNOLS vessel to be directed by the early-
career participants, bracketed by week-long pre-and post-cruise workshops. In
the pre-cruise workshop participants will plan the cruise and select sites to be
cored with the support and guidance of a team of experienced mentors. They will
be trained in the utility of legacy data at the Oregon State University Marine
Geology Repository (OSU MGR). They will also be introduced to the NSF Marine
Sediment Sampling (MARSSAM) facility and the technical and logistical support
offered to NSF coring PIâ€™s by MARSSAM staff. At sea, participants will be
trained in the operation and deployment of various coring systems, chirp and
multi-beam data acquisition and interpretation, final site selection, core
processing, multi-sensor core logger data collection and interpretation, and
shipboard core description and curation. At the post-cruise workshop, senior
mentors will guide participants through interpretation of core descriptions,
integration of collected cores and preliminary physical property data with the
stratigraphic/depositional environment. Participants will also be introduced to
relevant analytical techniques and appropriate archival, sampling and data
management practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.