* 2007411
* Multi-Wavelength Observations and Modeling of Magnetic Fields in Ultracool Dwarfs and Giant Exoplanets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Edo Berger, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 02/29/2024
* USD 400,339.00

The stars with the lowest mass and lowest temperature, called Ultra-Cool Dwarfs
(UCDs), are also the most numerous. With fully convective interiors, they
historically were thought not to have dynamo-generated magnetic fields. Recent
observations have shown that these stars do indeed have magnetic activity. This
work will characterize the nature of this magnetic activity, and lead to an
understanding of the dynamo responsible for magnetic fields in these stars.
Understanding these dynamos will shine light on the workings of the largest
exoplanets. The project will engage post-doctoral scholars and undergraduate
students. In addition, the work will be incorporated into undergraduate
education through the active participation of students in using Harvard-
Smithsonian telescopes. The results of the project will be disseminated to the
public through talks in the Harvard-Smithsonian Observatory Night program as
well as through on-going outreach in popular
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will examine archival data from the
VLA and from ALMA, as well as the Pan-STARRS Medium Deep Survey (PS1/MDS) to
understand magnetic fields from a variety of ultra-cool dwarf (UCD) stars. They
will study (i) the distribution of magnetic field strengths; (ii) the physical
scale, topology, and coherence timescale of the magnetic fields; (iii) the
ubiquity of dynamos across the full range of UCDs, as well as for the first time
in giant exoplanets; and (iv) the rates and energetics of flaring activity in
about 100,000 UCDs in the PS1/MDS on timescales of minutes to years, with
implications for habitability around UCDs. The results will inform studies with
future radio facilities (e.g., Square Kilometer Array) and optical surveys
(e.g., the Legacy Survey of Space and Time with NSFâ€™s Vera Rubin
Observatory).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.