* 2007909
* Stereolithography: Enabling Polymer Network and Multi-Scale Structure Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Catalin Picu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2023
* USD 531,361.00

This award supports fundamental research that integrates material chemistry and
mechanics to define a technology which can lead to advanced manufacturing of 3D
printed thermosets with enhanced mechanical properties. Thermoset structures
containing stiff and soft domains that mimic the hierarchical structure of bone,
nacre, bamboo and pearlite steels will be developed by using stereolithography
3D printing in conjunction with phase separation. The experimental work will be
guided by modeling to optimize the network structure and the multiscale
architecture of the material, in order to achieve strength and toughness of the
additive manufactured (AM) parts superior to those of the structurally
homogeneous thermosets used today. Polymer nanocomposite AM parts are
increasingly important for applications in dental, biomedical, wearable
electronics, aerospace, and automotive industries. Therefore, results from this
research will benefit the U.S. economy and society. This project integrates
research with an education plan, which encompasses course development, education
of graduate students, integration of undergraduate students in research,
outreach to K-12 and the promotion of STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to innovate the photopolymerization 3D printing technique
called stereolithography (SLA) to allow for the production of thermosets with
network structure and architecture modulated on multiple scales. The project
aims to develop material design rules for heterogeneous thermosets and to
establish new SLA methods by combining photo-crosslinking with phase separation.
This activity will (i) develop SLA as an additive manufacturing method for
thermosets with structure controlled on multiple length scales, including on
scales finer than the printing resolution, and (ii) develop the concept and the
methods to design the multiscale structure so as to enhance its toughness
without compromising the strength and stiffness of the thermoset. This will be
achieved by integrating modeling and experimentation. The developed technologies
will be applicable to other polymeric systems to control these and other sets of
properties, such as the thermal and electrical conductivities. This research
will also provide education in advanced manufacturing, materials modeling and
polymer research to graduate and undergraduate students, while dissemination and
outreach to K-12 will increase the impact of the project
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.