* 2007595
* III: Small: Improving automation and speed of macromolecule recognition and localization in cryo-electron tomography using unsupervised deep learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Min Xu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Cells are basic structural and functional units of all known living organisms.
Understanding the structures and spatial localizations of large individual
macromolecules inside cells is fundamental to the biological research community.
However, such information has been difficult to obtain due to the lack of data
acquisition techniques. Recent advances in Cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET)
have enabled submolecular resolution 3D visualization of the near-native
structures and spatial organizations of large macromolecules and their
interactions with other subcellular components in single cells. However, the
rapidly-increasing amount of diverse cryo-ET data brings along major challenges
to high-throughput systematic analysis. Automation and computation efficiency
have become bottlenecks. This project will focus on improving both automation
and speed of macromolecule recognition and localization in tomograms using
unsupervised deep learning. The proposed methods will have a wide range of
applications in life science that involve cryo-ET. This project will train
graduate and undergraduate students in computational biology, bioinformatics,
and bioimage analysis, as well integrate research results into university
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cryo-ET has emerged as the most powerful
technique for the structural recovery, recognition, and localization of
macromolecules in situ. To significantly improve the automation and speed of
macromolecule recognition and localization in tomograms, this project will
develop two key unsupervised deep learning techniques, including (1) a novel
simultaneous simulator and denoiser to create realistically simulated
subtomograms; and (2) a method for clustering macromolecule structures by
disentangling structure information from orientations and displacements. To
facilitate broad use of the methods developed from this project, the software
implementation of the proposed methods will be integrated into the open-source
software AITom, so that they are ready to be used by the structural biology
community. The methods focus on efficiently constructing initial homogeneous
subtomogram clusters and producing initial structures for further structure
refinement, which well complements existing structural refinement methods and
will significantly leverage the systematic de novo and in situ analysis of
macromolecules in single cells. The results of this research will be provided on
the Xu Lab website and GitHub site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.