* 2007469
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Robust Resource Planning and Orchestration to Satisfy End-to-End SLA Requirements in Mobile Edge Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Guoliang Xue, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 142,500.00

Mobile edge computing has emerged to address the long end-to-end latency, low
throughput, and unpredictability of cloud computing as an Internet-based service
when supporting modern mobile applications. Nevertheless, the lack of
performance guarantees in the form of service-level agreements (SLAs) can lead
to performance degradation of critical applications, rendering them incompetent
or unsafe to use. Due to the high dynamics in the mobile environment, the edge
provider can incur substantial financial risks for providing SLA guarantees that
could be violated. This discourages edge providers from providing SLA guarantees
without first understanding and being able to control the associated risks. This
project seeks to develop tools that help the edge provider to quantify and
minimize the risks associated with providing edge SLA guarantees on key
performance metrics through resource planning and orchestration. This project
will significantly advance our knowledge on the risk factors in edge computing
and give rise to new frontiers in edge computing research. Also, this project
will enable and enhance life-changing edge applications such as mobile vision
and autonomous driving, promote investment and expedite development in the edge
computing industry, train highly qualified personnel for the future computing
workforce, and broaden awareness and interest in edge computing through
curriculum development and research dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will lay the theoretical and algorithmic foundation of comprehensive
risk modeling and optimization for providing edge SLA guarantees. This project
combines a realistic performance model of mobile edge applications with the
established theory of risk management in portfolio management and develops
efficient algorithms for risk assessment and optimization through stochastic
optimization, convex optimization, sampling techniques, approximations, and
learning-based methods. Specifically, this project makes the following technical
contributions: 1) development and validation of a realistic performance and SLA
model for mobile edge computing applications, 2) modeling and optimization of
three risk measures (risk probability, value-at-risk, and conditional value-at-
risk) for single-user risk-aware edge resource orchestration, 3) modeling and
optimization for multi-user single-node risk-aware edge resource orchestration,
and 4) modeling and optimization for multi-user multi-node risk-aware edge
resource provisioning. All research outcomes will be evaluated with testbed
and/or large-scale simulations with public traces, and will be made publicly
available on the PIs' websites to promote result reproduction and future
research advancements along the line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.