* 2007351
* Compaction in Action: Blue, Green, and Red Nuggets at Redshift Zero
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Sheila Kannappan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 430,582.00

This project will use existing survey data along with new observations to study
compact galaxies across different stages of their evolution. As gas clouds
collide, they are thought to produce compact blue galaxies (called "blue
nuggets") that are undergoing rapid star formation. As the blue nuggets continue
to accrete gas, their star formation will decrease, leaving behind compact red
galaxies (called "red nuggets") that eventually form elliptical galaxies through
accretion of satellite galaxies. This project will study the nearby population
of blue nuggets, red nuggets, and nuggets in transition (so-called "green
nuggets"). The project will be able to look at all phases of nugget evolution
and better understand how star formation and colliding streams of gas produce
these objects and influence their structure. The project will also make the data
available for the astronomical community and provide tools so that the data can
be used in education. The project will support a two-week Computational
Astronomy &amp; Physics Boot Camp for undergraduates and post-baccalaureates who
may not have the resources to participate in research over the entire
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will perform a systematic study of
blue, red, and green nuggets in the z=0 RESOLVE (REsolved Spectroscopy Of a
Local VolumE) survey. The research will look at understanding how and when blue
nuggets quench, whether colliding-stream compaction still occurs at redshift
zero, and how nuggets evolve structurally as the pass from blue through green
and on to red. The project will use RESOLVE's environment metrics, multi-
wavelength photometry, optical spectroscopy, and 21 cm HI gas observations. This
data will be supplemented by data from other observations to look for kinematic
signatures of colliding streams, mergers, tidal stripping, and disk rebuilding.
The project will expand the utility of RESOLVE's searchable online database by
creating a new Data Science Portal providing computational methods tutorials,
example data analysis projects, and suggested tutorial sequences. The project
will conduct a two-week Computational Astronomy &amp; Physics Boot Camp, which
will serve five undergraduate and post-baccalaureate students per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.