* 2007080
* AF: Small: A Computational Lens on Participatory Democracy
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ariel Procaccia, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 408,000.00

Participatory democracy is an approach to governance that emphasizes broad
citizen participation, often in a way that is supported or even enabled by
modern technology. Although the design of systems of participatory democracy has
long been the subject of study and debate, the theme of this project is that
theoretical computer science has much to bring to the table. The project
explores two facets of citizen participation: allocation of public resources and
selection of citizen representatives. A formal approach to address optimal and
fair solutions to these two facets can potentially have a positive effect on the
confidence of citizens in governing institutions that utilize these
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is divided into two main research
thrusts. The first deals with participatory budgeting, a paradigm by which
residents of a city or citizens of a country vote on how public resources should
be allocated. Participatory budgeting has been implemented in thousands of
cities around the world, and recently at national level in several countries —
but the procedures being used have significant shortcomings. Indeed,
participatory budgeting methods should ideally provide rigorous guarantees. This
idea is beautifully captured by the notion of core solutions — outcomes that
every coalition of voters prefers to what it could afford if it went it alone.
Two of the research challenges focus on the existence and computation of core
solutions, or of natural relaxations thereof (which are inspired by fair
division). The second thrust deals with sortition — an ancient paradigm of
democracy by which representatives are selected at random. After a hiatus of
several centuries, sortition is being used again in the democratic process
around the world. The problem of participant selection has emerged as a major
sticking point, with no optimally fair solutions. One of the research challenges
deals with the design of randomized participant selection algorithms that
satisfy practical constraints and, simultaneously, satisfy fairness properties.
Another challenge asks, in addition, for algorithms that guarantee
representation for groups that are not explicitly known in
advance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.