* 2007075
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Katherine Eisen, Eisen, Katherine Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. One major challenge in biology is to
understand how variation in functionally-important traits—attributes of
organisms that affect their survival and reproduction—evolves in nature.
Interactions between plants and insects occur on every continent, and floral
scent is a complex trait that shapes many of these interactions. This project
investigates the evolutionary diversification of floral scent at the levels of
genes and networks of genes, individuals, and populations. This project will
study the links between these levels of biological organization in a widespread
plant that emits relatively few scent compounds and interacts with different
insects throughout Europe. Integrating across levels of biological organization
in this project can provide insight into “rules of life” regarding how and why
variation in the environment generates and maintains variation in the genes and
traits of organisms. This project provides valuable opportunities for
international collaboration and diverse student engagement at the elementary and
high school levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages and develops an
emerging model system for plant evolution, the alpine rock cress (Arabis
alpina), to address three main questions: (1) What is the genetic architecture
of variation in floral scent? (2) What are the ecological agents of selection on
floral scent? (3) What floral scent compounds are the targets of phenotypic
selection? The Fellow will conduct greenhouse common garden studies of genomic
and transcriptomic variation using F2 hybrids that exhibit the full range of
natural floral scent variation. A Pan-European field experiment will evaluate if
pollinators and herbivores generate phenotypic selection on floral scent, and
lab-based assays of insect behavior will determine if insects respond to
compounds under selection. This project will provide opportunities for the
Fellow to gain new skills in genomics, transcriptomics, and insect behavioral
assays. Broader impacts of this project include the development of online
infrastructure to facilitate sharing data, protocols, and equipment.
Additionally, the Fellow will conduct scientific outreach activities through
three avenues. Interactive classroom learning activities for elementary and high
school students, and opportunities for high school students to pursue
independent research projects, will pique students’ interest in science while
helping them develop essential skills for careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.