* 2007891
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Combinatorial Complexity Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Igor Pak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 339,131.00

Computational complexity characterizes what kinds of computational
resources,&lt;br/&gt;such as time, effort, space and energy, &lt;br/&gt;are
needed to solve challenging mathematical problems derived from real-
world&lt;br/&gt;activities, such as designing&lt;br/&gt;aircraft, analyzing DNA
evidence, or breaking a secret code.&lt;br/&gt;This project applies recent
cutting-edge work from combinatorics and&lt;br/&gt;algebra to more clearly
determine which problems are intractable (before&lt;br/&gt;too many
computational resources are wasted trying to solve them). This is important
because,&lt;br/&gt;knowing that a problem is hard to solve computationally can
be&lt;br/&gt;used in a different direction, such as creating codes that are
harder to&lt;br/&gt;break. Combinatorics is the ancient art of counting
complicated mathematical&lt;br/&gt;objects, and was the cradle for the
development of early digital computers.&lt;br/&gt;Algebra here refers to the
study of certain symmetries which have recently&lt;br/&gt;been discovered to be
important in complexity theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this
project approaches Geometric Complexity Theory&lt;br/&gt;from the point of view
of algebraic combinatorics to further clarify&lt;br/&gt;feasible approaches to
the VP vs. VNP Problem.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, part of the work will be devoted
to the computational complexity&lt;br/&gt;of counting certain Young tableaux and
computing related constants&lt;br/&gt;and polynomials in Algebraic Combinatorics
and Algebraic Complexity,&lt;br/&gt;respectively. These objects and quantities,
while introduced in the beginning&lt;br/&gt;of last century, are still not
deeply understood. However, they have recently&lt;br/&gt;enjoyed a healthy
stream of advances from&lt;br/&gt;various directions. Understanding their
computational nature would clarify the&lt;br/&gt;feasibility of some famous
problems in Algebraic Combinatorics searching for&lt;br/&gt;natural
correspondences (bijections), and pave a new approach to their
study,&lt;br/&gt;leading towards better lower bounds in algebraic complexity.
These objects and&lt;br/&gt;quantities include understanding the Kronecker
coefficients (an 80-year-old&lt;br/&gt;problem), and efficiently computing
Kostka and Littlewood-Richardson&lt;br/&gt;coefficients. While no closed-form
formulas for these coefficients exist,&lt;br/&gt;their asymptotics can lead to
new lower bounds in Geometric Complexity Theory&lt;br/&gt;that are currently out
of reach.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, distinguishing Arithmetic&lt;br/&gt;Complexity
classes like VP and VNP boils down to distinguishing their&lt;br/&gt;universal
polynomials (e.g. determinant vs permanent) under
affine&lt;br/&gt;transformations, ultimately translating to inequalities between
representation&lt;br/&gt;theoretic multiplicities involving the quantities
mentioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.