* 2007422
* Dynamical instabilities in the aid of planet formation in circumstellar disks
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Wladimir Lyra, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2023
* USD 323,825.00

A three-year program conducted by New Mexico State University will simulate
planets forming around young host stars using supercomputers. Many details in
the roadmap of planet formation are still uncharted. Planets form out of disks
of gas and dust that orbit young stars. This investigation will use powerful
computers to produce simulations of planet formation and compare the results
with modern observations. This research will be able to decide which models are
more likely to account for planet formation. This project has an educational
component focused on underserved Hispanic teenagers, with a goal is to inspire
them to pursue higher education. The project will develop a science camp where
students are taught reasoning skills and learn about astronomy. The project
plans to reach 30% of all Hispanic teenagers living under the poverty line in
Las Cruces. To consolidate gains, a three-month after-school program of lectures
will be offered, by the end of which some students are paired with local
astronomers for summer internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
potentially address the long-standing question of the robustness of planet
formation, specifically in the crucial range of solar and sub-solar metallicity,
by examining potential synergies between hydrodynamical and streaming
instabilities. The work will strive to produce testable predictions in the form
of (1) observational signatures of the planet-forming streaming instability in
sub-mm wavelengths; (2) the observational appearance of dynamical instabilities
in thermal emission and scattered light and (3) how vortices appear in scattered
light, which is valuable to current surveys with SPHERE, GPI, and SCExAO, but
also for future observations with JWST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.