* 2007175
* III: Small: Learning to Hash Information Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yong Ge, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,621.00

Many of today's real-world systems form information networks, where nodes
represent multi-type entities and links reflect relation between entities.
Examples include social networks, user-product networks, and knowledge graphs,
that exist in social networking sites, e-commerce systems, and digital
encyclopedia systems, respectively. One major goal of data science is to obtain
effective representations of information networks to support various analytical
tasks such as similarity search, link prediction, and node ranking that enable
real-world applications such as search and recommendation. Prior research has
developed machine learning and optimization solutions for inferring network data
representations. However, these approaches still suffer from computation and
storage challenges, especially while responding to real-time requests and
computing on small devices. This project will develop novel methods for learning
network data representations that could save much computational cost and storage
space. Ultimately, the project will make the applications driven by network data
run more effectively and efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop novel machine learning methods for hashing both homogeneous and
heterogenous information networks. In addition to structure information, the
developed approach will also consider attribute information that may be
available for many information networks. As the formalized learning objectives
are NP-hard problems with binary decision variables, this project will develop
new optimization methods for solving the learning problems by exploring two
different directions for solving the learning problems. The first one is to
creatively transform the formalized learning problems to well-studied Max-Cut
problems and then leverage existing approaches to solve the transformed
problems. The other one is to study continuous optimization reformulations for
the formalized learning problems and then develop convex approximations to solve
the reformulated continuous optimization problems. The learned binary
representations of information networks will be applied to several important
applications tasks such as similar node search, node classification, link
prediction, and recommendations. Multiple information network datasets will be
used to evaluate the performance of developed methods based on different
quantitative evaluation metrics. The developed information network hashing
solutions in this project will significantly advance the research fields of
representation learning of information networks, data mining and machine
learning for network data analysis, and optimization for machine learning
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.