* 2007689
* FET: CIF: Small: Graph-Based Quantum Error Correcting Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Javier Garcia-Frias, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum computing is inherently noisy, and errors in the processed qubits are
always present. In order to correct the errors, it is therefore necessary to
apply quantum error-correcting codes, which will be a key component of future
practical fault-tolerant quantum computation systems. Although existing
practical quantum codes use very short block lengths, future practical systems
will deal with many qubits and will need to apply powerful codes with long block
lengths. This project investigates the construction of novel families of quantum
codes that for long block lengths are expected to achieve excellent performance
in practical scenarios. Two graduate students and two undergraduate students
will directly participate in this research, and state of the art results from
the project will be disseminated in a new graduate course developed by the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project investigates the application
of turbo-like/graph-based coding structures in quantum error correction. The
introduction of graph-based codes, which are iteratively decoded using message
passing, has been one of the most important developments in classical
communications during the last two decades, leading to excellent performance in
many different environments when the block length increases. Interestingly, the
quantum codes in the important family of stabilizer codes can be designed taking
as a starting point classical graph-based codes that satisfy the symplectic
property, which can be seen as a constraint in the graph structure. Following
this approach, excellent results can be obtained for the subset of Calderbank-
Short-Steane (CSS) quantum codes. By properly modifying the graph structure,
this project will explore the great potential for the development of even better
non-CSS stabilizer codes that can be applied in realistic quantum channels, such
as asymmetric channels and channels with memory. The objective is to achieve
improved performance even when the channel parameters are not known at the
decoder site, by estimating them jointly with the decoding process, leading to
more robust designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.