* 2007974
* CHS: Small: Developing and Validating a Physically Accurate Light-Scattering Model for the Rendering of Bird and Other Dinosaur Feathers
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Eric Patterson, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2023
* USD 493,335.00

Although computer graphics has become a crucial tool for scientific
visualization (and many other fields such as medicine, industry, education, and
communication), more realistic, fine-scale representations of the natural world
are still sorely needed. Rendering, a core component of computer graphics, uses
models of light and material interaction to generate today's most photorealistic
images, but there are many real-world materials yet to be fundamentally studied
in this regard. In ornithology and paleontology, for example, researchers
continue to investigate feather micro-structures in an effort to discover how
these produce color and iridescence, and to reveal the similarities and
differences between feathers of modern birds and those of extinct dinosaurs, but
to date no sufficiently sophisticated model has been developed to represent the
complex, multi-scale interaction of light with feather sub-structures. This
interdisciplinary project will lead to the first computer-graphics appearance
model specifically developed for feathers, by collecting and building on
biophysical data to design a biologically realistic rendering method. Additional
broad impacts will derive from the project outcomes contributing to educational
activities related to birds and other dinosaurs while transforming rendering
capabilities to create photorealistic images of feathers and feathered creatures
for scientific visualization, illustration, documentaries, and interactive
graphics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The appearance of real-world feather anatomy is
the result of light interactions with complex, patterned structures of varying
scale. Currently, fiber-shading models of mammalian hair and fur are often used
for convenience, despite their quite different structural and mechanical
properties; inherently, therefore, such models do not accurately recreate the
scattering properties of feathers. Furthermore, structural coloration, a wave-
optics property not represented at all in fiber-shading models, is present in
many feathers. To address these deficiencies, novel material models will be
developed by collecting and observing physical data of varying scales from
feathers. Broad taxonomic sampling will make manifest important variation among
birds and facilitate imaging of a wide variety of microscopic structures. Light-
scattering data will be recorded to develop and validate the new physical
material models. Greater understanding of these multi-scale light interactions
as well as the complex phenomenon of structural coloration holds potential to
advance perspectives in several fields. Visualizations and comparisons between
living-bird feathers and non-avian dinosaur fossils will increase understanding
of feather evolution, be applicable to studies of signaling and evolution of
mate choice in ornithology, and improve sophistication of fiber and wave-optics
models in computer graphics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.