* 2007246
* SHF: Small: Towards a Holistic Causal Model for Continuous Software Traceability
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kevin Moran, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The construction of a software system leads to the creation of several different
artifacts, including requirements and code. Requirements, written in natural
language, stipulate the system functionality; code then implements and tests the
specified functionality. To ensure that a system has been properly implemented
and tested, software engineers attempt to match and link requirements to code
(and other artifacts) in a process known as software traceability.
Unfortunately, the traceability process can be both difficult and time consuming
due to the complexity of the underlying system and the fact that modern
development practices tend to prioritize implemented functionality over
traceability. This project will develop novel techniques for automating the
software traceability process by predicting accurate links for developers and
explaining why these predictions were made. The proposed techniques will allow
software engineers to establish and manage software traceability in a more
efficient and effective manner, ultimately leading to a better understanding of
a given system and more robust guarantees that it is functioning as intended.
The project will also produce and disseminate educational materials on best
practices for requirements engineering and program comprehension. We expect
these materials to be integrated into existing computer literacy courses at all
levels of education. In addition, the project will focus on recruiting and
retaining computer science students from traditionally underrepresented
categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is centered on three specific
goals. First, it will develop novel techniques that are capable of combining (i)
orthogonal measures of the textual similarity of software artifacts, (ii)
developer feedback, and (iii) transitive links that exist between artifacts, in
order to predict accurate trace links between software artifacts. This component
will adapt and build upon techniques for machine learning, information
retrieval, and statistical modeling. Second, it will develop a method for using
evolutionary software histories to improve trace-link quality. This evolutionary
component to the automated traceability system will adapt recent advancements in
dynamic statistical-modeling techniques. Finally, the project will leverage
causal inference and intelligent agents to aid in explaining predicted trace
links and supporting developers in the trace-link evaluation process. The
automated techniques developed during the course of this project will be
thoroughly validated with industry partners, and are expected to become a
powerful tool for developers in establishing and managing trace links for
software systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.