* 2007993
* WoU-MMA: Multi-messenger Titans: Probing The Dynamics &amp; Environments Of Supermassive Binary Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jessie Runnoe, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 523,920.00

It is now known that nearly every galaxy contains at its center, a supermassive
black hole, with a mass millions to billions of times greater than the mass of
the Sun. If a supermassive black hole is in a dense environment, it can be
detected by the light emitted by gas and dust falling into it. Such an object is
called an active galactic nucleus (AGN). It is also known that some of these
titanic objects exist in pairs, called supermassive binary black holes (SMBBHs),
which are expected to eventually spiral into each other and collide, producing
ripples in spacetime, or gravitational waves (GWs). These GWs cause tiny
variations in the timing of rapidly spinning compact former stars called
pulsars. By measuring these timing variations using multiple radio telescopes in
what is called a pulsar timing array (PTA), astronomers expect to infer the
existence of such GWs. A research team at Vanderbilt University will perform the
first end-to-end coherent multi-messenger (MM) search for SMBBHs using the
synthesis of precision pulsar timing array data with optical observations of the
time-varying brightness and spectra of AGN. The methods resulting from the
project will forecast the expected properties of the first MM binary detection
in the 2020s, including the likely binary environment and host galaxy
characteristics. The investigators will also establish a Vanderbilt node of
Student Teams of Astrophysics ResarcherS (STARS), a highly successful national
program established by the NANOGrav PTA team. The work will involve
undergraduate students from Vanderbilt and Fisk (a nearby historically black
university), who will be directly involved in pulsar and gravitational-wave
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will forge a path to the
unambiguous identification of SMBBHs at sub-parsec separations, helping to
resolve the perplexing enigma of this heretofore missing population. While dual
AGN have been observed at separations from kiloparsecs down to seven parsecs,
there are no unambiguously identified SMBBHs at sub-parsec separations. Some
candidate sub-parsec pairs have been identified as quasi-periodic optical-flux
or radial-velocity variations in AGN, but this is severely hampered by intrinsic
disk and environmental noise processes that can mimic periodic behavior over
short baselines. Only PTA data can directly infer the presence of SMBBHs through
detection of their ~nanohertz-frequency GWs. By combining PTA GW searches with
large photometric and spectroscopic surveys, this project will leverage the
strength of multiple messengers to arbitrate existing candidates, forecast the
expected properties and constraints on the first MM binary detection, and fuse
the information provided by different messengers into a complete portrait of
SMBBH dynamics at sub-parsec separations. This proposal represents a dramatic
leap forward in understanding how EM signatures of SMBBHs track the GW signal.
This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.