* 2007936
* WoU-MMA: Can Black Hole Images Constrain Modified Gravity Theories?
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Nicolas Yunes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2024
* USD 555,828.00

The recent imaging of the black hole at the center of the galaxy M87 by the
Event Horizon Telescope holds the promise of revealing wonders about the
astrophysics of material accreting onto a supermassive black hole. The
information contained in these images has promise to also allow for tests of
general relativity in the region of strong gravitational fields outside the
event horizon of a supermassive black hole. A research group at the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will study whether these images can indeed be
used to constrain deviations from Einstein's theory. This research will be
integrated with activities aimed at increasing the interest of middle-school
students and the general public in physics and science in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is aimed at studying whether the images
obtained from the observation of the black holes at the center of the galaxy M87
and at the center of the Milky Way can be used to constrain deviations from
Einstein's theory of general relativity. First, the investigators will study how
the shape of the so-called shadow in these images changes in modified gravity,
developing a fit for the boundary and calculating the Lyapunov exponents of
unstable geodesics near the light-ring, which produce certain features in the
image. Then, they will develop simple, phenomenological models of accretion flow
in modified gravity, which will allow them to generate simple synthetic images
and study the effect of deviations from general relativity. This study will be
followed by an analysis of the Blandford-Znajek process in modified gravity to
test how sensitive the jet power and magnetic field structure are to departures
from general relativity. The project will conclude with a thorough treatment of
general relativistic magnetohydrodynamics and accretion in modified gravity, and
the generation of synthetic polarized images from realistic accretion models to
determine whether deviations from general relativity can be disentangled from
other astrophysical processes. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.