* 2007079
* AF: Small: Metric Information Theory, Online Learning, and Competitive Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* James Lee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

There will always be limitations on human ability to collect and process
data&lt;br/&gt;about systems, environments, and populations. Algorithmic agents
act in real&lt;br/&gt;time based on partial, noisy information about the world,
and the elimination&lt;br/&gt;of uncertainty through "learning" must often be
balanced against the&lt;br/&gt;optimization of some objective. The cost of
choices made in the present must&lt;br/&gt;be weighed against the risk that
those choices might incur further costs in&lt;br/&gt;the future. Information
theory provides a rich and fertile framework for quantifying
and&lt;br/&gt;managing uncertainty. The situation becomes more subtle when
distinct pieces&lt;br/&gt;of information carry differing costs. Consider one's
401(k) balance at&lt;br/&gt;retirement. While the least significant digit is
most uncertain, there is&lt;br/&gt;substantially more cost associated with
incorrectly predicting the value of the&lt;br/&gt;most significant
digit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns probability spaces endowed
with a metric that describes&lt;br/&gt;the associated cost of uncertainty.
Designing algorithms to optimize in such a&lt;br/&gt;framework is intimately
connected to having a robust theory of metric&lt;br/&gt;information. Moreover,
the settings of online optimization and competitive&lt;br/&gt;analysis provide a
deep and varied set of formal models in which to apply these&lt;br/&gt;methods
and test their efficacy. In an area where algorithm design and
&lt;br/&gt;analysis have often been seen as ad-hoc and unstructured, the
framework &lt;br/&gt;underlying this work contends that both algorithms and
their analysis can be&lt;br/&gt;derived readily from the right set of underlying
definitions. Indeed, many &lt;br/&gt;problems in this area have been researched
for 30-40 years, and&lt;br/&gt;yet preliminary application of algorithms and
analysis tools from online convex&lt;br/&gt;optimization--in the context of
metric probability spaces--has already achieved&lt;br/&gt;a sequence of
breakthroughs. The team of researchers will develop the &lt;br/&gt;corresponding
theory, guided by a collection of prominent open problems, with&lt;br/&gt;the
ultimate goal of understanding in what circumstances, and to what extent,
&lt;br/&gt;one can limit the detrimental effects of uncertainty on
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.