* 2007115
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Towards Automated and QoE-driven Machine Learning Model Selection for Edge Inference
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shaolei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2024
* USD 249,940.00

Edge devices, such as mobile phones, drones and robots, have been emerging as an
increasingly more important platform for deep neural network (DNN) inference.
For an edge device, selecting an optimal DNN model out of many possibilities is
crucial for maximizing the userâ€™s quality of experience (QoE), but this is
significantly challenged by the high degree of heterogeneity in edge devices and
constant-changing usage scenarios. The current practice commonly selects a
single DNN model for many or all edge devices, which can only provide a
satisfactory QoE for a small fraction of users at best. Alternatively, device-
specific DNN model optimization is time-consuming and not scalable to a large
diversity of edge devices. Moreover, the existing approaches focus on optimizing
a certain objective metric for edge inference, which may not translate into
improvement of the actual QoE for users. By leveraging the predictive power of
machine learning and keeping users in a loop, this project proposes an automated
and scalable device-level DNN model selection engine for QoE-optimal edge
inference. Specifically, this project includes two thrusts: first, it exploits
online learning to predict QoE for each edge device, automating deployment-stage
DNN model selection; and second, it builds a runtime QoE predictor and
automatically selects an optimal DNN model given runtime contextual
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents an important departure
from and an essential complement to the current practices in DNN model
optimization. It can bring the benefits of DNN-enabled intelligence to many more
resource-constrained edge devices with an optimal QoE. Additionally, it provides
novel observations, insights and principles for edge inference, catalyzing the
transformation of the design of DNN models into a new user-centric paradigm.
This project also enables new opportunities to improve curriculum design and
attract students, especially under-represented minorities, to engage in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.