* 2007527
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Beyond Compressed Sensing: Analog Coding for Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Zixiang Xiong, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 230,000.00

Digital systems have been the cornerstone of modern communications. They are not
always robust to changes in channel conditions, however, and require the
transmission of long data blocks to achieve their full potential, which can
translate to substantial delays and high encoding/decoding complexity. These
problems can be alleviated by the use of end-to-end analog encoders, which
directly process the acquired samples using a non-linear transformation whose
output is transmitted directly through the channel after proper modulation. For
the same performance, these schemes claim greater robustness and feature lower
encoding/decoding complexity than traditional digital systems. In exchange,
analog systems are less flexible and more difficult to design than their digital
counterparts. This project aims at closing this gap by systematically developing
low-latency, low-complexity analog schemes that at the same time are robust,
flexible and easy to design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
investigates the application of very novel developments in the field of analog
joint source-channel coding for point-to-point and multiterminal communications,
considering the case in which temporal or spatial correlations are present in
the sources of interest, and studying practical applications in image and video
coding. Correlations existing in the original sources may be lost when digital
schemes are utilized, therefore degrading the end-to-end system performance,
something which is less likely to occur in the proposed analog joint source-
channel coding framework. This, together with the robustness of analog schemes
to channel variations, while requiring less processing complexity and much
shorter block lengths, would make analog coding an excellent candidate to meet
the ever growing requirements of modern communications systems if some of the
open research problems considered in this proposal, such as the development of
analog rate compatible codes capable of achieving any desired rate, are
solved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.