* 2008334
* III: Small: Go Beyond Short-term Dependency and Homogeneity: A General-Purpose Transformer Recipe for Multi-Domain Heterogeneous Sequential Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Tuo Zhao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Sequential data are ubiquitous in domains including healthcare, cyber security,
social science, and online search and recommendation systems. Deep learning
techniques have recently demonstrated tremendous successes in sequential data
analysis tasks, such as sequential prediction, and text understanding, and times
series classification and clustering. However, modern sequential data created
from many domains are becoming ever more massive, complex, and domain-specific.
When handling such complex and multi-domain sequential data, existing deep
learning methods are limited in capturing long-term dependency and generalizing
to multiple domains. To bridge such a gap, this project will develop principled
algorithms and methodologies that can handle data heterogeneity and long-term
dependencies for analyzing complex and multi-domain sequential data. The
proposed framework will be generic to various types of sequential data including
human language, time series, and trajectory data. It will open new possibilities
of enabling deep learning techniques for more challenging sequential data
analysis applications in social network analysis, clinical care, smart
transportation, text mining, and natural language
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed framework leverages the popular
transformer architecture and incorporates multi-domain adaptation to handle the
data heterogeneity. Specifically, this project aims to develop (i) unsupervised
learning techniques for transformer-based multi-domain point process analysis,
(ii) transformer-based metric learning techniques that enable large-scale and
multi-domain time series analysis, and (iii) techniques for robust and efficient
domain transfer learning over pre-trained transformers. The developed techniques
will enjoy both computational efficiency and modeling flexibility of capturing
long-term dependency and data heterogeneity, by addressing the computational and
statistical challenges for these problems. The proposed research will also
deliver open-source software in the form of easy-to-use libraries, which
facilitate researchers and practitioners in related fields to analyze complex
sequential data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.