* 2008456
* III: Small: Data-Driven Control of Epidemic Processes over Complex Dynamic Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* VICTOR PRECIADO, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 439,893.00

Despite notable advances in medicine over the last century, recent pandemics
such as COVID-19 remind us that the threat of infectious diseases to human
populations is very real. While continuing advances in medicine are essential,
information technologies can greatly improve our ability to detect and contain
the devastating effects of infectious diseases. In this direction, public health
agencies collect, periodically update, and publicly report field data containing
geolocated information about the tested, infected, recovered, hospitalized, and
deceased individuals in those areas affected by the disease. However, this data
is unreliable, incomplete, and coarse-grained; therefore, health agencies can
greatly benefit from information technologies to filter and analyze field data
in order to make reliable predictions about the future spread of the disease.
Moreover, the final objective of a health agency is to use this information to
design efficient strategies to contain the spread of infectious diseases. To
achieve this objective, health agencies have at their disposal epidemic-control
resources, such as social distancing, traffic restrictions, and the distribution
of pharmaceutical resources (whenever available). Due to the heterogeneity and
high cost of these resources, finding the cost-optimal allocation of each type
of resource throughout the population is a very challenging problem of utmost
societal impact. In this project, we propose to develop an integrated framework
for modeling, prediction, and cost-optimal control of epidemic outbreaks using
finite resources and unreliable data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to implement
practical epidemic-control tools, it is necessary to first develop mathematical
models able to replicate salient geo-temporal features of disease transmission.
These patterns are strongly influenced by the geography of the area over which
the disease is spreading, as well as the mobility patterns of the population. In
this direction, we will use complex contact graphs to model both realistic
geographical constraints and mobility patterns. In particular, the vertices of
this graph correspond to towns/districts and its links represent interactions
between them. On top of this contact graph, we will build a dynamical model
aiming to replicate the complex geo-temporal spread of the disease. In this
direction, we will consider a system of stochastic processes, coupled through
the edges of the contact graph, to model the evolution of the disease. Once the
model of the spread is tuned, we will then proceed to the design of a
coordinated strategy to contain the spread of the infection by distributing
resources throughout the population. In this direction, we will design and
implement an optimization program to find the cost-optimal allocation of
heterogeneous resources given a finite budget. In this research task, we must
deal with the inherent uncertainty of field data, as well as the presence of
sampling biases that can have a dramatic impact on the fairness of the cost-
optimal allocation of resources. The success of the proposed research program
would greatly improve our ability to efficiently detect and appropriately react
to epidemic outbreaks, whereupon a rapid control response can be
deployed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.