* 2008339
* CNS Core: Small: Towards Secure-By-Design Integration of Emerging Non-Volatile Memory in Future Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Rickard Ewetz, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Computer systems are increasingly adopting Non-Volatile Memories (NVMs) that
offer high capacity, superior power efficiency and persistent storage.
Traditionally, tremendous effort has been made to address NVM security issues
concerning the non-volatility property. However, the advent of hardware-based
information leakage attacks necessities a systematic re-assessment of NVM memory
architectures. This project is investigating the information security threats in
the form of side and covert channels in computing systems where NVMs are
integrated in different ways. A holistic examination of the security properties
from device-level accesses to system-level management policies will be
performed. Based on a comprehensive understanding of the potential attack
vectors, this project will design efficient architecture and system level
defensive techniques to defeat futuristic adversaries exploiting the discovered
information leakage vulnerabilities in NVM-based systems. Towards this end, this
project aims to bolster information security for systems with NVM integration
from the following aspects: (1) Securing NVM as main memory; (2) Securing
DRAM/NVM Hybrid Memory System; (3) Securing NVMs as Fast Storage
Devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As traditional memory technology faces severe
scalability issues, NVMs are increasingly playing key roles in the whole storage
stack of server systems such as data centers and high-performance computing
infrastructures. In light of the advances in hardware-based security breaches,
understanding and taming information leakage due to the architecture/system
design for emerging NVM-enabled systems are imperative for the future large-
scale adoption. This project is systematically evaluating information leakage
threats in emerging NVM memory and storage systems. If successful, the project
will enable secure integration of NVMs in computing systems that are resistant
to information leakage attacks. The work will result in the dissemination of
tools, attack libraries, software, and simulation results to the computer
architecture and security community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.