* 2008151
* CNS Core: Small: Importance-Aware Compressive Inference for Efficient Embedded Vision
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Robert Dick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,737.00

This project explores the concept of Compressive Inference in the context of
energy-efficient and low-latency machine learning and artificial intelligence
(AI) applications. Compressive Inference is the biologically inspired idea of
using highly heterogeneous, multi-round,feedback-controlled sampling and
analysis of signals to minimize latency and energy consumption while maximizing
inference accuracy, which stands in contrast to the commonly optimized but often
less relevant objective of signal reconstruction accuracy. Methods of
restructuring and compressing knowledge representations to improve efficiency
are also being explored. The project focuses on applications and systems facing
tight energy consumption and latency constraints, namely computer vision
applications running on low-power embedded systems, although many of the ideas
developed will have application in other domains, e.g., datacenter-based machine
learning and AI applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on preliminary results,
it is likely that the project will enable order-of-magnitude improvements in
machine learning and AI application inference latencies and energy consumptions,
thereby enabling the deployment of sophisticated analysis techniques in
applications where they were previously impractical, e.g., low-cost home
security systems and agricultural sensing applications, as well as applications
where sophisticated analysis was detrimentally resource and power hungry, e.g.,
autonomous driving and wearable vision-based assistants. The resulting
improvement in efficiency will enable local, on-device learning, thereby making
it possible for machine learning and AI systems to adapt to their environments,
thereby reducing the tendency to perform poorly on data dissimilar to samples in
centralized training datasets. The project also has an educational component, in
which students with a broad range of backgrounds will learn about state-of-the-
art approaches to machine learning, AI, and embedded system
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.