* 2008501
* CHS: Small: Evaluating and Optimizing Wayfinding in Healthcare Settings through Biometric Data and Virtual Response Testing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Mahsa Shoaran, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 415,657.00

Wayfinding systems are the signs, color-schemes, and other features of large,
complex buildings that serve as aids in navigation. Unfortunately, wayfinding is
often treated as an "afterthought" rather than as an integral part of the
architectural design process. In healthcare facilities, difficulties in
wayfinding have been shown to be a major source of stress for patients and
visitors, as well as a significant burden on hospital staff members and an
obstacle to operational efficiency. Testing and evaluating wayfinding systems is
difficult, because each facility is unique and trying out many different
wayfinding options in the same building to see which one works best would be
financially and logistically implausible. Thus, there is currently no good
method to rigorously compare the success of different wayfinding design
strategies. To help solve this problem, the researchers will develop a new
platform to evaluate and optimize wayfinding design in specific healthcare
facilities before those wayfinding features are physically constructed. Virtual-
reality (VR) testing will be used to accomplish this purpose. Participants in
the study will don VR headsets, along with various biometric sensors to help
evaluate their stress levels. They will then be asked to complete common
navigational tasks in a virtual replica of a hospital building, such as finding
their way from the main entrance to a specific patient room. Using a virtual
replica of the building allows the researchers to easily swap out different
wayfinding features, thereby determining what types of navigational aids are
most effective for improving wayfinding and reducing stress. The study will
contribute to the development of a new type of research platform that can be
used to conduct human-response testing for many different environmental design
variables, even beyond wayfinding. It will promote greater attention to the
needs of building users, including minority experiences (such as those of
disabled users) that have been historically overlooked in design. The ultimate
goal of the project is to streamline the virtual design-testing process so that
other designers and researchers can easily implement this approach and benefit
from rigorous pre-construction testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VR testing
platform designed and developed as part of this project will use actual design
information for planned hospital complexes, importing the data directly from
commonly used designed-industry software. Study participants will experience
different versions of the facilities that integrate different combinations of
possible wayfinding designs. As the participants complete wayfinding tasks in
the virtual buildings, the researchers will collect biometric data including
electroencephalography (EEG) and electrocardiography (EKG) signals to serve as
objective measures of stress and confusion, as well as behavioral data about the
participants’ actions in the environment and their navigational success. Self-
reported data about conscious evaluations and reactions to the environment will
also be collected from the participants. Two pilot studies will be conducted in
the context of a healthcare facility that is currently under contract by the
research team’s industry partners, testing actual wayfinding designs that may be
used in the final constructed facility. The first pilot study will focus on
different types and combinations of color patterns, pictograms, and
architectural features for wayfinding. The second pilot study will focus on the
wayfinding impact of different external view conditions (the placement of
windows and various exterior landmarks). As part of the research, the team will
investigate and confirm brain activity (EEG) classifiers, i.e., neural
signatures, for wayfinding success, by triangulating this data with the
behavioral and self-reported findings. By using these neural signatures and
other biometric interpretations, the project will provide specific findings to
improve the facility being investigated in the pilot tests. These results will
be incorporated in a platform that will be made available to other researchers
as a generalized software tool to support VR-based design testing with
integrated biometric sensor data. In future work, the research platform can be
extended to study other implementations of wayfinding design in different types
of facilities, and potentially to examine human responses to a broad range of
additional design variables. Rigorous virtual testing of architectural designs
has the potential to greatly expand the evidence-based design paradigm,
promoting responsible, data-driven innovation in the field and leading to more
effective and healthy built environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.