* 2008295
* III: Small: Bringing database query optimization to data intensive applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Eugene Wu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Modern database management systems (DBMSs) employ sophisticated query
optimization techniques that enable the generation of efficient execution plans
for queries over very large data sets. A variety of other applications also
process large data sets, but cannot leverage database-style query optimization
for their code. In this project, an open-source programming language compiler
will be enhanced with database-style query optimization capabilities. Data-
intensive parts of ordinary programs will be executed in chunks using different
execution plans. Based on feedback from earlier chunks, alternative plans might
be used for later chunks. The compiler could be used for a variety of data-
intensive applications, allowing all of them to benefit from this class of
performance optimizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing query optimization
techniques for in-memory processing are limited in several ways: (a) they are
not extensively used outside relational database management systems; (b) they
are limited to a handful of relational operators, and do not cover access
patterns or dynamically-defined functions found in other data-analysis
scenarios; (c) they treat the underlying compiler as a black-box, with
unpredictable performance depending on which compiler is used with which
compiler settings; (d) they often bake-in design choices that may be appropriate
for usage within a particular DBMS, but not for more general cases. This project
directly addresses these challenges by optimizing data-analysis style queries
expressed as tight loops in a conventional imperative programming language. This
project will extend an open-source compiler (GraalVM/Truffle) with both known
and novel optimization techniques that will automatically be applied whenever
the compiler identifies that a loop is time-consuming. Integration into the
compiler allows many applications to efficiently process large data sets. The
system will support dynamic queries involving user-defined functions and
arbitrary access patterns. Database-style and compiler optimizations will co-
exist in one system, eliminating some of the mismatches that happen when the
compiler is used as a black-box by a DBMS. The system will tune a variety of
run-time execution parameters automatically, with minimal guidance from the
programmer. The extended compiler will be validated by developing an interactive
data exploration application that will allow users to dynamically specify and
analyze a variety of large in-memory datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.