* 2008241
* CCF: AF: Small: Algorithms, Parallelism and Communication Efficiency in Shortest Path Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Vijaya Ramachandran, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Computing shortest paths in graphs is one of the most fundamental, widely-
studied and widely-used optimization problems on graphs. Classical shortest-path
algorithms that have been widely used in the past on smaller graphs are no
longer effective on massive graphs that arise in communication, social, and
biological networks, the world wide web, and other applications. This project
will investigate developing correct and efficient techniques and algorithms for
shortest paths to run on currently available parallel-computing systems in a
communication-efficient manner. The project will address fundamental and
theoretical issues that underpin computation of shortest paths in graphs while
also addressing the challenges related to designing correct and efficient
algorithms for modern computing platforms. These results will expand the
understanding of the algorithmic complexity of this very fundamental problem of
computing shortest paths in graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the
project will investigate the design of efficient shortest-path algorithms under
settings that include distributed computations with communication along graph
edges, parallel shared-memory PRAM computations, and multithreaded computations
with caching. The project will study the related problem of developing efficient
dynamic algorithms for shortest paths, where the goal is to update shortest
paths when the graph changes over time. Massive graphs that arise in practice
are almost invariably sparse, where the number of edges is much smaller than
quadratic in the number of vertices. For this reason, the project will focus on
developing tools and techniques for correct and efficient shortest path
algorithms for sparse graphs, and will investigate the design of efficient and
scalable data structures to aid the efficient computation of shortest paths on
such graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.