* 2008918
* CIF: Small: Low Complexity Maximum-Likelihood Decoding Through Serial List Decoding
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Richard Wesel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 552,568.00

Error control codes are ubiquitous, protecting the reliability of data and
control messages as they are communicated to a mobile phone or while data is
being stored in a memory device. The computation required to decode an error
control code typically requires far more complexity than is required for
encoding. The decoder should identify, from among all valid codewords, the one
that is most likely, i.e., the one that is closest to the received signal --
this is called 'maximum likelihood decoding'. In practice, some error control
codes that provide excellent reliability are not used because the complexity of
their decoder is prohibitive in time, cost or energy. Other codes are decoded
with sub-optimal decoders to manage complexity. This project dramatically lowers
the average complexity of maximum-likelihood decoding for a wide range of
commonly used codes. The project increases the number of undergraduates in
engineering who continue to graduate school through hands-on undergraduate
research experiences, with particular attention to broadening the participation
of women in engineering research and graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets codes described by
generator polynomials, including cyclic codes and convolutional codes. The new
approach decomposes the generator polynomial of a cyclic code into a
convolutional code part and a cyclic redundancy check (CRC) part. Serial list
decoding is applied to the relatively simple trellis describing the
convolutional code part, terminating when a convolutional codeword is found that
also passes the CRC check. This approach can be applied to any composite cyclic
code, including popular Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes such as Reed-
Solomon and binary BCH codes. Preliminary examples show that maximum-likelihood
decoding can be achieved with complexity that is the square root or cube root of
the complexity required to decode the minimal trellis describing the block code.
The new approach leads to new composite codes featuring trellis codes or
convolutional codes combined with CRCs that are designed to maximize the
reliability of the composite code under serial list decoding. This project
analyzes the complexity of the proposed decoding approach and creates new
optimal decompositions of cyclic codes and new composite convolutional and
trellis codes that provide excellent reliability with practical decoder
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.