* 2008688
* AF: Small: Online Algorithms and Approximation Methods in Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Aditya Bhaskara, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 349,999.00

Modern machine-learning applications aim to solve difficult computational
problems accurately, quickly and at scale. This has led to significant
algorithmic challenges that are compounded by practical considerations like
robustness to noise and the distributed nature of data. The goal of the project
is to develop a formal understanding of when efficient learning is possible, and
to develop novel algorithmic insights. The techniques developed in the project
will lead to progress in approximation algorithms, optimization, sublinear
algorithms, and computational complexity. The project includes a plan to develop
courses that teach undergraduate and graduate students to formally reason about
machine-learning systems and to understand their power and limitations. The
courses will help train the next generation of the workforce, and will be
offered at the University of Utah, with much of the material being publicly
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to address two core questions
in reasoning about machine learning. The first one is related to the
computational hardness of learning problems. For problems such as sparse coding
and learning low-depth neural networks, all the known algorithms require strong
structural assumptions in order to obtain learning guarantees. The project will
study methods (for these and other problems) that enable one to weaken these
assumptions, while obtaining weaker yet practically relevant guarantees. The
second question is related to learning in online arrival models, motivated by
recommender systems and signal processing. Here, many of the known theoretical
results fall short when data is noisy or is only partially observed, and the
project will develop formal models and algorithmic results for these
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.