* 2008905
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: An Automated Full-Lifecycle Approach for Improving the Development and Use of Static Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shiyi Wei, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 249,944.00

Because software failures can and do cause severe, even life-threatening losses,
effective quality assurance remains a constant concern for software developers.
In fact, over the past decades, numerous software analysis techniques have been
developed to address this concern. These techniques represent a powerful means
of detecting bugs or proving their absence. Despite their theoretical
superiority, static program analysis tools have had relatively limited industry
adoption. Static analysis tools aiming for practical solutions are forced to
approximate, trading off precision (i.e., better modeling to ensure correctness)
against performance (i.e., faster analysis). Finding the right balance of the
complex tradeoffs between performance and precision when developing and using
static analysis tools is extremely challenging. This project seeks to reduce
practical barriers to conquering this tradeoff. Successful outcomes of this
project are likely to improve static analysis tool adoption rates, and thereby
improve the safety, security and functionality of critical software that society
depends upon.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to achieve more effective
static analysis design and usage through cohesive development and usage
lifecycle that is powerfully augmented with automated support. This automated
support includes systematic evaluation and generation of benchmarks for static
analysis tools, localizing sources of imprecision and performance bottlenecks,
configuring tool settings that are likely to produce correct and timely results,
using machine learning approaches to identify and filter false positives, and
integrating these improvements into a demonstration system that leverages
information and experiences coming from both tool developers and tool users.
This augmented and automated lifecycle will identify frequently occurring code
patterns that significantly affect performance/precision tradeoffs in specific
tools, allowing tool developers to quickly improve their tools. It will also
enable tools designed to customize their behavior and analysis approaches to
specific target programs. At the same time, this will provide static analysis
tool users with automated support for tuning tool configurations to quickly get
more effective results. This is supported by automated classification of tool
error reports, reducing effort wasted investigating false positives. These
improvements used in concert with each other will result in greatly improved
static analysis tools, and much-increased use of these tools in analyzing real-
world software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.