* 2008690
* SCenE - Self-Assessment and Continual Learning on Edge Devices
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Ghulam Rasool, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2022
* USD 499,978.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) systems and machine learning algorithms lay at the
heart of modern autonomy in theory but have experienced a bottleneck in
expansion into real-world systems. Typically, in the case of real-world
environments, AI systems are considered untrustworthy and are lacking the
ability to adapt to an ever-changing environment, requiring continuous
maintenance and tuning to stay relevant. Most current AI systems are constrained
by their knowledge gathered during training and development. In order for a
system to be truly intelligent, they must incorporate learning frameworks that
are aware of their own limitations, have an expandable knowledge base in case of
failure after deployment, and have the capabilities to operate within available
energy budgets in a continuous and dynamic real-world environment. The goal for
this project is to develop a rigorous and scalable learning framework that will
enable the development of data-driven algorithms that can self-assess their
performance and continually expand upon their prior knowledge while operating in
real-time on a limited energy budget. This work will equally impact academic
research and economic development through collaborations with industrial
partners as well as local, regional and federal government agencies. The case
study examples include healthcare, intelligent transportation systems,
surveillance, severe weather and flood monitoring, aviation and rotorcraft
safety, agriculture, vegetation, and endangered species monitoring, and smart
and connected campus and communities. Collaboration with the Atlantic Cape
Community College will serve as a basis to disseminate the research
contributions to the next generation of STEM students. The developed algorithms,
source code, and hardware configurations will be made available to the public
through open-source data-sharing platforms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We aim to
tackle the limitations of the current AI systems and learning algorithms, which
are based on deterministic and over-confident deep neural networks. The learned
parameters of these models are frozen after training and deployed on possibly
energy-constrained edge platforms. These models cannot adapt to non-stationary
environments resulting in failures in continuously changing environments. The
objective of this project is to develop a rigorous, scalable, and open-source
learning framework that would facilitate the development and deployment of data-
driven algorithms, which can self-assess performance and continually adapt to
streaming datasets while operating in real-time on a limited energy budget. We
propose a new fundamental approach to machine learning systems that will: (1)
provide a theoretical foundation for self-assessment of modern learning
algorithms via quantifying confidence in network decisions through the
propagation of distribution moments over unknown network parameters, (2) spur
the development of self-assessment methods through the monitoring of variance-
covariance parameters of the estimated predictive distribution, (3) derive new
training methods that allow for algorithms to operate within a given power
budget while achieving continual adaptation from streaming datasets through
leveraging metrics of kernel importance based on variance-covariance
information, and (4) assess the validity of the mathematical derivations and
subsequently developed algorithms using benchmark public datasets and real-world
applications with our government, industry and academic
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.