* 2008331
* RI: SMALL: Prospective and retrospective mechanisms in complex planning by humans
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Whee Ky Ma, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 495,049.00

Planning is an important part of everyday life: we plan how to get from A to B,
how to develop our careers, how to write a text, and how to approach a sports
match. In all these cases, a sequence of decisions has to be made, with many
possibilities at each step. For these reasons, planning taxes people’s cognitive
abilities. In recent years, the field of artificial intelligence has made
impressive progress on hard planning problems, such as playing chess and go. By
contrast, the field of cognitive science has lagged behind in understanding how
people solve difficult planning problems. To plan well, a person has to imagine
situations that might happen in the future, even though they might never have
experienced those situations before. At the same time, people also use their
memory of similar situations to decide what to do. The goal of this project is
to understand how these two processes -- imagining the future and recalling
memories -- contribute to people’s planning decisions. This project will also
support associated educational activities for high school and general
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will break down the mechanisms of
human decision-making in complex planning tasks into two components: mental
simulation of possible futures (prospective decision-making) and learning
directly from past experiences (retrospective decision-making). Through a mobile
app, the investigators collected data from people performing an engaging,
competitive task that requires planning. The data set consists of hundreds of
millions of decisions, allowing for statistically highly robust conclusions. The
investigators will analyze these data using statistical methods and
computational modeling. The prospective component of the model will be based on
heuristic tree search algorithms. The retrospective component will be based on
repeating successful actions in previously experienced states. The researchers
will compare to alternative models and aim to account for human decisions and
reaction times. It is expected that this project will lead to a better
fundamental understanding of the cognitive processes involved in complex
planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.