* 2008907
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Optimization of Memory Architectures: A Foundation Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Xian-He Sun, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 225,000.00

This project proposes a foundational approach to model-driven performance
optimization of memory systems for modern computer architectures, with the
development of a set of memory-architecture optimization methods and tools that
are theoretically proven and empirically feasible for modern memory architecture
design. The outcome of this project will significantly improve the performance
modeling and optimization techniques for designing and evaluating memory
architectures in modern computer systems, featuring deep and diverse memory-
system hierarchies, heterogeneous memory devices, and complex data-intensive
applications, including big-data, cloud and data centers and high-performance
computing applications. The findings of this project will improve the content of
various courses that the PIs teach. This project plans to proactively recruit
minority students by taking advantage of the institutional efforts at IIT and
especially at FIU, which is a minority-serving institution. This project will
align education and outreach activities with an existing research and education
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growing disparity between CPU and memory speed
causes memory accesses to become a severe performance bottleneck in modern
computer architectures. Attempts to solving this “memory wall” problem underpin
technological innovations in computer-architecture design over the last two and
half decades. The objective of the research is to significantly extend prior
memory models and create a practical memory-architecture performance-modeling
and optimization framework that can capture the combined effects of data
locality, data concurrency, access latency, and multi-tier memory architecture
for real applications and on real systems. A simulation-driven approach will be
developed with elaborate real-system measurements and performance analyses to
examine the potential benefits and identify the performance issues of various
memory-architecture designs. More specifically, this project will develop along
three research directions: (1) developing theoretical and architectural
foundations to address both fundamental questions related to the tiered
heterogeneous memory architectures and investigate practical aspects of applying
the modeling and optimization framework for various memory architectures; (2)
performing model-driven memory-architecture design and optimization for specific
memory architectures, including disaggregated memory system, GPU, and deep-
memory hierarchy with hybrid memory devices including non-volatile memory; and
(3) developing the memory architecture simulator embedded with the performance
modeling and optimization framework, and conducting simulation studies and real
system measurements to evaluate memory performance, and compare design
alternatives and trade-offs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.