* 2008463
* CNS Core: Small: Dynamic and Composite Resource Management in Large-scale Industrial IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Song Han, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 475,982.00

An Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) paradigm aims at creating unified
sensing, computing, and control framework to interconnect all the industrial
assets with information systems and business processes and to streamline the
manufacturing process and lead to optimal industrial operations. Because IIoT
applications - including autonomous driving and smart highway, manufacturing
automation with robots, etc. - are distinguished from commercial IoT by
stringent performance guarantees and certifiable robustness, research is needed
to provide a holistic resource management framework that enables effective
sensing and control operations in the presence of intermittent data sources and
unpredictable system disturbances. This project aims to lay the foundation for
such a framework by formulating and investigating three fundamental questions:
1) How to achieve real-time data retrieval with intermittent data sources and
large-scale high-speed wireless control with guaranteed performance? 2) How to
perform dynamic packet scheduling to compensate for unexpected system
disturbances? 3) How to perform composite resource management to jointly
consider network and computing resources for resource scheduling among multiple
IIoT applications? By addressing these questions, the proposed dynamic and
composite resource management framework has the potential to vastly advance the
adoption of IIoT technologies, accelerate the transformation of legacy
communication infrastructure to advanced wireless infrastructure and boost the
nation's economic growth and competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
fundamentally transform the design principles of resource management in large-
scale IIoT systems, this project will (i) design novel algorithms for real-time
data management in IIoT systems with intermittent data sources; (ii) develop new
scheduling techniques for control performance optimization in multi-cluster
wireless networks; (iii) design a fully distributed packet scheduling framework
to handle unexpected system disturbances in complex industrial environments; and
(iv) explore new models and scheduling methods to develop a composite resource
management framework for handling heterogeneous resource scheduling,
partitioning and reconfiguration for time-critical end-to-end services in large-
scale IIoT systems. These innovations will be validated using high-fidelity IIoT
simulation tools and deployed on university-industry co-established IIoT
testbeds for thorough performance evaluation. This proposed resource management
framework will provide researchers and industrial partners holistic solutions to
achieve provable performance in large-scale IIoT systems and support a wide
range of industrial applications. The research outcomes will be integrated into
an innovative professional education program at the University of Connecticut to
educate current and next-generation researchers and professionals in a creative
way to understand, appreciate and contribute to the fast-growing and rapidly
evolving IIoT technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.