* 2008043
* RI: Small: Early Elementary Reading Verification in Challenging Acoustic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Eric Fosler-Lussier, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2024
* USD 466,000.00

Young students who have difficulty in reading fluently can gain confidence by
repeatedly reading story passages. Computer reading assessment can help improve
studentâ€™s fluency while freeing up teacher to help students more efficiently. In
previous projects, computer-based technologies have been shown to improve the
reading ability of low performing readers in urban schools. Reading verification
is a critical task, determining whether a student has correctly read the words
on the page, or has mispronounced words, is stuck, or has jumped ahead or back.
However, current systems that use automatic speech recognition (ASR) tend
towards accepting incorrect pronunciations, instead of figuring out mistakes,
and operate poorly when there is noise. This project addresses these issues by
studying how to build a reliable computer system that can tell, in real-time,
whether students are reading correctly within a noisy classroom, and make it
available on many different types of computers. To allow other researchers to
compare their studies, the project team will create and make available a dataset
of reading examples recorded in noise through the Language Research Lab at the
Center of Science and Industry (COSI) museum. By interacting with lab personnel,
visitors will be educated on how speech recognition systems work as well as on
how language science research is done. Thus, if this project is successful,
significantly better computer-based reading assessment technologies will be
developed, which will help many children read better, and the public will become
better informed about reading, speech technologies and science in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach investigated in this project abandons the
need for full ASR technology, instead performing Reading Verification (RV)
directly on the speech signal while jointly performing speech enhancement to
focus on the child's speech. The elimination of ASR decoding technology permits
creation of smaller verification models that can be deployed on devices or web
browsers. Building on pilot work in mispronunciation detection and integration
of phonetic information into speech enhancement, a new attention-based tracking
approach is examined that directly models phenomena like partial word
disfluencies, explores the difference between enhancement for child and adult
speech, and investigates a novel joint model of detection and enhancement
integrating longitudinal adaptation techniques. The research activities are
supported by a new collection of speech data, consisting of stories read in a
noisy science museum environment. The recorded dataset will facilitate
comparative work in reading assessment and will be released as part of the Ohio
Child Speech Corpus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.