* 2008570
* CIF: Small: A Theoretical Framework for Dynamic Collaborative Online Information Searching
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Rohit Negi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 496,914.00

The Internet today has been transformed from a network providing connectivity,
to a massive repository of human and machine knowledge, with information
relevant to nearly every aspect of human life stored in some corner. Search
engines allow keyword-based search of this knowledge, and while natural language
queries are increasingly useful, searching for complex information often
requires human thinking (augmented with the capabilities of search engines) to
obtain useful search results. Routine problems require individuals to search the
Internet for relevant ideas, a task which may be hindered by lack of expertise
in the appropriate subject matters. With pervasive online connectivity, there
are potentially unlimited ‘experts’ (or just helpers) available online to
contribute their knowledge to problems related to their expertise. This project
envisions tapping such potential experts (or helpers) to handle a large number
of requests for information, leveraging the power of online collaboration. The
relevance of this project should be increasingly apparent as the world moves
towards a knowledge-based economy where the Internet is used for collaborative
work, a significant part of which involves searching for information. The
project will train students who will understand and extend the proposed
approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a novel theoretical
framework to analyze the dynamics of information searching. It includes
information searching to handle multiple requests, collaboration of multiple
experts from different fields, exploration of the concepts of expertise mismatch
with the population of generated requests, and of diversity of expertise to
allow faster searches for multi-disciplinary requests. While the issues to be
studied bear similarity with multi-class queuing and scheduling, information
searching uniquely uses information-theoretic ideas. These research activities
require an interesting interplay between the fields of information theory,
queuing theory, scheduling, and social network
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.