* 2008981
* III: Small: Towards the Foundations of Training Deep Neural Networks: New Theory and Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Quanquan Gu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Deep learning has achieved tremendous successes in the past decade. Despite
these empirical successes, the theoretical understanding of deep learning is
still largely falling behind. There exists a huge gap between the empirical
successes of deep learning and conventional optimization and machine learning
theories. This project aims to bridge this gap by establishing the theoretical
foundations of deep learning to understand why and how it works, and use this
theory to develop new models and algorithms. The expected outcome of this
project includes new theories and the state-of-the-art approaches for deep
learning. The project will push the frontier of deep learning and train next-
generation researchers and practitioners in artificial intelligence. Research
demonstrations and lab tours will be given to K-12 school students by showing
the wide range of applications of AI and their connection to society, to
motivate them to pursue a STEM discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
consists of two synergistic research thrusts: (1) understanding the optimization
dynamics of training algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent for deep
learning models, and deriving algorithm-dependent generalization error bounds to
assess their generalization performance; and (2) developing a new suite of
faster training algorithms for deep learning, as well as principled neural
architecture search algorithms guided by the generalization error bounds to
design better neural network models. To evaluate the developed approaches, both
theoretical analyses and extensive experimental evaluations will be performed on
real-world benchmarks including but not limited to image classification and
natural language processing. The open source software and course materials
developed in this project will be made publicly available to the broader
community, to help engineers and scientists better understand and apply deep
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.