* 2008144
* SHF: Small: Boosting Reasoning in Boolean Networks with Attributed Graph Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* CUNXI YU, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 381,707.00

Boolean networks, mostly represented as graphs, have emerged as an effective
logical representation to model not only the computational processes but also
several phenomena from science and engineering, such as genetic analysis,
electronic design automation, formal verification, etc. However, Boolean
networks used in modern science and engineering applications can be extremely
large with complex structures, which makes them less practical for real-world
applications. For example, Boolean networks for optimizing logic circuits can
have billions of vertices and cannot be effectively handled using traditional
algorithms. Recent years have seen a widespread application of machine-learning
(ML) techniques to various problems over graphs, namely graph learning, which
has been successfully applied to accelerate applications by exploiting graph
features found in social-network prediction and drug analysis. This project aims
to develop a systematic framework that leverages graph learning to reason about
Boolean networks, including dataset design, learning-algorithm development,
training models, system integration, and evaluation over various application
domains. The framework will be implemented in an extensible platform that can be
used for a variety of applications in science and engineering. This project will
create unique education and outreach opportunities for both academic and
industrial participants, which involve mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students, innovation in teaching with investigator’s new courses in electronic
design and deep learning, and attracting and preparing high-quality researchers
with diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of researchers will
develop a set of novel algorithms in graph fusion, graph coarsening and
refinement, and graph neural networks, to achieve high-quality and scalable
embeddings for reasoning about functional, high-level abstractions of billion-
node Boolean networks. The methods in this project will sit between the
classical symbolic techniques in formal methods and ML in order to benefit both
research communities in many domains, such as verification and synthesis,
bioinformatics, artificial intelligence, and security. Specifically, the
investigator plans to leverage and advance ML in symbolic-reasoning tasks, such
that it can perform truly scalable Boolean reasoning analogously to traditional
symbolic-reasoning approaches. The developments of this project will focus on
novel algorithms in graph fusion and neural network architectures, domain-
specific compression algorithms, end-to-end system integration, and large-scale
system-level parallelism. In addition, the framework will be evaluated in
algorithmic design-space exploration, targeting Boolean satisfiability solving
and Boolean optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.