* 2008449
* RI: Small: Robotic Path Planning to Reveal Wireless Rays - A New Foundation for the Optimization of Networked Robotic Operations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yasamin Mostofi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 448,515.00

A robotic network can have a tremendous impact in many different areas such as
emergency response, national security, and mobile service provisioning. In such
systems, a team of unmanned vehicles are tasked with information gathering and
cooperation to accomplish a given mission. Wireless communication is an integral
part of such a system as an unmanned vehicle needs to connect to other nodes or
to remote operators in order to transfer sensing data and/or receive control
commands. Since a robotâ€™s path directly affects its link quality, an unmanned
vehicle needs to take the communication quality into account during path
planning. This then requires an unmanned vehicle to have an accurate prediction
of its link quality at unvisited locations. Accurately predicting the channel
quality, however, is a considerably challenging problem and an open one, due to
the high spatial variations of the channel power. This project enables the
robust cooperation of a team of unmanned vehicles by developing new predictive
wireless channel models and its corresponding co-optimization with sensing and
path planning, which can significantly impact the area of robotics. The project
also has an educational component, leveraging appeals of both robotics and
communications, to reach out to the young minds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a new multi-disciplinary paradigm for the robust networked
operation of unmanned vehicles. The first research task shows it possible for
the robot to reveal the makeup of the incoming wireless rays, based only on its
onboard received channel power measurements. More specifically, it proposes a
novel combination of path planning and information processing that can reveal
the makeup of the rays, enabling the robot to learn considerably more about the
channel than the measured received power. This new approach has a significant
implication for robotic field operation as the project addresses. More
specifically, the second major task builds on the first one in order to develop
a new framework for robotic channel prediction. The third major task then
develops a multi-disciplinary design that properly co-optimizes the new
predictive channel models with sensing and path planning decisions, in order to
enable the robust networked operation of unmanned vehicles. Finally, the overall
new design paradigm is tested on a robotic testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.