* 2008020
* CIF: Small: An Information Theoretic Framework for Minimizing Supervision in Image/Video Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Amit Roy-Chowdhury, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The recent successes in image and video analysis have been largely in the domain
of supervised learning. Supervised learning methods assume the availability of
extensive amounts of manually annotated/labeled training data, which limits the
applicability of existing methods to complex and unseen environments. This has
motivated growing interest in developing semi-supervised, and even unsupervised,
methods for image and video analysis, i.e., methods that have limited or even no
manually annotated data. These methods focus on how to learn visual analysis
models with limited labeled data; however, the problem of what to label is far
less addressed. If one can identify the optimal subset to label, it is likely
that the learning process will be more efficient than randomly choosing
representatives that are labeled by a human. This project will focus on
mathematically rigorous approaches on how to choose these samples to
label.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate information theoretic
approaches, coupled with an understanding of the inherent structure in visual
data, that would help identify samples that require annotation. A well-known
idea in information theory is typical sets. The concept of a typical set is
based on the intuitive notion that some portions of a dataset carry more
information than others. The project will investigate the applicability of this
notion of typicality from information theory to select a minimal set of most
informative samples, which will be manually labeled, such that visual analysis
models (e.g., classifiers) designed on this subset can maximize performance (of
the task of interest) on the entire dataset. The inherent structure in visual
data will be combined within this information theoretic framework to obtain the
optimal set of representatives to label. The approach will be analyzed in the
context of various learning paradigms, including active learning, transfer
learning, and weakly supervised learning. The project will involve theoretical
analysis of the representative selection process, algorithm design, and
experimental evaluation on applications in image segmentation, activity
recognition, and target re-identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.