* 2008186
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Puerto Rico-LSAMP - Expanding Opportunities for Underrepresented College Students (2020-2025)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Carlos Corrada-Bravo, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,200,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2020-2024 Puerto Rico Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (PR-LSAMP) STEM Pathways and Research Alliance (SPRA)
project, under the leadership of the University of Puerto Rico, will build on
the successes of previous support to attract, recruit and retain STEM students
in undergraduate and graduate studies to degree completion. The alliance is
comprised of: (1) the University of Puerto Rico System: two graduate campuses -
Río Piedras and Mayaguez and six 4-year campuses - Aguadilla, Arecibo, Bayamon,
Cayey, Humacao, and Ponce; (2) the Pontifical Catholic University of Puerto
Rico; and (3) the Ana G. Méndez University System - the Universidad
Metropolitana, Universidad del Este, and Universidad del Turabo. PR-LSAMP
provides a model for a seamless pipeline to increase the number of
underrepresented minority groups that complete a PhD in STEM fields. It
documents and disseminates the effectiveness of the replicable undergraduate
research mentoring strategy to increase the number of underrepresented students
that continue on to graduate studies and contribute to the diversity of the
nation's STEM workforce. Furthermore, it disseminates and applies concepts of
Learning Science to improve learning and teaching in STEM disciplines in a
transformative manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A requirement of this
project is the production and dissemination of broadening participation
research. Thus, the project will conduct impact studies to answer the following
questions: (1) Which components of the PR-LSAMP model are more effective at
mediating changes in different institutional or regional contexts? and (2) To
what extent does participating in the PR-LSAMP model changes student’s non-
cognitive attributes (self-efficacy, outcome expectations and STEM interest)?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for this project is provided by the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI Program), that
aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs, the
Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP), and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.