* 2008004
* A Data-driven Approach to Multiscale Methods for ScalableTransport in Neutron Star Mergers and Complex Plasmas
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Andrew Christlieb, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2024
* USD 433,399.00

The detection of multimessenger astrophysical signals is one of the most
exciting and significant new areas in physics. However, extracting meaningful
physical understanding from observations depends fundamentally on accurately
modeling and simulating such complex multiphysics, multiscale systems. For
example, neutrinos play a key role in neutron star mergers, but the extreme
complexity and scale of this class of problem force the use of severe, and often
inadequate, approximations. This project directly addresses these deficiencies
with a novel approach, which will be open-source and incorporated into the
widely-used FLASH radiation hydrodynamics code, thus benefiting the broader
computational astrophysics community. The research includes significant
mentoring of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, who will develop
skills that are in high demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will advance the
state-of-the-art in modeling neutrino transport in high-accuracy simulations of
binary neutron star mergers and core-collapse supernovae, developing surrogate
models for the kinetic equations by using machine learning (ML) and reduced
order modeling (ROM), to achieve scalable multi-scale transport simulations. The
framework, dubbed Surrogate Transport Adaptive Model Procedure (STAMP), replaces
algebraic closure with adaptive computed methods from a surrogate model, and
retains the highly-scalable nature of moment methods while recovering the
accuracy of multi-angle approaches. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.