* 2008800
* CHS: Small: Creating a VR Workspace for Design by Physical Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Francis Quek, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

From an early age, humans learn to see, touch, hold, manipulate, and alter their
physical surroundings using both of their hands and tools. A sculptor holds clay
in one hand and precisely carves out material to create an intricate work of
art. A mechanic uses hands and tools to reach the most inaccessible nooks of a
car’s engine to make repairs. All who work their hands, threading needles,
carving soap sculptures, or wiring electrical wall sockets know the
extraordinary dexterity and precision they possess when working in the space
within the near reach of both hands. The project investigates a new class of
augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) environments that allow designers to be
more creative in this workspace. Existing AR/VR systems only allow users to
interact at an arm’s length making it impossible to leverage the innate human
ability to use hands and tools for precise actions close to the body. As a
result, the original promise of AR and VR in facilitating creative thinking and
problem-solving is still unrealized. Towards this, a workspace is designed in
this project to enable designers to create virtual designs in three-dimensional
(3D) space by mirroring the intricate, complex, and precise actions that humans
can perform in daily life. The research team will develop AR/VR technology and
approaches that will enable users to directly “sketch” 3D digital objects,
precisely control those objects, and assemble them to create physically feasible
designs. The research team will integrate the new technology and tools from this
project to promote geometric reasoning in K-12 students, undergraduate, and
graduate curriculum. The project has the potential to make a long-term
contribution to the future of creative work and may positively impact U.S.
competency in design, manufacturing, and education by enabling small businesses
to innovate effectively and economically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
enable the creation of a new class of AR and VR interfaces for 3D design, this
research investigates precise spatial manipulation of virtual objects to
facilitate 3D digital design. The research team will systematically explore new
spatial interactions by leveraging the perceptual-motor sweet spot, i.e., a
portion of frontal space in the immediate vicinity of the human body where
highly precise interactions are possible through the confluence of visuo-tactile
perception, proprioception, and fine bi-manual motor control. Through a series
of iterative design-prototype-evaluate cycles, the research team will (1) study
the visuo-motor and biomechanical aspects of tangible bi-manual interactions in
the workspace for spatial object manipulation; (2) develop digital workflows for
3D design and modeling of virtual mechanical artifacts based on the those
interactions; and (3) expand the digital workflows to enable physics-based
design powered by haptics. First and foremost, the project will contribute to
the understanding of how inherent human dexterity can be leveraged to enable
precise spatial interactions. Second, the project will reveal how precise
spatial interactions promote design creativity and enable creators to design
functional artifacts. Finally, the research will provide tested methods for
operationalizing the perceptual-motor sweet-spot through new interactive methods
that integrate user intent, design feasibility, and physical realization of
functional products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.