* 2008559
* Collaborative Research: RI: Small: Theoretical Foundations: TheAdvantage of Deep Learning over Traditional Shallow Learning Methods
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yingyu Liang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2023
* USD 159,207.00

Machine learning has been a primary driving force behind many current
intelligent decision-making systems. Recently it shows a paradigm shift with
increasing reliance on deep learning approaches, which have achieved
unprecedented performance in various applications such as image processing,
speech recognition, language translation, and game playing. Besides the
empirical success, provable guarantees and insights into the principles behind
the success have also become sought-after goals. However, the lack of adequate
understanding is still limiting our capacity to fully exploit the potential of
deep learning. This project aims to lay the foundations for supporting the
practical trends, by understanding the advantages of deep learning over
traditional learning methods, which is crucial for revealing key factors behind
the practical success. The project will provide frameworks for proving
performance guarantees and advantages of deep learning over traditional learning
methods and enable the development of new deep learning methods that are more
efficient and accessible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
thorough and systematic approach for understanding the superior empirical
performance of deep learning over traditional learning methods and use the
obtained insights to design new learning methods. It will develop new
theoretical models of properties on the labeling function of the data and the
structure of the input leading to the practical success, and also provides
frameworks for proving performance guarantees and advantages over shallow
learning. It will also design new learning methods that explicitly exploit those
properties and thus can be more efficient and accessible. This direction is
still largely unexplored, despite significant recent research activities. The
planned theoretical and algorithmic solutions are possible through an
interdisciplinary mix of tools from machine learning, statistics, and
optimization. The proposed program is grounded in the investigators' prior work
that includes both theoretical results and empirical validation. If successful,
the proposed research can be transformational for modern intelligent systems by
laying the foundations for further development. It will also help to solve new
theoretical problems from practice that are not adequately addressed by current
theory and will have lasting impacts on machine learning and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.