* 2008369
* SHF: Small: Programming with Semantic Revision Requests
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Bor-Yuh Evan Chang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,234.00

Software development today is a social process, and the workflow
of&lt;br/&gt;programmers is increasingly centered around discussing
program&lt;br/&gt;revisions - that is, artifacts that document small,
incremental program&lt;br/&gt;changes. Meanwhile, traditional research on
testing, debugging, and analyzing&lt;br/&gt;programs focuses on one program
version at a time, ignoring any preceding or&lt;br/&gt;succeeding versions of
the same software artifact. The project's novelties&lt;br/&gt;are a foundational
examination of program revisions and the investigation of&lt;br/&gt;automated
techniques that cooperatively assist software-engineering teams&lt;br/&gt;with
reasoning about them. The project's impacts are to enhance the
way&lt;br/&gt;engineering teams collaboratively evolve their software and thus
enable them&lt;br/&gt;to more effectively create secure and reliable software on
which society&lt;br/&gt;depends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's core
contribution is defining the notion of a "semantic&lt;br/&gt;revision request"
that enables treating program revisions as first-class&lt;br/&gt;entities for
debugging and analysis tools. A semantic view of program&lt;br/&gt;revisions
enables programmers to run or analyze the program revision
(both&lt;br/&gt;before and after a change simultaneously), not merely each of
the two program&lt;br/&gt;versions, as supported by today's conventional tools.
By focusing on&lt;br/&gt;debugging and analyzing program revisions - not their
individual program&lt;br/&gt;versions - the resulting tools come closer to
capturing the intent of the&lt;br/&gt;programmer as they develop and commit
program changes. The intended broader&lt;br/&gt;impact from a technical
perspective is that these executable and analyzable&lt;br/&gt;specifications
will supplement, or even replace, informal descriptions about&lt;br/&gt;how
software systems evolve, by providing an unambiguous way to
communicate&lt;br/&gt;high-level programmer intent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.