* 2008793
* Advancing the Science from The Hobby-Eberly Telescope Dark Energy Experiment
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Karl Gebhardt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 938,538.00

It is now well established that our universe is undergoing an accelerated
expansion. The initial observations in the late 1990s for this expansion come
from observations of distant Supernova and have held up to latest analysis
today. It is not known what causes this acceleration, named “dark energy”. It is
believed to be responsible for about 70% of the matter energy density of the
universe. There are many theories for the cause of “dark energy”: perhaps new
particles, vacuum energy pushing the universe outward, modifying the theory of
relativity concerning the laws of gravity, or some other unknown process which
will lead to a more detailed understanding of the evolution of the universe from
its origin in a “Big Bang” to the present day. The Hobby-Eberly Telescope Dark
Energy Experiment (HETDEX) will collect data on at least 700,000 galaxies that
are 9 to 11 billion light years away allowing astronomers to measure how fast
the universe was expanding at different times in its history. Changes in the
expansion rate will reveal the role of “dark energy” at different epochs which
will be used to validate/negate the predictions of various theories or give new
clues that will lead to a final solution. The observational program for HETDEX
is fully funded, and currently about 25% complete. This grant will support the
compilation of a detailed catalog containing the calibrated data products that
will be available to the scientific community and the public for additional
astrophysical science studies. A cell phone app will be developed for a Citizen
science program using the data products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will
amplify the science from HETDEX by combining a vetted catalog with a public
database that will be employed for ancillary science by the scientific community
and citizen science applications. The neural networks used for the spectral
extractions for classifying the galaxies in the catalog to meet the HETDEX
specifications need to be optimized. Partial support will be for an expert at
the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) to design the public access to the
data base including web development, and data base maintenance and will
interface with the postdoctoral fellow for vetting the catalog for the
optimization of the visual classification into machine learning. The information
from the classification campaign will be folded back into the reduction software
for continued reduction optimization. This will allow the data base to be
maintained and updated for subsequent data releases as more about the system is
learned. This support will build a truly useful data base for the internal use
of the HETDEX program, public access for additional science the scientific
community as well as Citizen science projects using the cell phone application
that will be developed for this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.