* 2008684
* CIF: Small: Community Detection Meets Non-Graph Data: Principles and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Aria Nosratinia, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 449,410.00

Community detection refers to the inference and identification of clusters of a
graph based on observation of a graph representing relationships between the
nodes. The clustering of the nodes based on observing their pairwise
relationship is a central problem in machine learning, and has a wide and
increasing set of applications, from biology to criminology, social networks,
politics, link prediction, and advertising. The utility of the graph structure
in formulating and solving inference problems is a main driver of the success
and popularity of network inference and community detection. Still, in almost
every practical application involving graphs, there also exist non-graph data
that are relevant to the inference task. For example, social networks have
access to individual attributes and variables as well as connective attributes.
These non-graph data may not fit neatly into the existing graph inference
frameworks, and therefore have not been widely utilized therein. This project is
dedicated to the development of the field of graph inference in the presence of
non-graph data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graph inference can benefit in various
ways from the efficient incorporation of available non-graph data. For example,
non-graph data, also known as side information, can be utilized to reduce the
residual error of community detection algorithms and improve their performance.
Side information can also reduce the computation gap between local belief
propagation algorithms and information-theoretic limits of label recovery,
extending the set of regimes under which belief propagation can be used to good
effect. This project analyzes the information limits of label recovery with side
information, and explores how side information affects the limits of efficient
local algorithms such as belief propagation, as well as other efficient
algorithms such as semi-definite programming. The project also includes a
computational component involving experiments on real-world data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.