* 2008412
* FET: Small: Ferroelectric Transistor based Spiking Neural Networks with Adaptive Learning for Edge AI: from Devices to Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Kaushik Roy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,998.00

Incorporating artificial intelligence (AI) in electronic systems has been widely
recognized as one of the key enablers for several emerging applications.
However, the energy efficiency and the learning capabilities of state-of-the-art
AI systems is far from that achievable by human brains. This research undertakes
a cross-layer exploration spanning novel devices, low-power neural networks, and
new learning schemes. The exploration will exploit Ferroelectric Field Effect
Transistor (FeFET) technology with intrinsic neuro-mimetic features to achieve
energy-efficient neural hardware and adaptable learning. The low-power hardware
solutions and adaptive-learning algorithms have the potential to impact critical
applications such as computer-aided diagnosis, robotics, speech/face
recognition, and data classification, thereby directly benefiting areas such as
healthcare, defense, security etc. Moreover, power savings should translate to
longer battery life for edge devices and energy-efficient data processing for
applications like wearable health-monitoring platforms. The project will
leverage outreach programs at Purdue University and develop a summer Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program to involve undergraduates and
minority students in the project. The broad nature of this project will provide
opportunity for undergraduate students to get introduced to the field of AI
based on emerging technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spiking Neural Networks
(SNNs), due to their self-learning capabilities, show promise in introducing
adaptability in learning for AI systems, but suffer from low accuracy. Improving
SNN accuracy and performance not only necessitates novel learning mechanisms
that support adaptable lifelong learning, but also an intrinsically suitable
technology for low-power scalable hardware. To address this critical need, this
project will carry out a comprehensive devices-to-algorithms exploration of
multi-domain FeFET based SNNs. The main objectives include (a) design of low-
power neurons and synapses using FeFETs, and (b) development of adaptive and
sequential learning algorithms utilizing the unique attributes of the neuro-
mimetic devices. To enable bio-plausible features in FeFETs, physics-based
device optimization will be carried out to utilize the multi-domain effects and
domain dynamics of ferroelectrics. To facilitate cross-layer exploration, a
devices-to-systems simulation framework will be developed capturing the rich
dynamics of the neurons and synapses, their interactions in an SNN, and the
impact of new learning algorithms on system
performance/accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.