* 2008417
* Advances in Casimir-Polder Interactions between Atoms and Substrates
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kimball Milton, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

The quantum vacuum is a busy place, with particles popping into and out of
existence for short periods of time. This activity gives rise to amazing
phenomena, such as the attractive force between closely-spaced uncharged
conducting plates, or between neutral atoms, discovered by Casimir more than 70
years ago. A beginning is being made to see how to exploit these Casimir forces
in practical devices and nanomachinery. By changing the properties of the
objects that interact, and the environment in which they are immersed, the
forces can be repulsive rather than attractive. When the objects and atoms are
in motion, quantum frictional forces arise between atoms and surfaces even when
they are not in contact. This project advances the progress of science and
promotes the education of a diverse group of students and researchers. This
interdisciplinary work has significant impacts in biology, chemistry, atomic and
nuclear physics, and is even finding applications in planetary
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific topics to be considered include: (1)
Negative Casimir entropies. It is now well known that the interaction entropy
between atoms, or between atoms and metallic surfaces, for example, are often
negative. Although it was suggested that the positive self-entropies of the
atoms themselves would cancel this effect, we have now discovered that this is
in general not the case, and that self interactions typically lead to a region
of negative entropy. (2) Quantum vacuum forces between atoms and surfaces in
inhomogeneous media. Nearly all work on Casimir forces between bodies assumes
they are separated by vacuum, or by a homogeneous dielectric medium. But if they
they are separated by a spatially varying medium, divergences appear which are
not well understood. The group has made some preliminary proposals as to how to
extract meaningful interaction energies, but the general situation will require
much more work. (3) Repulsive Casimir forces and nonmonotonic torques. Casimir
forces can turn repulsive, and not merely with exotic combinations of materials.
This is not unrelated to the negative entropies seen ubiquitously, and reflects
the nonmonotonicity of the free energy. With anisotropic materials, Casimir
torques can undergo sign changes with the distances between atoms and surfaces.
Real-world applications to such long-standing problems such as the freezing of
ice, and the interaction of greenhouse gases with substrates are being explored.
(4) Casimir friction. When an atom or a dielectric plate is moved parallel to
nearby plate, a frictional force is experienced due to the interaction with the
fluctuations in the electromagnetic vacuum. This requires understanding
nonequilibrium dissipative effects. Systematic ways of treating such phenomena
are being developed, with the intent of proposing accessible experimental
signatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.