* 2008610
* Fluctuation, Dissipation and Inversion
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Fernando Guevara Vasquez, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2024
* USD 262,001.00

Most of us have experienced thermal noise as that undesirable static hiss we get
when we turn up the volume of a sound amplifier. Thermal noise is present in any
voltage measurement of an electrical circuit and the intensity of the noise
increases with both the temperature and the resistance of the circuit elements.
One goal of this project is to develop a method to estimate the electrical
properties of a circuit from thermal noise measured while heating some circuit
elements. One practical application would be to monitor laser welding. We expect
that the laser hot spot generates noticeably higher thermal noise with intensity
depending mostly on the nearby electric properties. But a defective weld that
does not bridge two parts does not conduct electricity well, so one should be
able to distinguish a good weld from a bad one based on thermal noise alone. The
same principle may also be used in Atomic Force Microscopy to measure the
conductivity of a sample. This project will explore these new uses of thermal
noise, using mathematical tools to extract valuable information from a usually
undesirable andignored quantity. In particular we anticipate to answer questions
such as what electric properties can be recovered from thermal noise? How can
these be recovered? We will use simulations to illustrate our ideas, with an eye
on applications. Another goal of this project is to control heat using small
heat pumps called Peltier devices. We use mathematical tools to show that an
idealization of these devices can be used to thermally isolate an object, that
is, making the temperature surrounding the devices and the object
indistinguishable from the ambient temperature. The mathematical framework we
will develop could be used for heat control in electronics and to design devices
for slow release of drugs. This project provides research training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
two main thrusts. The first thrust is about harnessing ubiquitous thermal
fluctuations to image the properties of a body and the second thrust concerns
active thermal cloaking. An example for the first thrust is Johnson-Nyquist
noise, that is, the random currents or voltages that can be measured at the
terminals of any resistive electrical component. The voltage variance is
proportional to the temperature and the resistance. Thus the resistance can be
found from the temperature and the voltage variance. We will consider a similar
problem on conducting bodies where the problem is to find the electrical
properties (impedance) of a body from the voltage or current covariance measured
at a few electrodes (which may be placed either inside the body or on its
boundary) all while locally heating the body. A discrete analogue of this
problem will be considered for finding the impedance of elements in electric
circuits. Johnson-Nyquist noise is a manifestation of the Fluctuation
Dissipation Theorem, a fundamental statistical physics result relating the
fluctuations about an equilibrium of a system to the dissipation in thesystem.
Thus the inverse problems that we plan to study may have applications to other
linear systems subject to random externalfluctuations, e.g. thermo-elastic
fluctuations. For the second thrust, we will study cloaking strategies for the
heat equation that rely on active surfaces to dissimulate objects or heat
sources/sinks and are grounded on potential theory (Green identities) for the
heat equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.