* 2008551
* NSF-BSF:AF:Small:Algorithmic Tools for Proximity Problems among Curves
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Boris Aronov, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 03/31/2024
* USD 399,082.00

In recent years, a vast volume of path and trajectory data has become available.
The data comes from a variety of sources, as different as motion capture of
actors, flight paths of birds, bus routes, taxi trips, sports analysis, GPS
sensors on cattle, and stock-performance recordings. Recent advancements of
technology, such as the proliferation of GPS-enabled mobile phones, makes such
data sources ubiquitous. This gives rise to several challenges, such as storing
the data, identifying and removing redundancies, clustering it, and
preprocessing it to facilitate a variety of common and useful
queries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, the world is witnessing an outburst
of research surrounding path and trajectory data. Much of it is experimental,
with little focus on the guaranteed performance, in terms of time, storage, and
quality, of the various heuristics used for processing the sea of information.
In this project, the team of researchers is designing effective algorithms and
data structures with provable performance guarantees for fundamental problems
dealing with path and trajectory data. They are concentrating their attention on
proximity problems, including nearest-neighbor searching, clustering, and
related questions. However, in contrast with much of the previous related
research, the team intends to put special emphasis on the usefulness of the
obtained results, by taking into account properties that are often found in
real-life inputs. They are also considering these problems in the streaming
model, which often suits the circumstances in practice. (In this model one
assumes that the overall volume of information is overwhelmingly large, that the
data arrives in small frequent updates, and that limited amounts of time and
memory are available to handle each update.) The team is developing new methods
and combine them with existing ones to attack challenging algorithmic questions
in processing of massive amounts of curve and trajectory data in various
settings. The methodology is intended to be applicable to other problems in
computational geometry and beyond. The researchers are designing algorithms that
are applicable to real-life problems of relevance to the academia, industry, and
society. Moreover, proximity problems for path and trajectory data are
especially suitable for introducing high-school and university students to the
world of algorithms, as the background needed for understanding the problems
themselves is minimal and nice ideas at various levels of sophistication can be
presented through easily accessible illustrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.