* 2008273
* CNS Core: Small: Network-wide Policy Enforcement in Programmable Networks using Logical Queues
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Balajee Vamanan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Data center networks and Internet eXchange Points (IXPs) are a critical part of
today's computing infrastructure that support important cloud services like
Google, Facebook, and Netflix. In these networks, competing companies (tenants)
run many different distributed applications that communicate across the network.
Unfortunately, existing networks are not able to ensure that these competing
applications are isolated. For example, if a malicious tenant were to open more
connections and inject more data into the network than other tenants, it could
consume more than its fair share of network capacity and adversely affect the
performance of other tenants' applications. This work introduces a new system
that can enforce network-wide isolation policies and ensure that competing
tenants cannot game the system and get more performance by opening more
connections or by injecting more data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing approaches
to providing in-network performance isolation use virtual queues to isolate
traffic. Unfortunately, these approaches suffer from key limitations with
respect to scalability, performance, update latency, and TCP-friendliness. To
overcome these limitations, this proposal aims to rethink the design of how
switches track and respond to dynamically changing traffic patterns and how end-
hosts are notified of congestion information. Specifically, it will introduce
logical queues, which use counters to approximately behave as a switch with a
large number of virtual queues without the associated hardware costs. The key
insight is that since today's switches are already dedicating switch resources
(SRAM) to counters that are used for monitoring, these same counters can be
repurposed to implement logical queues with low
overheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have significant implications for
application developers, network hardware vendors, cloud providers, and users of
cloud infrastructure. The new abstractions have the potential to become
commonplace in both the development and teaching of network applications, and it
has the potential to significantly improve performance and security isolation in
today's networks. This proposal has the potential to also broaden the appeal of
today’s programmable switches and open up a new segment of the market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software created as part of this work will be made
broadly available for public reuse under flexible open-source licenses through
github (https://github.com/uic-data-center-systems/). The investigators have a
strong record of releasing the source codes of their research prototypes to the
broader research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.