* 2008855
* CIF: Small: Communication-Aware Decentralized Game-Theoretic Learning Algorithms for Networked Systems with Uncertainty
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ceyhun Eksin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 361,086.00

At the core of the opportunities for many emerging technological networked
systems, such as Internet-of-things, smart grid, transportation systems, lies
decentralization which means the deployment of interlinked agents, e.g.,
sensors, appliances, and devices, that operate in harmony. An implicit
assumption in the decentralized operations in these systems is that these agents
agree or are able to resolve their differences in what is their objective. In
large scale networked systems, barring unreasonable accuracy of environmental
information and unjustifiable levels of coordination, agents cannot be sure of
what other agents are optimizing. This project will enable practical and
scalable decentralized solutions to signal processing and communication problems
in technological networked systems where wireless network technologies provide
the backbone for information exchange. Furthermore, this project will involve
mentoring of PhD students, providing research experience to undergraduate
students, and the development of a graduate-level course on learning and
networks at Texas A&amp;M University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise of this
project is that when agents disagree on their objectives in a networked multi-
agent system due to environmental uncertainty, they are playing a game against
uncertainty, and the optimality criterion is then defined by game-theoretic
notions. Upon adopting, game-theoretic equilibria as the optimality criterion,
the project is divided into three major thrusts. The first thrust will develop
decentralized algorithms based on game-theoretic notions, and will characterize
finite-time outcomes when information aggregation or consensus in large-scale
networked systems may not be possible. The second thrust aims to understand
fundamental trade-offs in communication vs. optimality, and to develop
decentralized algorithms that account for costly and faulty communication. The
third thrust will seek to characterize the likelihood of converging to
undesirable equilibria, and will use influence maximization methods to avoid bad
outcomes. Overall, the project draws upon methods common in decentralized
optimization, e.g., consensus, and in signal processing, e.g., communication
censoring, and combines them with game-theoretic, best-response type, learning
algorithms to design scalable and communication-aware decentralized
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.