* 2008786
* CIF:Small:Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access with Imperfect Assumptions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Hamid Jafarkhani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 140,000.00

There has been a tremendous emergence of new applications of wireless
communications in different aspects of life. These new applications and the
corresponding opportunities have improved the quality of life, provided
economical growth, and helped the expansion of new businesses. The next
generation of wireless, dubbed 5G, promises unmet demands for higher
transmission data rates through designing more efficient wireless communication
networks. To increase the efficiency of the emerging wireless networks, the
concurrent transmission of different users, as pursued in this project, is
unavoidable. The outcomes of this year-long project can help inform future
generations of wireless communications standards and spur a new direction of
research that can greatly increase the efficiency of radio spectrum used for
wireless communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, Non-Orthogonal Multiple
Access (NOMA) has been suggested as an efficient method to enable the concurrent
transmission of multiple users in the same frequency/time resource block. It
provides many nice properties including high bandwidth efficiency, fairness
among different users, and ultra-high connectivity. While the above properties
can be very advantageous, they are obtained under perfect assumptions, such as
the availability of perfect synchronization. For the multiuser/multi-cell
environments for which NOMA is an essential technology, these assumptions are
more likely to be violated. In this exploratory project, the investigator
studies the effects of imperfect timing synchronization in multi-user NOMA
systems and design high performance NOMA systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.