* 2008443
* CIF: Small: Machine Learning for Wireless Propagation Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Andreas Molisch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,991.00

Wireless communications is an essential part of modern society, and with the
introduction of 5G, will become even more important. One of the key challenges
of wireless communications is that the signals are distorted on their way from
the transmitter to the receiver, i.e., by the propagation channel. In order to
make communications efficient, the system needs to know and correct these
distortions at the receiver. The current way of getting this information is
through sending special, known signals, from which the distortion information
can be extracted. However this is highly inefficient as useful (payload) data
cannot be sent during this time. These challenges are further exacerbated if the
distortion information needs to be known at the transmitter, or when prediction
of what the distortions will be in the future is needed, or in a different
frequency band, or at different locations. This project explores the use of
powerful identification and prediction techniques in Machine Learning (ML) to
make such predictions. The project team will combine knowledge about the physics
of propagation channels and extensive measurement data to train the ML
algorithms together with novel ML training approaches to tackle this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, the structure of wireless
channels is very different from structures of other types of data (images,
documents, etc.) to which ML has been applied. Thus application of ML to
wireless channels cannot simply apply modern training algorithms (e.g. deep
learning) known from image classification and other well-known ML applications,
but rather requires incorporation of the special properties of wireless
propagation and suitable rethinking of the ML approaches. The project will thus
develop new methodologies, and provide new insights, both from the perspective
of ML and that of propagation channels and their impact on system design. The
project will also establish an extensive database of channel measurement and ray
tracing data that will be used to train and evaluate the proposed algorithms
which will be made available to other US researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.