* 2008714
* CIF: Small: Numerically-Stable Large-Scale Coded Distributed Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Krishna Narayanan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 596,425.00

In this data-centric age, staggering amounts of data is being collected and
processed using computers at unprecedented scales of complexity. In many
situations, a single computer/server does not possess enough computational power
to process such a large volume of data fast enough to execute the task at hand.
A useful approach to speed up the computations is to break the computing task
into smaller tasks and to distribute the smaller tasks among many worker nodes.
The results from worker nodes can then be assembled at a master node to complete
the original computing task. Such a distributed approach has the potential to
provide a dramatic speed-up; however, a major limitation of this approach is
that even a single straggling worker node can slow down the entire process.
Similarly, a single faulty or malicious worker node can introduce errors in the
computation, affecting the overall computation task. Coded distributed computing
is therefore used to speed up computations even in the presence of stragglers
and faulty or malicious nodes. This project will advance the state of the art in
the domain of coded distributed computing by designing robust algorithms for
distributed computation that provide (i) resilience to straggling workers, (ii)
resilience to malicious or faulty workers, and (iii) scalability, i.e., the
numerical accuracy and implementation complexity of the designed algorithms will
scale efficiently with the number of workers. This project has the potential to
have a broad impact on the development of modern computing infrastructures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design and analyze numerically-stable
and computationally-efficient coded distributed computing schemes for matrix-
matrix multiplication and multivariate polynomial evaluation - two essential
tasks frequently used in machine-learning and deep-learning algorithms. The
focus will be on systems with a moderate to large number of worker nodes. Novel
coding-theoretic ideas will be pursued, and powerful mathematical tools from the
rich literature on random linear codes, rateless fountain codes, multi-
dimensional product codes, as well as collaborative decoding of algebraic codes
will be leveraged. The performance of the schemes developed in the project will
be analyzed in terms of the number of straggling worker nodes that can be
tolerated, the number of adversarial or random errors in the computations of the
worker nodes that can be detected/corrected, the implementation complexity and
the numerical stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.