* 2008857
* CNS Core: Small: Gmem: Unified Address Space Management for Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Alan Cox, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

With the decline in year-over-year performance increases achieved by new
general-purpose processors, a growing variety of devices, e.g., field-
programmable gate arrays, are being added to computers to accelerate
applications. Consequently, the operating system (OS) must not only manage
access to the computer's memory by applications running on general-purpose
processors but also on a diverse array of accelerators. Currently, memory access
by these accelerators is managed by different, disconnected parts of the OS,
leading to a proliferation of independent, redundant, and often inefficient
implementations. This project aims to replace the current fragmented
architecture by a unified framework for all
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project's principal objective
is to create a generalized mapping and protection system, called Gmem, that will
provide a single, consistent interface within the OS for the creation,
management, and destruction of mappings to any physical memory across all
devices. Gmem will simplify the overall architecture of the mapping system
within the OS. It will enable the authors of device drivers to implement just
the device-specific behavior that they need, rather than implementing a complete
mapping system. Furthermore, Gmem will provide asynchronous interfaces and
employ coupled page table management, which together will enable high
performance and strong protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its never-ending
quest for increased performance, the computing community should expect to see
the continued rise of specialized accelerators, increased integration with
graphics processing units, networking interfaces, and storage devices, and large
amounts of non-volatile memory across the computing system. This conglomeration
of components in next generation computing systems requires OS designers to
rethink the ways in which the OS manages disparate memory. A broader impact of
this project is that it will contribute to the significant innovations in OS
software that will be needed to realize the full potential of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software artifacts and experimental data of long-
term value that are created for this project will be available at
https://github.com/rice-systems/gmem for at least three years beyond the
project's end.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.