* 2008993
* III: Small: EnrichDB  - Supporting Enrichment in Database Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Sharad Mehrotra, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,996.00

Emerging application domains such as sensor-driven smart spaces and social media
platforms require incoming data to be appropriately enriched prior to being
consumed by data analysts. Enrichment often requires the use of complex compiled
code, declarative queries, and/or expensive machine learning/signal processing
modules. Traditionally, enrichment is performed as an offline process prior to
making the data available for analysis. The recent trend towards real-time
analytics has prompted industrial and research systems to explore enrichment
during online data processing. These efforts have focused on optimizing
enrichment at the time of data ingestion. This project will develop a new type
of data management technology, to support real-time data analytics, entitled
EnrichDB, that represents a significant departure from the above ingestion-based
enrichment approaches. EnrichDB is based on the premise that enriching data in
its entirety at ingestion can be (a) wasteful -- since applications may not
require all data to be enriched; (b) result in unacceptable latencies -- if data
arrival rates are high, or (c) not be feasible -- if enrichment functions are
learned and incorporated into the system at a later time after ingestion.
EnrichDB will explore seamlessly integrating data enrichment through the entire
data processing pipeline - from ingestion to event-based intermittent
enrichment, and progressively during query processing. EnrichDB will benefit
real-time data analytics in multiple domains including IoT-enabled smart spaces,
text and social media analytics, cybersecurity, network surveillance, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EnrichDB will address a variety of challenges that arise
in enabling enrichment through different stages of the data processing pipeline.
One such challenge is to explicitly represent the state of enrichment of the
objects (i.e., which enrichment functions have been applied to which objects);
such a state will drive additional enrichments required downstream in data
processing. Another challenge is to develop mechanisms to support enrichment
during query processing efficiently since query-time enrichment could result in
unacceptable latencies. Techniques need to be designed to enrich data
progressively while processing queries to provide answers at acceptable levels
of quality and latency. Such progressive processing logic could either be
layered on top of existing databases or could be incorporated natively into
database engines by rethinking storage, indexing, and query processing to
support enrichment. The project will explore challenges that arise for both
these cases. Finally, self-driving strategies to decide which objects should be
enriched to what degree at what stage of the data processing pipelines need to
be designed. Such an approach would complement a strategy wherein such decisions
are made by the system administrator. EnrichDB will be used in advanced data
management classes and will be integrated into a campus-level smart space
testbed at UCI entitled TIPPERS that supports a variety of services including
real-time occupancy counts and other building usage analysis, at the UCI
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.