* 2008083
* SHF: Small: Semantics of Higher Order Probabilistic Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Dexter Kozen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2023
* USD 425,000.00

Probabilistic programming is a powerful programming paradigm that focuses on the
use of randomness to model uncertainty. The topic has enjoyed a recent
resurgence of interest spurred by new applications in machine learning and
statistical analysis of large datasets. Several new probabilistic programming
languages such as Church, Anglican, and Venture have emerged in the last few
years that allow statisticians to construct statistical models, sample
probability distributions, condition on events, and perform Bayesian inference.
The rapid development of these languages has created a need for sound semantic
foundations and logical tools for specification and reasoning about
probabilistic program behavior. Describing the behavior of probabilistic
programs with higher-order features and mechanisms for sampling and conditioning
presents enormous mathematical challenges. A variety of diverse mathematical
structures for capturing the most salient properties of these languages have
recently been proposed, similar in spirit but diverging markedly in execution.
The objective of this project is to isolate the fundamental principles at work
in each case and ultimately determine whether and how these diverse approaches
can be reconciled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates useful
semantic and logical tools to guide the future development of probabilistic
languages and logics. The project provides fundamental knowledge and insights
that will inform the design of next-generation higher-order probabilistic
programming languages with conditioning and Bayesian inference, along with
compiler technology and runtime support for these languages. The research
results and software artifact from this project will be made publicly available.
The project personnel will organize two annual summer research workshops, and
participate by giving introductory lectures on probabilistic programming and
Bayesian inference, and supervise followup projects with interested
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.