* 2008305
* AF: Small: Sublinear Algorithms for Flows, Matchings, and Routing Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sanjeev Khanna, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Very large-scale graphs routinely arise in applications where the data describes
pairwise relationships among a set of objects. The widespread prevalence of such
graphs has led to the emergence of new computational models that allow for
efficient processing of information contained in these large networks.
Traditional gold standards of computational efficiency, namely, linear storage
requirements, linear running time, and linear communication overhead as a
function of problem size have given way to sublinear algorithms that use
resources that are much smaller than the input size. The goal of this project is
to design sublinear algorithms for several fundamental graph problems as well as
explore limits of such algorithms. The research activities in this project will
go hand-in-hand with educational and student-training initiatives, as well as
outreach efforts to engage high-school students and under-represented groups in
computer science and related disciplines. The project will also support and
train PhD students whose dissertation work will be closely aligned with the
proposed research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is broadly divided into
three parts. The first part considers sublinear space and sublinear time
algorithms for the matching problem. The sublinear space algorithms are in the
setting of the streaming model of computation where the edges of an underlying
graph are revealed as a sequence of edge insertion and deletion updates, and the
goal is to compute a near-optimal solution using a small amount of space. The
sublinear time algorithms are in the setting of the standard query access model
where the graph can be accessed via adjacency-list queries. The second part
considers communication-efficient protocols for flows and matchings in the
setting where the edges of a graph are arbitrarily distributed among two
players, and the goal is to compute an optimal or near-optimal solution with a
small amount of communication. The third part considers sublinear time and space
algorithms for the well-known traveling salesman problem where the goal is to
estimate the cost of the cheapest traveling salesman tour. The problems
considered in these three parts are intimately connected to one another and new
results for any one of them are likely to have implications for the
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.