* 2008724
* CIF: Small: Exploiting Interference via Data-Dependent Precoding
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Arnold Swindlehurst, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,996.00

In wireless communications, managing interference is a key problem that has been
studied for many years. When a cell tower or a WiFi access point sends signals
simultaneously to several users, it has to ensure that these signals do not get
so mixed up with each other that they can't be separated by the individual
receivers. The most common approach is to encode the signals in a way that
attempts to completely eliminate this multi-user interference, usually by
assigning each signal to an "orthogonal" channel, e.g., sending the signals at
different times, on different frequency bands, or using different transmission
beams. The goal of this project is to exploit the observation that not all
interference is "bad." When the signals are confined to a limited alphabet, it
is unnecessary that the signal be received in exactly the form it was
transmitted; it is only necessary that the receiver properly decode which symbol
from the alphabet of signals was transmitted. While multi-user interference
inevitably distorts the waveform, the transmitter can encode the waveform in
such a way that the interference does not prevent (and in fact can enhance) the
ability of the receivers to correctly decode their respective symbols. The key
advantage of this approach is that it enables the transmitter to use much less
power to get the same performance, since the interference essentially serves the
purpose of adding extra power to the desired signals for each receiver. The
significant energy savings that can result from this approach could have a
revolutionary effect on the performance of wireless systems, and enable a much
wider deployment of wireless network infrastructure and IoT devices at a
fraction of the currently required energy consumption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-antenna implementations have become standard in
todayâ€™s WiFi and cellular communication networks, and are one of the key
technologies for achieving the large throughputs and high reliability required
by next-generation systems. This proposal is focused on a new symbol-level
precoding paradigm that has recently emerged in which not only the channel state
information is exploited, but also knowledge of the symbols to be transmitted.
This approach provides a powerful extra dimension for optimization that can
yield dramatic improvements in performance. While most precoding methods try to
eliminate interference, symbol-level precoding (SLP) exploits useful or
"constructive" interference and repurposes it as energy for the desired signals.
This increases the robustness of the signal detection and enables wireless
systems to operate with significantly less power, and thus makes constructive
interference SLP a promising candidate for low-cost and high-reliability
applications. This project seeks to study methods for reducing the complexity of
SLP, operation of the algorithms in scenarios with constrained radio-frequency
front ends (e.g., low-resolution quantization, per-antenna power constraints),
physical layer security, user selection in large networks, theoretical analyses
of performance, network settings other than broadcast,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.