* 2008822
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Wavefront Sensing and Control for Exoplanet Imaging at W. M. Keck Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Rebecca Jensen-Clem, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 362,259.00

Taking pictures of planets around other stars is difficult, because stars are
much brighter than planets. However, images of other planets can also tell us
what the planet is made of, what its weather might be like, how it formed, and
whether it might be home to life. So far, astronomers have only managed to image
a handful of planets outside the Solar System, and these planets are unusually
hot, bright, and far from their suns. To take pictures of Earth-like planets
(which are faint and very close to their suns) astronomers must overcome issues
like the turbulence in Earth’s atmosphere and imperfections in the telescope
optics. This project will tackle both these issues. A new predictive control
method will be investigated that both anticipates the upcoming turbulence, and
develops methods to measure and correct the internal optical errors of
telescopes. The project’s investigators are involved in teaching and mentoring
at the new “AstroTech” summer school. Students from underrepresented and
underserved populations in Hawaii will be directly involved in this research
through Akamai Workforce Initiative internships and through the University of
Hawaii at Hilo. These new approaches will be demonstrated at the Keck
Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last three decades have been marked by the
discovery of over 4000 exoplanets orbiting nearby stars. Direct imaging is the
preferred method for obtaining high signal-to-noise, high-resolution spectra of
diverse exoplanet atmospheres. The performance of modern high contrast imaging
systems is limited by the ability to sense and correct the lowest order
wavefront aberrations that give rise to contaminating starlight close to the
telescope’s diffraction limit. This project will implement two technologies at
Keck Observatory to improve spatial resolution. Firstly, predictive wavefront
control will minimize the effect of time lag between wavefront sensing and
control that results in quickly- evolving speckles at low spatial frequencies.
Secondly, focal plane wavefront control that minimizes instrument aberrations
that are poorly sensed by the existing adaptive optics systems that give rise to
wavefront “speckle” errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.