* 2008589
* FET: Small: Exploring the Computational Power of Stochastic Processes in Molecular Information Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Erik Winfree, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

As computing technology matures, it becomes possible to embed programmable
computing devices into objects and materials where it was previously almost
unthinkable: autonomous robots on Mars, “smart dust” femtosatellites and “smart
paint” with embedded millimeter-scale electronic circuits, “smart” molecular
therapeutics with embedded biochemical circuits, genetically engineered living
cells with embedded genetic regulatory networks controlling their activity, and
“smart” chemistry with programmable molecular robots that control the assembly
and disassembly of molecular materials, for example. As miniaturization reaches
the nanometer and molecular scale, both device fabrication and device operation
become unreliable, ultimately dominated by stochastic effects. Despite decades
of study, the theory of computation in the presence of high levels of
stochasticity remains underdeveloped, and the practice of building stochastic
computing systems is limited accordingly. While the majority of prior work has
focused on error-tolerant designs that enable robust implementation of
deterministic computation using unreliable and stochastic components, this
project will investigate how the abundantly available stochastic operation of
molecular devices can provide augmented computing power – going beyond what a
deterministic implementation could achieve with the same resources. As such, it
will help establish a rigorous computer-science foundation for molecular
information technology. Long-term, programmable molecular information technology
is poised to eventually impact industry and society broadly, as programmable
chemistry will enable information-based responsive molecular materials, advanced
biomedical therapeutics and diagnostics, sophisticated chemical synthesis and
molecular-scale instruments, and other applications of molecular nanotechnology.
The proposal includes education and outreach plans to train and prepare students
with emphasis on recruiting students from women and minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial investigations will consider models of
computation that have been used in the rapidly developing fields of DNA
nanotechnology and molecular programming: formal chemical-reaction networks,
molecular tile self-assembly systems, polymer-reaction networks and reaction-
diffusion systems. Recent work has shown that well-mixed chemical-reaction
networks operating in small volumes can utilize their stochasticity to represent
complex probability distributions, to perform information-processing tasks such
as probabilistic inference, and to effectively search for solutions to complex
combinatorial problems. This project aims to improve understanding of the
benefits of stochastic molecular computation by building on these insights.
First, it will establish a complexity theory for chemical-reaction networks that
generate probability distributions. Second, it will explore how stochastic
constraint satisfaction by chemical-reaction networks can lead to robust spatial
pattern formation in self-organizing reaction-diffusion systems and other models
that incorporate geometry. Third, it will develop an understanding of how
stochastic self-assembly processes can augment the power of algorithmic self-
assembly. A concrete outcome will be a demonstration of how the stochastic
nucleation of self-assembled DNA structures can perform an information-
processing task similar to pattern recognition by neural
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.