* 2008072
* Collaborative Research: CNS core: OAC core: Small: New Techniques for I/O Behavior Modeling and Persistent Storage Device Configuration
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Ningfang Mi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2024
* USD 244,927.00

Currently, there is a rapidly growing diversity in data processing workloads.
Likewise, new advancements in persistent storage technologies are emerging.
Therefore, it is important to have new techniques for benchmarking and
appropriately configuring storage systems in order to obtain the best possible
performance and reliability. This project proposes to derive new input/output
(I/O) models to capture I/O behaviors accurately when running multiple
applications with different workloads on storage systems such as flash-based
solid-state drives (SSDs). In addition, this project develops new approaches to
identify the most appropriate internal algorithm for different types of
persistent storage devices and dynamically adjust the associated algorithm
parameters according to I/O activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes
empirical contributions to storage systems by addressing challenges issued by
large-scale data-intensive applications. Specifically, it advances (1) how to
analyze the impact of various system components while running multiple workloads
on emerging storage systems; (2) how to design interactive frameworks that allow
users to modify the internal algorithms and parameters of modern storage
devices; (3) how to enable novices to configure storage systems with respect to
their workloads and data processing requirements; and (4) how to derive I/O
models to predict future I/O workload patterns and accordingly configure storage
systems in advance for better performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will lead to better storage systems design with high performance and
reliability. The outcome of this project will bring a significant impact on many
areas that are dependent on processing a large amount of data. This project will
share the findings with undergraduate and graduate students through computer
science and engineering programs and open up career opportunities to female
students, underrepresented minorities, and first-generation college students.
This project will disseminate the proposed techniques into the industry and
foster technology transfer through new industrial collaborations. The developed
infrastructure will be available to the research community through a web-based
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the publicly disclosable NSF funded work
products developed under this project will be maintained at the project website
(https://damrl.cis.fiu.edu/research/) at Florida International University (FIU)
for at least five years beyond the end of the project. Data generated and
collected as part of this project will be deposited into Digital Repository
Service (DRS) (https://repository.library.northeastern.edu/) at Northeastern
University (NEU) and maintained for at least 5 years beyond the end of the
project. The developed software code and tools will be published in scholarly
articles and be made available online via NEU's DRS, and FIU's project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.