* 2008427
* Large-Scale Interactions in Financial Markets
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Tomoyuki Ichiba, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 147,978.00

One of the essential roles of the global financial markets is to generate future
investment opportunities and to meet various needs from real economic
activities, where participants in the financial markets interact both locally
and globally through trades. Their interactions are understood as dynamic
consequences of participantsâ€™ trading behaviors. The interactions yield market
growth over time and sometimes trigger systemic risk events in unexpected ways.
The main goal of the project is to understand mathematically interactions and
their consequences in large financial markets. In order to analyze both
homogeneous interactions with the market averages and heterogeneous interactions
among similar participants, graphical interactions are modeled and analyzed with
the methods in the system of stochastic partial differential equations with
probability distribution constraints. The analysis of complicated financial
markets in the project will provide mathematical tools for comprehensive
understanding of financial networks among investors and can be applied to the
similar network structures observed in other fields such as Biology, Data
Science, Physics and Social Sciences. The award will support the opportunity for
research experiences for graduate students and postdoctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to understand the dependence structures
in the stochastic processes in the system of nonlinear stochastic differential
equations of mean-field type and of directed chain interactions in large
financial markets. With the directed chain interactions, the local dependence
structure is preserved in the limit and the stochastic chaos does not
necessarily propagate. Four subproblems are considered. First, the directed
chain interactions are extended to the interactions through random tree or
network structures. The outputs are sufficient conditions on drift and diffusion
functional for the existence and uniqueness of weak solutions to the stochastic
differential equations. Second, network detection problems are examined by a
class of newly introduced, stochastic partial differential equations through
stochastic filtering. Third, the dependence of stochastic volatility of multiple
financial securities are analyzed and compared with rough volatility models
driven by the fractional Brownian motion. Fourth, the optimization problem of
market participants is analyzed in the mean-field stochastic game with directed
chain interactions. The goal of solving this problem is to derive the master
equation for the large population equilibria and provide understandings of
competition and cooperation among investors in financial markets. The results of
the project will shed some light on the family of joint probability laws in the
space of continuous functions which are not of the product form yet
mathematically tractable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.