* 2008255
* Dynamics of Evaporating Fluids Films
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Thomas Witelski, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 259,926.00

This research project addresses the needs to develop more comprehensive
understanding of models that can predict the behaviors of layers of evaporating
fluids. Volatile liquids play fundamental roles in numerous settings spanning
natural and biophysical systems to engineering and industrial processes such as
printing and painting. Models for evaporation and condensation are crucial for
many applications where such slow processes can shift systems into different
operating conditions, as in evaporation of the tear film on the human eye for
people with dry-eye syndrome. Whether the dynamics maintain the liquid as a
uniform layer or drive break-up into many droplets can have major consequences.
Volatile liquid films can be used in cooling systems for high-power electrical
or mechanical equipment. Heat transfer through uniform fluid layers is known to
be less efficient than transfer through comparable arrays of droplets. Hence,
optimizing the performance of such systems involves reliably controlling the
behavior of the fluid film. While there have been extensive studies of
evaporation leading to simple models for the drying of uniform liquid layers and
shrinking of individual droplets in many contexts, there are gaps in applying
the models uniformly to broader settings. This work seeks to build a systematic
understanding of the dynamics that can result from the interaction of
evaporation competing with wetting effects for fluids on solid surfaces. In
addition to presenting results from this project in journals targeting broader
audiences in fluid dynamics and engineering, the PI will use the project to
incorporate new techniques into training in applied mathematics. Parts of the
project will be used in the PI's courses on mathematical modeling and fluid
dynamics. The project will also serve as the focus for the PI's continuing track
record in the training of graduate students and providing research experiences
for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use numerical
simulations and analytical approaches from applied mathematics to develop a
better understanding of the long-time dynamics of evaporating layers of viscous
liquids. A lubrication model with an evaporative flux will be used to describe
the evolution of the height profile of thin films of viscous fluids. The
governing equation is a fourth-order nonlinear parabolic partial differential
equation describing wetting effects generating phase separation (sometimes
called de-wetting instabilities) between droplets and thin layers while fluid
mass is lost or gained due to phase change from the surrounding vapor phase.
Recent results have shown that there is a critical range of parameters where the
influence of substrate properties can dramatically change the course of the
dynamics between the two long-time attracting behaviors: evaporation of droplets
down to a minimal adsorbed film or condensation yielding growing thicker layers.
Mathematical analyses for many aspects of the study of mass-conserving unstable
thin film models have been well-developed using techniques from partial
differential equations, nonlinear dynamics, and related models in materials
science. However, introducing evaporation into the problem fundamentally changes
key properties of the solutions of the model and necessitates the development of
new extensions of previous methods or other novel approaches. The long-term goal
of the project is to develop asymptotic models for the evolution of arrays of
interacting volatile droplets. Obtaining this kind of coarsening model will
involve new challenges as the quasi-steady framework underpinning the mass-
conserving model no longer directly applies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.