* 2008243
* CNS Core: Small: Paxos Unpacked
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Murat Demirbas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 496,347.00

Due to their excellent fault-tolerance properties, Paxos protocols have been
employed by many cloud computing systems for consistent coordination of clusters
of computers. This project aims to show that when properly customized, Paxos
family of protocols can also deliver top-notch performance and scalability,
which they currently lack. To this end, the project will design high-
performance, scalable, practical, and usable Paxos variants customized for
different deployments and use cases. Instead of developing disjoint point-
solutions, the project will provide a systematic and principled exploration of
the solution space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scaling Paxos and making it practical
and customizable involves many challenges and requires an assortment of
distributed algorithmic tools and techniques. For scaling Paxos horizontally,
the project will investigate novel in-protocol sharding and reconfiguration
strategies enabled by the flexible quorums result. For scaling Paxos vertically,
the project will alleviate the bottleneck at the leaders by decoupling control
from communication flow and by employing in-protocol aggregation optimizations.
To provide consensus as a lightweight serverless primitive, the project will
develop efficient single-instance fine-granularity consensus as a systems
primitive and showcase its use in applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
techniques developed in this project will have broader applicability to
coordination protocols in general. In order to accelerate technology transfer to
academia and industry, the project will showcase these techniques in the context
of a globally distributed database prototype. The project will also enable
broader impact through enhancing scientific/technological understanding,
distributing tools and software to the community, engaging undergraduate and
underrepresented students, and reaching out to K-12 students. New tools,
software, and material will be created to teach students the principles of
distributed systems and reasoning about distributed
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will share all the software,
documentation, and technical papers generated with the public openly as open
source via Github repositories at https://github.com/muratdem. These material
will include TLA+/Pluscal models of the protocols, implementations of the
protocols in Go language, implementation of a distributed database showcasing
the protocols, implementation of primitives and tools for designing and
developing coordination protocols, course modules on distributed coordination,
research papers, presentations, and blog posts. The material will be stored and
preserved for at least three years beyond the award
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.