* 2008338
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: loTScope: Sensing Physical Materials via Inexpensive loT Radios
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Romit Roy Choudhury, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Maturing wireless technology and low-cost IoT devices are enabling new kinds of
approaches to conventional fields and applications. This project will design a
system called IoTScope that aims to shine wireless signals on any object and
identify the material properties by analyzing the reflected and refracted
signals. Such a capability has the potential to impact many applications helpful
to society. Soil moisture detection using drones can help predict crop yield and
fertilizer requirement, thus benefitting precision agriculture. Detection of the
caloric values of liquids and of water contamination have important health-care
applications. Being able to distinguish humans, cars, and other objects can be
useful in autonomous-driving and security applications. The project aims to
tackle algorithmic and practical challenges in enabling material detection using
wireless signals. The simulations, experimental data, and software libraries
that will be developed in the project will be made available to students through
mini-projects. Given the â€œSci-Fi" like nature of this work, it is designed to
naturally draw students towards research, while also teaching fundamental
principles of wireless communications, signal processing, and wave-matter
interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project attempts to harness the rich
information inherent in wireless signals for detecting materials and enabling
disruptive IoT applications. Detection can be challenging due to noisy data,
wireless multipath (environmental reflections) and diffraction, complexity of
material surface, arbitrary user mobility, etc. The specific research tasks are:
(I) Fusion of physics models of signal-material interaction with measurements of
reflected and refracted signals. This allows IoTScope to decouple signal
entanglement with multipath with potentially higher accuracy than state-of-the
art multipath deconvolution techniques. (II)Iterative hardware cancellation
techniques for subtracting environmental multipath to amplify weak refracted
signal. (III) Actuation/mobility based control of probing the material at
various angles of incidence, antenna orientations, and frequencies to extract
maximal spatial diversity with minimal overhead. (IV) To handle application-
specific challenges in soil-moisture detection, the proposal exploits RF-vision
fusion together with prior information about soil moisture
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.