* 2008101
* Determining the Origin of the Types of Stars found in Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Adam Ginsburg, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,556.00

Our visible Galaxy consists of billions of stars and vast amounts of gas, and
dust. New stars form from this gas and dust, and some old stars - but only the
biggest - die in explosions. When they die, their matter gets mixed back into
the star-forming reservoir. The less-massive stars, those like our Sun and
smaller, live a very long time and keep most of their mass forever. The
lifecycle from gas to stars and back depends on how many big and how many small
stars are formed. The investigator seeks to test a model to explain the observed
distribution of masses of stars. This investigation will measure the gas and
dust that is just about to form new stars. ALMA observations of thousands of
young stars will provide a large sample, which is needed to accurately measure
the relative numbers of different star sizes. A new modeling framework will be
built to predict what these young stars will look like to ALMA. The models this
project builds will advance our understanding of galaxies and the formation
environments of planetary systems.&lt;br/&gt;To further advance the education of
groups under-represented in astronomy, this project will involve an outreach
program targeted at local middle schools. The investigators will bring solar
telescopes to these schools to give a daytime astronomy experience. Students'
attitudes toward science will be measured, assessing the degree to which this
project instilled in them the confidence that they too can be
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stellar initial mass function (IMF) is key
to understanding stellar populations and galaxy changes over time. This project
will measure the natal phase of the IMF, often referred to as the core mass
function (CMF), using the NSFâ€™s Atacama Large Millimeters/submillimeter Array
(ALMA) observations of massive star forming regions throughout the Galaxy. The
project will increase the available sample of proto-stellar cores by more than a
factor of ten. More importantly, it will sample the full dynamic range of star
masses, from sub-solar to the most massive that are forming at present. The
project will develop a new modeling framework based on existing proto-stellar
evolution and radiative transfer models, bringing them together in a coherent
toolkit for predicting observables for ALMA and similar
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.