* 2008557
* III: Small: Combinatorial Algorithms for High-dimensional Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Andreas Stathopoulos, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 395,403.00

This project designs a new suite of statistical learning algorithms for high-
dimensional problems in which the number of observations is insufficient to
support conventional methods. Solving these problems is vital for modern
scientific discoveries in social and environmental issues that rely on both
complex models and massive data. For example, many empirical asset pricing
models can use only 10 years of daily market data, for a total of approximately
3,000 observations, to fit significantly more than 3,000 parameters. The
algorithms created in the project integrate key tools from theoretical computer
science with data to deliver more accurate predictions with significantly fewer
samples. The suite of new algorithms will assist with data-centric problems in
financial econometrics, social network analysis, recommender systems, and
skillset inferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint, this
project uses graph-based algorithms and average case analysis to exploit
statistical patterns that cannot be addressed by existing tools. These patterns
include, for instance, block diagonal structures of the learnable parameters in
vector regression models, and covariance matrices of mildly correlated features
that exhibit heavy-tailed spectra. The project consists of two thrusts. First is
the design of learning algorithms by relating high-dimensional problems to
graph-learning problems, and generalizing graph-learning techniques. Second is
the construction of new algorithms based on average case analysis, motivated by
(i) the avoidance of over-conservativeness by using distributional assumptions,
and (ii) the use of ``promises'', a notion borrowed from theoretical computer
science, that guides prediction power using input structures. Utilizing weak
distributional assumptions and promises together in turn allows the design of
effective algorithms for a multitude of problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.