* 2008202
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Study of Neural Architectural Components in Physics-Informed Deep Neural Networks for Extreme Flood Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ping Chen, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,226.00

Understanding our physical world is clearly critical and beneficial to human
society, which has become a central focus and challenge in many areas of science
and engineering for centuries. This project will develop machine learning-based
techniques to model complex atmospheric systems (from weather to climate).
Atmospheric system models can approximate atmospheric flow and predict sequence
of extreme precipitation events including flooding. Flooding is one the most
deadly and costly natural hazards in the world. Mounting losses from
catastrophic floods are driving an intense effort to increase preparedness and
improve response to disastrous flood events by providing early warnings.
Findings in this project will help decision makers better determine the need for
and outcomes of particular policy actions. For example, a 10-15 day lead time in
flood prediction will allow significant changes in the way reservoir operation
rules are executed to minimize the impact of flood events. Moreover, this
project will provide undergraduate and graduate students with valuable research
and training opportunities, encourage minority and woman participation in
science and engineering, and have a broad and sustainable impact on Computer
Science curricula and courseware development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Many
physical systems can be described by a set of governing partial differential
equations. However, these underlying governing partial differential equations
are often coupled and nonlinear, do not have tractable analytical solutions, and
need numerical approximations that are highly sensitive to initial and boundary
conditions. This project synthesizes current understanding of physical systems
with novel neural architectures to develop deep neural network models that can
improve interpretation, generalization and prediction of complex physical system
models. To achieve this goal, this project focuses on three interrelated
research activities: (1) developing a library of neural architectural components
to build modular neural network models; (2) testing neural architectural
component based deep learning approach for flood prediction; and (3) building
physics inspired deep learning models for better interpretation and prediction.
This project investigates a new approach of developing and using basic neural
architectural components to build large physics-informed deep neural networks.
The modularity-based approach on study of neural architectures is critically
important to enhance understanding and interpretability of deep learning models
and has broad applications in multiple scientific domains. From scientific
perspective, it will provide a new benchmark on the efficacy of using neural
architectural components to build physics-informed deep neural network models
and quantify achievable predictability limits for a class of precipitation and
flood events by combining strengths of partial differential equation based
numerical weather prediction models and recent advances in deep
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.