* 2008867
* CNS Core: Small: eXecution Graph Path Security (XGPS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Nathan Dautenhahn, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

eXecution Graph Path Security (XGPS) is a new computer processor that restricts
common low-level behaviors so that attackers cannot use them to take control of
a system. By replacing general purpose control operations with new limited
operations, XGPS will prevent common attacker steps while preserving expected
functionality. This is important because almost all computing systems are
susceptible to compromises. Existing approaches emphasize general protection
hardware but leave gaps in defenses and cannot easily trace the program as it
executes.The core challenge and idea is to describe, track, and ensure good
behavior in the hardware itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;XGPS observes that almost
all security policies are more precise when including a description of the
program path. XGPS will develop a novel hardware mechanism for representing,
tracing, and securing all program paths, including for the operating system. The
first thrust will develop a general purpose data structure capable of
representing the program path while remaining finite in size. The second thrust
will implement the path in hardware while protecting it from supervisor level
compromise. The third thrust will develop new efficient path based
hardware/software security policies, demonstrating the efficacy of the path to
enforce meaningful properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The end result of this
research will be the enhanced understanding and development of a system with
rigorous control of program behavior. By controlling this behavior, XGPS will
deny large classes of threats and, if adopted, will lead to a significantly
stronger trusted computing base. Moreover, XGPS will enable existing hardware to
tackle problems better suited to their capabilities. A core element of this
research program will be engaging graduate and undergraduate students through
courses, mentorship, and hands-on research activities. This project will
actively pursue underrepresented minority students for research and security
technology education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this work will be high
level models of core components, hardware based design and implementation,
written reports, and experimental data. All artifacts will be kept at
https://fiercelab.cs.rice.edu/projects/xgps/ and maintained for three years
following the conclusion of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.