* 2008856
* CNS Core: Small: Design and Evaluation of Methods for Supporting Resilient and High-Availability Elastic Network Slicing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jason Jue, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 449,651.00

Emerging 5G networks are expected to serve an array of critical applications in
different industries such as healthcare, education, transportation, and
manufacturing. A major challenge when supporting such a wide range of
applications is being able to provide a high degree of availability and
maintaining service requirements in the presence of network failures and other
constantly changing network conditions. The concept of network slicing in 5G
networks is widely viewed as a promising approach for supporting diverse service
requirements by enabling the creation of application-specific network slices. A
network slice consists of virtual computing and network resources that are
tailored to the unique requirements of individual applications. Of particular
interest is the concept of elastic network slicing in which the resources
allocated to a slice may be dynamically adjusted over time in response to
network failures or changes in network conditions. This project aims to address
the issues of maintaining high availability and diverse service requirements in
5G networks through the intelligent design, provisioning, and restoration of
elastic network slices. The work will result in techniques for providing a
robust and resilient network infrastructure that is able support critical
applications under dynamic and adverse conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goals of this project are to develop methods and techniques for
maintaining high availability and diverse service requirements for elastic
network slices in 5G networks. To achieve these goals, this project considers a
framework that utilizes techniques from deep reinforcement learning and online
convex optimization to develop schemes for deploying, provisioning,
reconfiguring, and restoring elastic network slices. Specific research problems
that will be addressed include 1) machine learning based strategies for the
pricing and admission control of elastic network slices while maintaining slice
isolation and service requirements, 2) schemes for composing network slices and
mapping slices to a physical infrastructure to optimize cost while providing
availability guarantees in the presence of infrastructure failures, and 3)
schemes for the progressive recovery of virtual and physical infrastructure
components after catastrophic failure events. Methodologies will be developed in
the context of online convex optimization that will provide a means to obtain
theoretical performance bounds for a class of discrete optimization problems.
The proposed techniques will be rigorously evaluated through comprehensive
analytical models and simulation experiments. Testbed activities will be
initiated to evaluate and validate proposed schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.