* 2008428
* CIMA LSAMP Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Usha Gururajarao, St. Philip's College
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the number
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science,technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans,American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM. For the United States
(U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent
of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM
areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIMA
Alliance - a partnership between St. Philip's, San Antonio, Northwest Vista,
Palo Alto, and Northeast Lakeview Colleges - is uniquely poised to respond to
the need for a more diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still
exists and is particularly acute in Bexar County(Texas) where minorities
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields comprise much of the region's
population. The CIMA Alliance's goals are to: 1) Increase individual student
retention and progression to baccalaureate degrees for underrepresented
minorities (URMs); 2) Enable successful transfer of URMs from two-year programs
into four-year programs; and 3)Increase access to high-quality undergraduate
research experiences. These goals support the National Science Foundation's
strategic goal to "cultivate a world-class,broadly inclusive science and
engineering workforce, and expand the scientific literacy of all citizens." To
retain more STEM majors to graduation or transfer, and to provide an
intervention that addresses multiple factors that influence Hispanic student
success in STEM, the project will encourage students to develop peer and faculty
support networks and improve their sense of self-efficacy in STEM through
involvement in student-led undergraduate research; peer mentorship; faculty
mentorship; tutoring; supplemental instruction, especially in mathematics; and
STEM student clubs. The project supports the goals of the LSAMP program by
transforming undergraduate STEM education at all five CIMA Alliance Colleges via
1) relevant curricular and co-curricular educational experiences that are
designed to meet the specific needs of URM STEM majors; and 2) professional
development in innovative, evidence-based teaching, recruitment, and retention
strategies for all STEM faculty and academic advisors. Convergent STEM education
is emphasized to prepare students for 21st Century careers in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of the evaluation results will
provide insight into activities/programs that establish seamless transfer
pipelines into four-year institutions, and the extent to which these
interventions increase the number of underrepresented community college STEM
majors who complete a STEM bachelor's degree within six
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for this project is provided by the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI
Program), that aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity
at HSIs and the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.