* 2008728
* Collaborative Research: FET: Small: Towards full photon utilization by adaptive modulation and coding on quantum links
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 340,980.00

Secure communication has long been an indispensable part of numerous systems,
ranging from the more traditional such as finance and defense to the emerging
ones such as the internet of (battlefield) things and health data management.
Traditional data encryption methods based on using public keys are threatened by
the advances in quantum computing algorithms promising to efficiently solve
otherwise intractable problems which make public key encryption secure. However,
it is precisely quantum information processing advances that are also expected
to enable secure communications by allowing efficient and secure private key
distribution. The main advantage of private key encryption is that as long as
the key strings are truly secret, it is provably secure, that is, insensitive to
advances in computing. A Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) protocol describes how
two parties, commonly referred to as Alice and Bob, can establish a secret key
by communicating over a quantum and a public classical channel that both can be
accessed by an eavesdropper Eve. For the widespread adoption of QKD, it is
mandatory to provide high key rates over long distances. What has appeared as a
bottleneck in practice is the inability to maximize the utility of information-
bearing quantum states. This project seeks to solve this inefficiency problem.
The results will pave the way for practical quantum networks in which multiple
receivers communicate with a source simultaneously though multi-channel
entanglement distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
maximizing the utility of photons in frequency-time entanglement based QKD,
through a combination of innovations in adaptive photon generation-aware
modulation and coding, and a state of the art experimental validation. QKD
offers a physically secure way for establishing an encryption key over a quantum
and a public communication channel, both of which are observed by an
eavesdropper. Because of the growing demand for quantum communications, research
on improving QKD protocols has steeply intensified. One recent breakthrough is
the experimental observation of continuous-variable frequency-time
hyperentangled photons. This high-dimensional large Hilbert-space approach
promises high information efficiency by potentially carrying multiple bits per
an entangled photon pair. However, to ensure unconditional security in QKD, the
biphotons (whether carrying single qubit or multiple qubits per photon), must be
transmitted under photon-starved conditions, creating an immediate need to
maximize utility of all generated biphotons. The project will offer an
integrated solution consisting of photon-aware modulation and coding schemes,
and will be the first such to be demonstrated on time-bin encoded multi-
dimensional biphotons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.