* 2008556
* CNS Core: Small: Non-contact Monitoring of Respiration and Heart Rates Through Light-wave Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2023
* John O'Hara, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 156,000.00

In many health care settings there is a need to discreetly monitor respiration
and heart rates in humans. The applications for monitoring include warning
fatigued drivers or pilots, active feedback for virtual reality or gaming,
anxiety monitoring, security screening, and health monitoring for sleep apnea,
tachypnea, tachycardia, and bradycardia. This project investigates a discreet,
non-contact method of using light to monitor respiration and heart rates. In
concept, the intensity of light reflected from a subject follows the subtle body
movements associated with breathing and heartbeat, enabling extraction of the
rates. The method offers high privacy with zero risks of radio interference, but
its theoretical effectiveness and accuracy are not yet clear. This project seeks
to understand the fundamental limits of the technique, which will determine how
well it can perform in real-world situations. Apart from the technological
interest, the project will enable unique educational opportunities for next-
generation engineers and scientists, including class modules as well as training
and outreach. This work will use an outreach effort with light sensing and
communication kits in which students, through programs like OSU Summer Bridge or
Discovery Days, build their own low-cost, portable, light-based wireless
communication system, a highly successful activity for stimulating interest and
recruitment. The PIs will continue their commitment to mentoring
underrepresented students through the OK Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the work is to
determine the limits of lightwave respiration and heartrate monitoring as a
function of source intensity, wavelength, ambient lighting, photodetector,
range, clothing, and optical layout. A human-like robot will be built and
covered with artificial skin and multiple clothing items. Using actuators
controlled by a microcontroller, it will accurately simulate motions produced by
humans during breathing. Different lighting conditions, sources, optical layouts
and fields of view, clothing types, subject positions/orientations, and actuator
patterns will be systematically measured in controlled conditions to determine
the effects on the system signal-to-noise ratio. Signal processing algorithms
will be applied to measured data to test the statistical accuracy and to
determine how well rates can be extracted from noisy ambient conditions. The
resulting data will provide a foundation upon which theoretical models of the
sensor performance can be developed. Importantly, it will also reveal important
science about the limitations of information content that can be conveyed
through simple scattering and intensity measurements with modern photodetector
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.