* 2008646
* Collaborative Research:  CNS Core: Small: Extended Reality over Wireless Cellular Networks: Quality-of-Experience Analysis and Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Omid Semiari, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 270,000.00

Extended reality (XR) technologies, encompassing virtual reality, augmented
reality, and mixed reality, will immerse users in virtual worlds with
unprecedented interactivity across multiple domains ranging from gaming to
sports and entertainment. However, to date, XR technologies have mostly relied
on wired connectivity, which restricts their use to small spaces and narrows
their application domains. In contrast, the goal of this research is to unleash
the potential of XR technologies by marrying them with seamless wireless
connectivity. As a result, this research will potentially enable users to use XR
applications on-the-go without being confined to indoor environments and having
to carry cumbersome cable-connected XR equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal
is achieved by developing a holistic framework for enabling XR over wireless
networks by symbiotically integrating rigorous theory with real-world
communication system design considerations. A key component of this framework is
the development of precise quality-of-experience metrics that combine objective
wireless quality-of-service indicators with subjective XR user experience
measures using tools from utility theory. These metrics are then integrated into
novel resource management algorithms that merge concepts from reinforcement
learning and reservoir computing to guarantee seamless XR quality-of-experience
and adapt the network to XR user dynamics. The developed solutions are validated
in realistic environments using a combination of simulations and user
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute towards
accelerating the deployment of wireless XR technologies and applications thus
having tangible societal impacts. A well-crafted educational plan focused on
wireless XR will be developed and will include curriculum development as well as
involvement of students in research and hands-on projects. Broadening
participation outreach events will be organized as part of existing summer camps
and will include seminars and hands-on activities that can expose the community
to wireless XR technologies, in general, and the outcomes of this research, in
particular. Workshops focused on wireless XR will be organized for broad
dissemination. Outcomes of this project will be posted at https://sites.google.c
om/view/nsfcns2008646project/home&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.