* 2008056
* SHF: Small: Inter-Request Workflow and Dataflow in Web Applications: a Modeling Framework and its Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Guoliang Jin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Web applications have become a major platform to deliver various services to the
general public, largely due to the increasing popularity of cloud services for
hosting web applications and handheld devices for accessing web applications.
Poor-quality web applications can lead to significant problems, including user
dissatisfaction and financial losses. A key challenge imposed by web
applications is due to their request-driven nature; they expose services to
users and serve requests with application-defined request-handler methods. Under
this request-driven paradigm, inter-request control and data dependencies exist
although each request is served independently. However, tracking these
dependencies across requests is challenging because of the diversity and
complexity of languages and frameworks for implementing web applications.
Existing techniques targeting web applications lack any inter-request analysis
capability, and they may miss performance-optimization opportunities and
security issues that can only be exposed in the inter-request
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promotes inter-request analysis to
handle the problems just cited. To build a solid foundation for inter-request
analysis, this project designs and develops techniques that can effectively and
efficiently capture and express control and data dependencies across requests.
The proposed techniques combine statistical mining approaches with a hybrid of
static and dynamic analyses. The generated workflow and dataflow models provide
necessary inter-request knowledge for various analyses to extend the scope. With
the inter-request workflow- and dataflow-modeling framework, this project
explores performance optimization and workflow monitoring to improve the quality
of web applications regarding performance, correctness, and security. From the
success of previous research on inter-procedural and inter-thread analyses for
handling the abstraction of procedures and threads, the concept of inter-request
analysis can greatly benefit web applications and other request-driven
applications through both technique development and student
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.