* 2008920
* AF: SMALL: Further Investigation of the Sum of Squares Hierarchy
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Aaron Potechin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The sum of squares hierarchy (SOS) is an algorithmic framework which has the
following nice properties. First, SOS is broadly applicable and surprisingly
powerful, capturing the best-known algorithms for many problems. Second, in some
sense, SOS is simple as all it uses is polynomial equalities and the fact that
squares are non-negative. Thus, understanding the power of SOS gives us insights
into designing new algorithms and insights into which problems cannot be solved
efficiently. In this project, the investigator will further investigate the
power of SOS. As part of this project, the investigator will train and mentor
graduate students in complexity-theory research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To further
investigate the power of SOS, the investigator plans to research questions
including but not limited to the following. (1) Can one lift degree 2 SOS lower
bounds for constraint satisfaction problems to higher degree SOS lower bounds?
This question is related to determining the performance of SOS on the unique
games problem, which is a major open problem. (2) What is the performance of SOS
on robust estimation problems where an adversary has corrupted a small portion
of the input? (3) Graph matrices are a type of matrix that appears when
analyzing SOS. However, graph matrices are not well understood mathematically as
there are only rough norm bounds on graph matrices. Can these norm bounds on
graph matrices be improved? More ambitiously, can one determine the spectrum of
the eigenvalues and/or singular values of graph matrices? (4) Can one remove the
current limitations on techniques for analyzing SOS on planted problems, which
are problems where trying to distinguish a signal from random noise? (5) What is
the performance of SOS for finding the tensor nuclear norm of a tensor? This
question is closely related to the performance of SOS on the tensor
decomposition and tensor completion problems, which are two important problems
in machine learning. Through researching these questions, the investigator aims
to further improve the understanding of SOS, finding new algorithms and/or lower
bounds along the way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.