* 2008838
* AF: Small: Algorithms meet Structural Graph Decomposition
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Daniel Lokshtanov, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 349,865.00

A graph consists of dots, called vertices, representing objects, and lines
between these dots, called edges, representing relationships between the objects
the edge connects. Graphs and graph algorithms have a crucial role in computing,
and by extension in all of science. They are used to model such diverse objects
as people and friendships (social networks such as Facebook or LinkedIn), maps
(Google Maps), connections between neurons in the brain, or the possible
configurations of pieces on a chess-board connected by valid moves of chess
pieces. For this reason graphs are extensively studied, both from structural and
computational viewpoints. The structural approach to graphs often seeks to
explain what a graph has to "look like" when it has certain desirable
properties. The computational viewpoint seeks to design algorithms (efficient
computer programs) that can process a graph to answer questions about it. For
example, what is the shortest path from one place (vertex) to another? Which
person on this social network is the "most influential?", etc. The aim of this
project is a closer connection between the computational and the structural
approaches to graphs. Such a connection already exists - for example many graph
algorithms are based on powerful structural graph decompositions. However, the
usage of structure decompositions in algorithms is most commonly in a black-box
fashion - the algorithms simply exploit the structure provided by the theorems.
Because the structure theorems were not designed with these concrete algorithmic
applications in mind, the obtained algorithms have sub-optimal performance. For
other important algorithmic problems the existing structure theorems seem to
“not quite fit”, leaving efficient algorithms for these problems just out of
reach. In this project the team of researchers will prove new algorithmically-
focused graph-structure theorems, and use the new structure theorems to design
efficient algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has identified
several directions where algorithmically-minded structure theorems have a big
potential for success: graph isomorphism on minor-free graphs, optimization
problems on weighted graphs, and (generalized) cut and separation problems. In
each of these directions the team of researchers will design radically new
algorithms with superior performance guarantees, and take the field far beyond
the state of the art. The project cuts to the heart of several well-known open
problems in theoretical computer science, specifically within the fields of
parameterized algorithms and approximation algorithms. Is there a polynomial
time for graph isomprohism if the input graphs exclude a clique with log log(n)
vertices as a minor? What is the best approximation algorithm for deleting the
fewest possible vertices to get a planar graph? Can approximation schemes for
unweighted problems on planar graphs be lifted to their weighted counterparts?
What is the parameterized complexity of removing k vertices of minimum weight
from a digraph to make it acyclic? This project is to resolve these problems by
designing new and algorithmically efficient graph-decomposition theorems. The
new decomposition theorems will be built on completely new insights, as well
novel combinations of insights from structural graph theory and algorithms. The
combination of graph-theoretic and algorithmic thinking holds a wealth of
untapped potential. Therefore the results of this project will yield substantial
new results both in algorithms and in structural graph theory, and will bring
the two fields closer together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.