* 2008883
* SHF: Small: Probabilistic Programming and Statistical Verification for Safe Autonomy
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sayan Mitra, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Autonomous systems such as drones and self-driving cars are quickly entering
human-dominated fields and becoming tangible technologies that will impact the
human experience. However, as these systems share space and operate among
humans, safety and reliability of autonomous systems become primary concerns. An
important challenge for safety and reliability in autonomous systems is coping
with uncertainty. This project focuses on three important forms of uncertainty:
(1) noisy data from sensors, (2) asynchrony of distributed computation, and (3)
heuristic computation of decision-making software. They bring various challenges
for developing and validating software modules of autonomous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates a design of a language
for distributed autonomous systems and associated program verification
techniques that treat uncertainty as a first-class citizen. The main design goal
of the language is to decouple the representation of the program code from both
the probabilistic models of uncertainty and underlying solvers. For this
language, the project will also develop analysis techniques that are based on
statistical model checking and probabilistic program analysis. The project aims
to apply the key components of the approach, including language abstractions,
algorithms, and solving mechanisms, to provide end-to-end safety assurance in
real-world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.