* 2008487
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: RUI: Intelligent Developer Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Daniel Barowy, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 209,887.00

Software engineers use development tools to help develop software. The tools may
compile computer code into runnable programs, debug programs to find and fix
errors, and deploy software across systems. Existing tools used for these tasks
are complex. The misuse of tools can introduce errors and inefficiencies. For
example, a popular tool for compiling code, called "make", automates compilation
with a user-provided encoding of the task. Users of "make" must produce either a
simple but inefficient encoding, or an efficient but complex encoding with an
increased risk of error. This project introduces techniques that correctly and
efficiently automate compilation, debugging, and deployment tasks without
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a core technique built
on dependency graphs. A dependency graph is generated by observing a piece of
software interacting with its environment as it runs. This project proposes
three tools that leverage dependency graphs to automate software development
tasks. First, Riker correctly and efficiently automates compilation tasks based
on a single example compilation. Second, Scotty answers high-level queries about
where a program went wrong by observing the program's execution. Third, Locutus
automates software deployment tasks by observing the user during an example
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to impact the
day-to-day work of software developers significantly. Automating support tasks
with minimal developer input reduces the cost of software development and
guarantees that support tasks are correct by construction. These changes free
software developers to focus on their core tasks. This project will provide
undergraduate students at Grinnell College and Williams College with
opportunities to participate in research, and will broaden participation by
including students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
products of this project will be hosted at https://github.com/curtsinger-
lab/idi-grant. Code produced in the course of this project will be released
under the MIT license. Modifications to existing software will be released under
a compatible open source license. Any non-code products will comprise only
publicly-available, non-confidential information, and will be released under a
Creative Commons license. All products of this project will be preserved for at
least five years after the conclusion of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.