* 2008710
* CIF: Small: Deep Generative Models for Ultra High-Dimensional Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Jeffrey Andrews, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 165,000.00

Future wireless communications applications like untethered virtual reality,
connected vehicles, and high resolution mobile video content delivery will
demand very high bit rates and reduced energy consumption. To fulfill these
requirements, future wireless systems will use very high carrier frequencies
enabled by deploying massive arrays of very small antennas. Such architectures
are called ultra high dimensional (UHD) communication systems. This is a very
challenging scenario for wireless communication, since the wireless channel is
difficult to learn and the wireless energy must be radiated in a highly
directional manner towards the intended receiver. Existing approaches to these
problems will not scale to the UHD scenario in terms of complexity, power
consumption, or overhead signaling. This exploratory project will address these
challenges emerging in modern wireless communication systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this project is on developing novel
unsupervised learning techniques to handle these emerging challenges. In
particular, this project will enable accurate and efficient channel estimation
techniques, design novel data-driven beamforming schemes, and model the
nonlinearities created by quantization. This project will further help in
enabling power and bandwidth-efficient UHD communication systems, as well as
establishing a new methodology and initializing communication over ultra high
carrier frequencies (e.g., above 100 GHz).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.