* 2008548
* CNS Core: Small: Toward a Dependable Network of Batteryless Intermittent Nodes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Daji Qiao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 531,569.00

This project explores the software and hardware foundations that enable
dependable communications between networks of batteryless sensor nodes powered
solely by ambient energy (energy harvesting). This is particularly challenging
since such batteryless nodes usually have intermittent operation, spending a
large fraction of their time without sufficient power to operate, depending on
the ambient energy conditions. This project will explore two thrusts: (1)
developing approaches to establish initial communications between batteryless
nodes and (2) developing methods to efficiently maintain communications across
periods of no power by developing a shared sense of time between batteryless
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling direct communications between batteryless
sensor nodes allows development of large-scale networks of batteryless
intermittent nodes where two nodes at any location can dependably communicate
with each other as long as the network is connected. Such a network of
batteryless nodes can be deployed across large areas (e.g., fields, factories,
space) and self-sustain without wiring or battery changes to monitor events. The
result enables transformative improvements to applications demanding pervasive,
long-lived, and autonomous intelligent sensing systems, including industrial
automation, infrastructure monitoring, agriculture, environmental sciences,
healthcare, defense, and space exploration. The resulting software and hardware
systems along with collected energy data of this project will be made publicly
available for scientists, engineers, educators, and industry to
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.