* 2008475
* NSF-BSF: RI: Small: Provably High-Quality Robot Inspection Planning - Theory and Application
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ron Alterovitz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2024
* USD 448,492.00

Inspecting the surfaces of objects is a common task required in a variety of
applications, from diagnosing a diseased organ by inspecting its tissue surface
to verifying the safety of a bridge by inspecting its structure. Robots with
mounted sensors have the potential to efficiently and effectively perform such
inspection tasks by automatically moving the sensor to view the region of
interest on the object's surface while avoiding obstacles and satisfying motion
constraints. For example, an endoscopic needle-based robot has the potential to
perform an inspection task inside the human body to help diagnose certain
diseases that manifest on the surfaces of internal organs. As another example,
drones have the potential to be widely used to efficiently inspect the complex
geometry of bridges, which is increasingly important since almost 40% of the
nation's bridges exceed their 50-year design life, and regular inspections are
critical to ensuring bridge safety. In this project, the research team will
investigate the problem of robot inspection planning. Specifically, the team
will develop and analyze new, efficient computational methods to plan motions
for a robot to enable the robot to autonomously maximize the quality of an
inspection while safely avoiding obstacles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to provide a theoretically-grounded efficient and effective
algorithmic framework for robust inspection planning demonstrated on real-world
robotics applications. Specifically, the research team plans to provide a
rigorous explanation to why and when different variants of the inspection-
planning problem are computationally hard. Pinpointing exactly why the
inspection problem is computationally hard will then enable the research team to
develop an efficient algorithmic framework to solve the fundamental version of
the inspection-planning problem, namely, when there is no uncertainty with
respect to the robot's kinematic model, sensor model, or environment model.
Finally, the research team plans to extend the new algorithmic framework to
account for different sources of uncertainty in order to make the results
applicable to real-world problems. This will be done by combining tools from
diverse domains such as computational geometry, graph theory, optimization, and
machine learning. In all stages of the project, the research team will
demonstrate the results using several applications in a laboratory setting,
including the inspection of patient anatomy using needle-based robots and the
inspection of bridges using drones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.