* 2008568
* On the Dynamics of Nonlinear Systems in Applied Sciences: From Theory, Computations, and Experiments to Insights
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Konstantina Trivisa, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 323,970.00

This research investigation focuses on the modeling and mathematical analysis of
nonlinear systems of partial differential equations arising in physical
applications. The analysis involves nonlinear systems for compressible flows,
mixtures, and polymeric fluids, which are relevant to several practical
applications in science and engineering, and kinetic models describing self-
organized dynamics, which are important in biology, physics, and bioengineering.
The project includes training and research opportunities for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of statistically stationary states in
randomly driven systems in fluid dynamics is of basic importance from both
mathematical and experimental points of view. On the one hand, the existence of
an invariant measure provides information on the generic long-time behavior of
the system. On the other hand, under ergodicity assumptions, they provide a link
between experimental observations, for example in turbulence theory. This
project aims to (a) establish well-posedness results for variational solutions
to deterministic systems and (b) analyze weak martingale solutions and invariant
measures for randomly forced systems. The variational framework developed in
this investigation will be employed for the construction of numerical algorithms
for the approximation of nonlinear systems that arise in science and
engineering. One of the goals of the project involves connecting the theoretical
and computational results to experiments, in order to optimize theoretical
models for more accurate predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.