* 2008105
* RUI: Time-dependent Composites and Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,06/30/2024
* ORNELLA MATTEI, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 165,000.00

Composite materials find numerous applications in engineering and manufacturing
for their unique properties that are superior to those of conventional
materials. The search for composites that guarantee higher levels of performance
requires the development of mathematical models able to accurately predict the
behavior of such materials. Particularly interesting are time-dependent
composites: passive materials, such as viscoelastic composites, exhibit a time-
dependent response when subject to static loadings, due to the dissipation of
energy carried out by the viscous component; on the other hand, active
materials, such as space-time composites, in which energy accumulates or
dissipates depending on the change of the applied field, provide entirely new
ways to channel waves. The first goal of the project is to provide accurate
models to predict the static response of passive time-dependent composites and
to describe wave propagation in active composites. The second goal of the
project concerns inverse problems: given the response of an inhomogeneous
medium, not necessarily a composite, the aim is to develop reconstruction
formulas to determine the internal geometry of the medium, a fundamental problem
in geotechnical and medical applications for which one wants to recover the
internal structure of a body. For instance, for a homogeneous elastic body with
a viscoelastic inclusion, the objective is to determine the volume and the shape
of the inclusion by applying suitable loadings and by measuring the
corresponding response at a specific moment of time. San Francisco State
University is a Research Undergraduate Institution; several undergraduate
students will be involved in this research and will be trained through their
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of the project will bring forward
mathematical advancements in several areas with focus on the following research
avenues. (i) Wave equations with time-dependent coefficients: the project aims
at exploring the behavior of solutions of such equations in the presence of
dissipation, dispersion, nonlinearity, and more than one spatial dimension. The
ultimate goal is to address the issue regarding the implementation of space-time
composites to design one-way propagation devices and to engineer filtering
devices and absorbers. (ii) The theory of Herglotz-Nevannlina-Pick functions:
such theory plays a crucial role in the description of the behavior of passive
and causal materials and one of the objective of the project is to broaden its
applications to bound the response of two- and three-dimensional passive time-
dependent composites in time, by using the analyticity of the effective
properties tensor, and to solve inverse problems regarding lossy inhomogeneous
media, by using the analyticity of the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map. (iii) Boundary
integral formulations: one of the objective of the project is to determine the
elastic fields in a two-dimensional unbounded isotropic medium with an elastic
inclusion of arbitrary shape, by applying the single layer potential technique
and by choosing a suitable set of functions for the series expansion of the
elastic fields. The goal is to investigate how to derive reconstruction formulas
for the shape of the inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.