* 2008368
* CNS Core:Small: Edge Platform for Enabling Situation Awareness Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Umakishore Ramachandran, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 519,446.00

The ubiquity of affordable computing devices with rich sensing capabilities
(e.g., smart cameras, Fitbit, Amazon echo dot, and so on) continues to create
increasingly large streams of data collected from the physical world. Situation
awareness applications are emerging that utilize these devices to convert sensed
information into actionable knowledge. In many instances, the data gathered by
these devices far exceeds their computational, storage, and network
capabilities. The low-latency and high-bandwidth requirements of next generation
applications also means they will quickly become constrained by limitations of
the Cloud's centralized design. Edge (or Fog) computing seeks to address this
problem by providing Cloud-like capabilities in geo-distributed micro
datacenters across the edge of the network. However, realizing this goal is not
as easy as it seems due to two challenges. First, micro datacenters are
necessarily limited by physical space, and thus have only a small portion of the
Cloud’s hardware capabilities. Second, at the same time, there is a sharp
increase in demand to process sensed data via machine learning models to achieve
rapid actuation. This proposal addresses both of these challenges by introducing
a novel set of machine learning libraries (modeled as “Machine Learning as a
Service”) to dynamically support different processing requirements across
heterogeneous hardware, coupled with an efficient execution model for enabling a
high degree of multitenancy on limited hardware resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is aimed at providing insight on how
the incoming wave of situation awareness applications may be supported at the
edge. Situations awareness applications often require tradeoffs between speed
and accuracy when making decisions. At the same time, these applications are
continuously evolving, creating a need to dynamically adjust the behavior of a
heterogeneous edge computing infrastructure with respect to this tradeoff. In
this respect neither the machine learning model used nor the hardware allocated
can be static. Micro datacenters at the edge have limited hardware capacity but
must provide a high degree of multitenancy to support multiple client
applications simultaneously. Thus the execution framework at the edge has to be
agile to ensure the most efficient use of limited hardware resources while
maximizing performance and availability to different client applications. This
proposal explores the research issues pertaining to platform services at the
edge (akin to what Cloud computing has done for throughput-oriented
applications) that caters to the needs of situation awareness application
developers. Planned activities involve in situ studies via collaboration with
the Georgia Tech Police Department, which creates the potential for technology
transfer and direct societal benefits beyond technical
accomplishments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.