* 2008279
* NSF-BSF: RI: Small: Resource-Constrained Multi-hypothesis-aware Perception
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Michael Kaess, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 479,081.00

Mobile robots such as self-driving cars, service and household robots, will help
people in their daily lives. They operate outside controlled factory
environments where they need to perceive the world around them using onboard
sensors such as cameras to self-localize, create maps, and perform tasks. Most
current perception systems estimate the most likely state of the world but are
poor at handling ambiguity and can therefore easily fail. In ambiguous
situations, the most likely solution based on the currently available sensor
measurements is selected, even though that might not be the one that corresponds
to reality. Future measurements can disambiguate the situation, but if the
correct solution has previously been discarded, it cannot be recovered, and the
robot will fail in its task. This project focuses on developing novel algorithms
that can deal with ambiguity for example by keeping track of multiple possible
solutions. The key challenge is that the number of possible solutions can grow
rapidly, and efficient solutions are needed that can be implemented with the
restricted computational resources available onboard mobile
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel methods to be investigated in this
research will extend current state-of-the-art robust perception and belief space
planning techniques by approximating the full set of potential hypotheses while
simultaneously decreasing computational demands and providing probabilistic
bounds on performance. Two different approximations will be investigated: (1) by
grouping similar hypotheses into sets that can be approximately evaluated
efficiently as a group and (2) by seeking to find a simplified set of hypotheses
that is probabilistically close to the original unreduced set of hypotheses.
After developing these methods in the passive case, they will be extended to the
active perception situation where inherent tradeoffs will be investigated to
attain online performance during both simulated and real-world experiments in
environments where perceptual aliasing and ambiguity are
prevalent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.