* 2008815
* III: Small: COMPASS: Online Sketch-based Query Optimization for In-Memory Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Florin Rusu, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,870.00

The query optimizer is a core component of database servers, which represent one
of the most successful products of the software industry, adopted massively both
across business enterprises and in scientific projects ranging from astronomy to
genomics. Despite this success and decades of work, query optimization is still
far from solved. The main reasons are the complexity of the problem and the fast
pace of hardware development, which makes query optimization a continuously
moving target. In this project, the researchers investigate how to design
COMPASS, a lightweight, yet effective, query optimizer for modern databases
based on two design principles. The first principle is to capitalize on highly-
parallel computing architectures in query optimization, while the second is to
simplify the type and number of synopses included in the optimizer. The final
goal is to build COMPASS, an open-source query optimizer that can be integrated
into existing and novel database servers. Due to the extensive use of databases
across many domains of modern life, optimal querying can bring benefits to the
entire society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COMPASS is an online query optimizer that
uses sketch synopses exclusively in order to find optimal execution plans.
Sketches are correlated synopses for cardinality estimation that use small
space, can be computed efficiently in a single scan over the data, are linearly
composable, and have statistically high accuracy. COMPASS uses the parallel
execution engine in modern databases to compute sketches at runtime. This is
realized by decomposing query processing into two stages, performed before and
after optimization. In the first execution stage, selection predicates are
pushed-down and sketches are built only over the relevant tuples. Plan
enumeration is performed over the join graph by incrementally composing two-way
join sketches in order to estimate the cardinality of multi-way joins. The plan
is executed in the second processing stage. The holistic COMPASS approach
introduces novel methods in all the components of the query optimizer---
cardinality estimation for selections, two-way, and multi-way joins; plan
enumeration; and cost models. In addition to the algorithmic aspects, these
methods involve heavy engineering practices on highly-parallel architectures.
Specifically, parallel random number generation schemes go well beyond sketches
due to their application to many other data processing tasks. This is also
applicable to graph traversal algorithms. The generalization of sketches to
multi-way join estimation has intellectual value by itself because this is a
theoretical open problem. Since sketches are streaming algorithms at origin, the
contributions made in this project are also directly applicable to this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.