* 2008772
* OAC Core: Small: Architecture and Network-aware Partitioning Algorithms for Scalable PDE Solvers
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Hari Sundar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,317.00

Solving large-scale partial differential equations (PDE) is common in science
and engineering, from studying gravitational waves to designing aerodynamic
cars. Given the scale of these problems, solving such PDEs requires
supercomputing resources. The latest supercomputing architectures are different
from the previous generation of leadership class architectures and and are
characterized by high levels of diversity within and across machines. Such
diversity and heterogeneity makes it extremely difficult to effectively
distribute work, i.e., partition the data or tasks, across disparate computing
resources. Since the primary objective of building leadership class machines is
to further scientific discovery and national prosperity, it is essential that
applications, old and new, are able to scale and utilize these machines to their
full potential. This project develops novel data and task partitioning
algorithms that factor in the architectural characteristics of modern
supercomputers to enable efficient and scalable utilization of current and
future computing architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing data and task
partitioning schemes do not explicitly consider the underlying architectural
topology while partitioning or is done indirectly during the design of the
algorithm and codes. Ignoring topology leads to loss of scalability and
performance, while shifting the burden to algorithm/code design increases the
development costs and complexity, and decreases portability. While data and task
partitioning for parallelization, along with mapping the partitions to
processes, have been studied for a long time, they have not been considered as a
combined problem. To a large extent this was due to the simple structures and
symmetry that existed in cluster computing architectures. Inefficiencies that
did not significantly impact performance and scalability ten years ago are
starting to inhibit scalability and thereby scientific discovery. This project
is a first step in ensuring that scientific discovery is not hampered as a
result of the difficulty in porting codes to new architectures. This project
develops new graph and space-filling-curve-based partitioning algorithms that
are aware of the architectural topology and are able to automatically generate
data/task partitions and mappings to address problems with current schemes. The
algorithms and software developed as part of this proposal will have wide-
ranging impact, by improving the performance and scalability of legacy
applications and reducing the development cost and improving the portability of
new applications, to run efficiently on systems ranging from simple shared
memory architectures to the largest heterogeneous
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.