* 2008321
* CNS Core: Small: Operating Systems Abstractions for Serverless Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Emmett Witchel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,986.00

Serverless functions, or Functions as a Service (FaaS), are a cloud computing
feature whose popularity has been increasing in recent years. This project will
improve serverless functions with a sophisticated runtime system that will allow
users to run code efficiently while keeping serverless functions economically
viable to providers. While keeping the programming model simple, a more
sophisticated runtime will provide features such as efficient caching of
intermediate results and fault tolerance. Meanwhile hardware acceleration (e.g.,
graphical processing units (GPUs)) will be transparently enabled. As a
consequence, serverless functions will be made efficient for new classes of
workloads such as video processing and machine learning
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving efficient execution with a simple
programming model requires a technically sophisticated runtime system.
Organizing the computation as a data flow graph allows the user to provide only
simple data dependencies while the runtime simultaneously schedules local
storage and computational accelerators along with more traditional resources
such as the Central Processing Unit (CPU) cores and memory. Serverless workloads
require high parallelism and short run times to make the platform worthwhile.
However, maintaining high levels of parallelism can be difficult because of
input-dependent processing requirements and GPU acceleration. Load imbalance
arises when the stages specified in a data flow graph have data-dependent
processing requirements. This is common in some machine learning (ML) related
tasks, e.g., face recognition. GPUs may make the problem worse because a data
flow graph that is balanced for CPU execution might become unbalanced when some
stages are executed on a GPU where execution is much
faster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the necessary tools,
techniques, and infrastructure to bring serverless functions to new workloads
with unprecedented levels of performance. This allows the continued exponential
evolution and innovation for systems that rely on machine learning and other
compute-intensive computations. This project will also provide an opportunity
for doctoral students to work as graduate research assistants while gaining
broad exposure to interdisciplinary research that draws from multiple areas of
computer science, including operating systems, virtualization and
GPUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will be made public where
they can be archived. All published material from the project will be
distributed for free from the authors' web site. Research artifacts are likely
to include modified source code and workloads. Research publications will be
available at https://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/witchel/. Source code, workloads,
and other artifacts will be available at https://github.com/ut-
osa/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.