* 2008660
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Automated Quantitative Assessment of Testing Difficulty
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Tevfik Bultan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 359,654.00

Our society is heavily reliant on software systems running on an increasingly
large number of programmable devices that surround us. Moreover, the amount of
software in safety-critical systems such as cars and planes keeps increasing.
Software-quality assurance is one of the most fundamental problems that we are
facing in this modern computing-dominated era. One can read about dependability
and security problems caused by poor-quality software in the news everyday. It
is extremely crucial to develop techniques that can improve the quality of
software systems before they cause disastrous consequences during operation. The
most common software-quality assurance technique is software testing. Although
there has been a surge of progress in automated software-testing techniques, it
is hard to predict their effectiveness. Given a piece of software, there is no
existing technique that can predict how challenging it will be to automatically
test that piece of software. In this project the goal is to develop techniques
for assessing the difficulty of automatically testing
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing software-complexity metrics do not
provide meaningful assessments of testing difficulty. This project's goal is to
develop scalable techniques that can provide a quantitative assessment of
testing difficulty. In order to be scalable and practical, the method has to
rely on a level of abstraction that provides efficient analysis, while
preserving meaningful characteristics of program behavior that relate to testing
difficulty. The approach used in this project builds on two concepts that
provide a promising abstraction for quantitative assessment of testing
difficulty: 1) path complexity, and 2) path selectivity. Path complexity
assesses how the number of paths in a given program increases with increasing
execution depth, and path selectivity assesses the difficulty of finding values
that satisfy a path condition. The team of researchers working on this project
will develop techniques that automatically compute path complexity and path
selectivity and then combine them to obtain a quantitative measure for testing
difficulty. By developing techniques that can assess software-testing
difficulty, this project will enable development of more effective software-
testing techniques based on better resource allocation for software-quality
assurance tasks. This will lead to improvements in software quality, and
reduction in software defects that cause dependability and security problems.
Secondly, the research activity will help to expose graduate and undergraduate
students to software-quality assurance challenges and techniques. Finally, the
research activity will help to disseminate the knowledge, techniques and tools
developed within the scope of this project through publishing in open literature
and making available the software tools that are developed as open
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.