* 2008835
* SHF: SMALL: STITCH: Request-SLO-Aware Orchestration for Large-scale Sensing Services over IoT-Edge-Cloud Hierarchy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Hao Che, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,658.00

As the three-tier IoT-Edge-Cloud hierarchy is evolving into a mature ecosystem
in terms of its social and geographical scale, and sensing, computing, and
storage capabilities, the cloud is expanding its reach to every corner of the
globe. This gives rise to the opportunity of developing a whole new category of
cloud services, known as IoT-based Sensing-as-a-Service (ISaaS). With ISaaS, a
user would be able to ”sense” any part of the world or even the entire world at
his/her fingertip in real time. It is expected that large-scale ISaaS services
involving up to billions of edge and IoT devices for simultaneous sensing will
emerge as a dominant category of cloud services, in terms of resource demand,
and social, economic, and political signiﬁcance. Notable examples, in decreasing
order of time criticality, are earthquake detection and alert,
child/patient/object tracking and identification, nation-/world-wide
fever/symptom mapping for virus breakout detection, environment and utility
monitoring, and crowd sourcing for business analytics. Obviously, to enable such
w¬ide range of ISaaS services with diverse response time requirements,
technically known as service level objectives (SLOs), a common orchestration
platform that can coordinate resource allocation among and provide an SLO
guarantee for such services, encompassing the entire IoT-Edge-Cloud ecosystem,
must be in place. This project aims at developing such a platform, called
requeST-SLO-aware resource orchestration for large-scale sensing services over
IoT-edge-Cloud Hierarchy (STITCH). The approach taken by STITCH promotes
fundamental analysis in guiding the design of robust complex systems and
provides enablers of new cloud services. It will help foster collaboration
between academia and industry in designing eﬀective large-scale computing
systems. The involvement of underrepresented minority and women students, and
students with disability at UTA, a Hispanics Serving Institution, in this
research through existing course oﬀerings and a REU program will help enhance
the competitiveness of the future US workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STITCH is a
two-level distributed resource orchestration platform, i.e., the cloud-to-edge-
cluster level and the edge-cluster-to-edge-and-IoT level. At the core of STITCH
is the development of a novel decomposition technique that can translate a given
request SLO into distributed task performance budgets for all the sensing tasks
of the request. More specifically, in the cloud, the decomposition technique
translates the request SLO for a given ISaaS service into edge-cluster-level
task response-time budgets for the sensing tasks of the request to be dispatched
to different edge clusters. In turn, at the edge cluster level, the
decomposition technique translates the edge-cluster-level task response-time
budgets for each task into task queuing deadlines at individual edge and IoT
devices the task is further dispatched to. This solution makes it possible for
STITCH to schedule the sensing tasks for sensing in a fully distributed manner,
so that it can scale up to billions of edge and IoT devices, while providing
request SLO guarantee. The proposed research addresses key challenges to enable
ISaaS services at scale. First, unlike the existing ISaaS orchestration
platforms that are mostly resource centric, STITCH is a holistic, user-centric
solution that provides SLO guarantee for individual user request of any ISaaS
service. Second, unlike the existing solutions where request/job scheduling in
the cloud is directly concerned with the edge-and-IoT resource allocation, in
STITCH, request scheduling in the cloud is purely driven by the high-level user
requirements, leaving the task resource allocation to be handled by the
individual edge clusters. This separation of concerns makes the STITCH highly
scalable and the autonomous control at the edge possible. Finally, the approach
taken is foundational, applying fundamental principles and mathematical
reasoning to address challenges of practical
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.