* 2008935
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Cooperation and Competition in Payment Channel Networks: Routing, Pricing, and Network Formation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Dejun Yang, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 252,000.00

The scalability of blockchain-based cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and
Ethereum hinders their wide adoption. This is due to the massive resource
consumption required by their underlying consensus mechanisms for guaranteeing
the unique and synchronized global state. To address this scalability issue,
Payment Channel Networks (PCNs) have been proposed to enable instant and
inexpensive payments without requiring expensive and slow blockchain
transactions. However, the concept of PCN is still at its nascent stage, and its
fundamental understanding is still lacking. The goal of this project is to
conduct a comprehensive study of PCNs from optimization, game theoretic, and
economic perspectives, by providing an advanced suite of algorithms, theories,
and mechanisms for routing, pricing, and network formation in PCNs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project with investigators from
Colorado School of Mines and Arizona State University is expected to lay the
algorithmic, theoretical, and economic foundation in PCNs by studying routing,
pricing, and network formation problems from optimization, game theoretic, and
economic perspectives. By weaving together techniques from optimization, game
theory, and microeconomics, this project will yield several advances: 1)
Insightful understanding about PCNs; 2) Realistic models of PCNs considering
both balance constraints and expiry constraints; 3) Advanced algorithms for
routing a payment in PCNs subject to path-dependent constraints; 4) Rigorous
analytical models of balance allocation when multiple payment paths compete for
the available balance; 5) Scientific theories about the impact of the
participants' strategic behavior on the routing in PCNs and the formation of
PCNs; 6) New economic approaches that provide guidelines on how to influence the
participants in PCNs to make off-chain payments successful at the minimum
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to have significant impacts
in many sectors: 1) Research community: giving rise to new frontiers in PCN
research area and break new ground in the understanding PCNs; 2) Economy:
expediting the adoption of blockchain-based cryptocurrencies and thus increase
the economic competitiveness of the US; 3) Environment: reducing the energy
consumption and carbon footprint caused by blockchain technology by encouraging
more off-chain transactions; 4) Education: integrating this research into
education through curriculum development, student development, K-12 outreach
activities, and dissemination of research results; and 5) Society: raising
awareness and interests in the blockchain and PCNs through disseminating the
research results, partnerships with local companies, community meetups, and
public talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this project, including source
codes and dataset, will be maintained at the project website
(https://people.mines.edu/djyang/research/project-pcn/) for at least five years,
and will be made available to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.