* 2008228
* CHS: Small: DeepCrowd: A Crowd-assisted Deep Learning-based Disaster Scene Assessment System with Active Human-AI Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2021
* Dong Wang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 499,786.00

Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) have transformed many important
domains of modern life such as transportation, finance, education, healthcare,
and entertainment. This project addresses application of AI to disaster scene
assessment (DSA). For DSA, artificial intelligence can be used to automatically
identify damage severity of impacted areas from imagery reports in the aftermath
of a disaster such as earthquake, hurricane, or landslides. A key limitation of
AI based techniques is the black-box nature of many contemporary models and the
consequent lack of interpretability of the results and failures. This project
investigates the problem of troubleshooting, tuning, and eventually improving
the black-box AI algorithms by integrating human intelligence with machine
intelligence through active crowd-AI interactions. The work complements the
prevailing AI solutions that primarily focus on AI model design and training
sample collection. The results from this project will open up unprecedented
opportunities of fully exploring the wisdom from the crowd in various crowd-
assisted AI application domains. This project will also provide opportunities
for students in STEM and from underrepresented groups to study the interaction
between AI and humans.

This project develops a DeepCrowd framework that can be used to guide the
design, development, and implementation of future crowd-AI applications where
the human intelligence obtained from the crowd is tightly integrated with AI
deep learning models to significantly improve the system performance over the
AI-only or human-only solutions. The project addresses the black-box challenges
of AI and the crowdsourcing platform in DeepCrowd using an interdisciplinary
approach inspired by techniques from AI, machine learning, estimation theory,
and cyber-human interactions. In particular, the research includes i) developing
a crowd task generation scheme to effectively query the crowdsourcing platform
for feedback; ii) creating a novel adaptive mechanism to incentivize the crowd
for timely and accurate response; iii) designing an interactive attention neural
network scheme that enables direct interaction between crowd and AI models; and
iv) developing a crowd and AI integration engine that effectively incorporates
feedback from crowd to alleviate failure scenarios of AI. The resulting
DeepCrowd framework is transformative in that it will produce a set of new
crowd-AI interaction models and techniques to build novel crowd-assisted AI
applications with boosted system performance.

This project develops a DeepCrowd framework that can be used to guide the
design, development, and implementation of future crowd-AI applications where
the human intelligence obtained from the crowd is tightly integrated with AI
deep learning models to significantly improve the system performance over the
AI-only or human-only solutions. The project addresses the black-box challenges
of AI and the crowdsourcing platform in DeepCrowd using an interdisciplinary
approach inspired by techniques from AI, machine learning, estimation theory,
and cyber-human interactions. In particular, the research includes i) developing
a crowd task generation scheme to effectively query the crowdsourcing platform
for feedback; ii) creating a novel adaptive mechanism to incentivize the crowd
for timely and accurate response; iii) designing an interactive attention neural
network scheme that enables direct interaction between crowd and AI models; and
iv) developing a crowd and AI integration engine that effectively incorporates
feedback from crowd to alleviate failure scenarios of AI. The resulting
DeepCrowd framework is transformative in that it will produce a set of new
crowd-AI interaction models and techniques to build novel crowd-assisted AI
applications with boosted system performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.