* 2008824
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Beyond-5G  Extreme Mobility: Issues and Solutions
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Lili Qiu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The current 4G/5G cannot ensure satisfactory reliability and performance for
many emerging usage scenarios, such as vehicle-to-everything, high-speed rails,
low earth orbit satellites, and drones. This project proposes a forward-looking
solution suite for beyond-5G extreme mobility. It eliminates the 4G/5G
limitations for extreme mobility by enabling predictive wireless design and
simplified yet more efficient wide-area mobility support. If successful, this
work will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in wireless networks. To
maximize the impact, the researchers will collaborate with industry and release
software to the public. The research outcome will also be incorporated into the
graduate and undergraduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes a forward-looking, transformative solution suite to beyond-5G extreme
mobility. It first unveils 5G's deficiencies in extreme mobility under various
scenarios and studies the client and infrastructure's proper roles in supporting
them. It then develops novel approaches to accurately predict wireless channel
by extracting delay-Doppler of the multipath and exploiting their temporal
locality. In this way, it eliminates slow channel feedback in high-speed
mobility and adapts to the fast-varying channel in extreme mobility. It further
uses the predicted channel to enable predictive rate adaptation, resource
allocation, and MIMO optimization under high mobility. Finally, it designs
latency-friendly and interpretable distributed machine learning (ML) to help
clients analyze the latency bottlenecks, and perform cross-layer latency
optimizations. The proposed research will be evaluated using a software-defined
radio prototype and large-scale emulation driven by operational 4G/5G
traces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.