* 2008102
* RI: Small: Reliable Machine Learning in Hyperbolic Spaces
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Christopher De Sa, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Many artificial intelligence (AI) methods reason about things in the world by
assigning each thing to a point in space and processing them using geometry. The
way such an AI reasons about words is analogous to writing down many words on a
piece of paper, such that words with similar or related meanings are located
close to each other on the page: this map is called an "embedding." Often, AI
perform better when they map things onto a curved surface (such as the surface
of a sphere), rather than a flat one. A human might find this hard because of
the need to write a large number of words into a small space on the paper; an
analogous problem with the way points are represented on computers presently
limits the performance of AI that use certain curved embeddings. This project
will build tools to alleviate this problem, letting practitioners use curved
embeddings without having to worry about how their points are represented as
bits on a computer. This will promote the progress of AI science by making this
powerful class of AI techniques more accessible to humans and improving the
accuracy of AI on fundamental tasks such as processing natural language and
learning from social networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on
"hyperbolic space," which is a homogeneous geometry with constant negative
curvature. Hyperbolic embeddings can significantly improve the performance of
many AI applications, but the same properties that make it attractive for
learning also create serious numerical reliability problems for existing machine
learning frameworks, which were designed with Euclidean geometry in mind. This
project will fix this by building a new model of hyperbolic space that provably
avoids the numerical issues of existing approaches while still leveraging the
hardware acceleration capabilities of GPUs for learning algorithms.
Accomplishing this would improve the performance of learning in hyperbolic
spaces and enable more people to train AIs using non-Euclidean
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.