* 2008686
* RI: Small: Robust Autonomy for Uncertain Systems using Randomized Trees
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2024
* USD 480,508.00

In recent years, a true revolution is taking place, in the way intelligent
machines and robots operate in new, previously unseen, environments and interact
with human operators. While in the past robots were primarily found in
industrial settings, nowadays autonomous and semi-autonomous robots and systems
can be found almost everywhere. This new generation of intelligent autonomous
systems will interact even more closely with humans and will help them in their
daily lives whether this is work, leisure, and by taking care of many mundane
domestic tasks. But world is a messy place. There is a huge difference between a
robot operating inside an enclosed “cage” on a factory floor that repeats the
same task over and over again, and a robot that needs to navigate in an office
environment, in a hospital, or on the highway, where uncertainty and
unpredictability dominate. This project will develop new algorithms that run
inside the “brain” of these autonomous systems to enable them achieve optimal
decision-making, thus increasing their reliability, predictability, performance,
and fail-safe operation in the presence of uncertainty and under limited
information. Self-driving vehicles, anthropomorphic robots, aerial drones,
manufacturing automation systems, and precision surgical instruments among
others, will all benefit from the results of this research. Although motivated
by robot navigation problems, this project addresses a more fundamental problem
in artificial intelligence and thus has a much broader applicability. All
applications where a “minimum-energy” path is to be found, e.g., crack
propagation in structures, protein folding, data retrieval in high-dimensional
spaces, etc., will benefit from the results of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage techniques from
randomized graph representations and methodologies from stochastic optimal
control theory, and will combine the two in novel ways, in order to mitigate
uncertainty and unpredictability during planning and decision-making for high-
dimensional autonomous robotic systems. The specific research activities to be
undertaken in this project are: First, randomized graphs will be used to obtain
efficient abstractions of the environment by avoiding non-scalable grid-based
techniques, along with the application of new uncertainty propagation techniques
developed by the investigator to solve efficiently planning problems in high-
dimensional spaces. Second, optimal feedback strategies for stochastic systems
will be developed by utilizing the recent theory of forward/backward stochastic
differential equations, along with the incorporation of hierarchical and
randomized approaches to better explore the search space. Finally, this project
will take advantage of recent advances from Machine Learning (ML) and the use of
prior experience gained during previous similar instances of the problem to
expedite optimal search during runtime. The experimental validation of the
theory will take place in the investigator’s lab and will involve both graduate
and undergraduate students. The results of this research will be disseminated to
the community by journal and conference publications and by securing summer
internship opportunities for the students to transition the results of their
work to real-life engineering problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.