* 2008450
* CHS: Small: Computer-supported Collective Deliberation for the Future of Work
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Elizabeth Gerber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,891.00

This research project will develop and test theoretical design principles for
deliberation platforms and working software to support large-group deliberation.
A new genre of socio-technical system that helps workplace teams deliberate on
open-ended problems, digital assemblies, can increase the quality of decisions
and consensus in multi-stakeholder decision making. Traditionally, many of the
most important decisions about local government policy, or organization
strategy, or interdisciplinary research projects are made by single individuals
such as a CEO, mayor, or principal investigator. But taking into account the
perspectives of multiple stakeholders can produce better decisions and greater
compliance needed to implement decisions. In the last few decades, research on
deliberation has produced rigorous models such as deliberative polls that
involve large numbers of people making policy decisions, however, these
techniques are slow and expensive, making these models too costly for most real-
world workplaces. Deliberation can become more feasible through recent advances
in technologies supporting online communities, crowdsourcing, and social media.
To do so, technologies must overcome the challenges inherent in large group
discussion such as motivating participation, capturing and combining ideas,
decision making and information seeking&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance
broadening participation, this research will partner with an organizational
change management team working with multiple stakeholders to improve the
university experience for first-generation college students and with a local
city government to gain the perspective of multiple stakeholders across a
diverse city to achieve its 2050 environmental sustainability goals. Among the
primary methods it will develop are: (1) ranked-choice voting to dynamically
form groups based on participant interests, (2) deliberation canvases for
capturing and combining ideas that advance beyond the limitations of traditional
opinion polls, and (3) issue-tracking to support iteration between decision-
making discussion and information seeking. A new model will provide a better
understanding of how large groups can use computing technology to better develop
solutions and build commitment necessary for multi-stakeholder decision making
in the future of work. In answering this question, the model opens the black box
and the fundamental role of coordination and learning mechanisms in this
process, contributing to the fields of social computing, learning sciences, and
political science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.