* 2008092
* CNS Core: Small: Application-Oriented Scheduling for Optimizing Information Freshness in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yu Cheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 420,508.00

The significant advancement in wireless networking technologies as well as the
proliferation of mobile devices have enabled information-centric Internet of
Things (IoT) systems, where timely information updating is normally required or
preferred by users. Age of Information (AoI) has recently been introduced to
quantify the freshness of the knowledge the controller has about the remote
information sources. While AoI is information-centric, in the present state of
the art, the evaluation of information freshness has been conducted mainly in a
transmission-centric manner. This project aims to bridge the gap between
transmission-level information freshness and application-level decision making
by revealing involved fundamental research issues, developing generic modeling
tools, and generating effective network protocols in some important practical
scenarios. This proposed research integrates theoretical studies in the areas of
wireless networking, optimization theory, control theory, information theory,
and machine learning. Such an interdisciplinary project will not only provide
various training projects to undergraduate and graduate students, but also
inspire students to pursue high-quality research with a creative and open-minded
perspective. Information freshness based wireless scheduling algorithms are of
critical importance to next generation wireless networks and mobile
applications, with a good potential to be transformed into practical
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is expected to contribute
to innovative information freshness optimization techniques with some
fundamental intellectual merits. This study is to show that optimizing
information freshness from an application-oriented angle (that is, incorporating
user query patterns, correlations across different information sources, or
cooperative decision-making among distributed agents) requires brand-new
modeling/analysis techniques. Effective decomposition techniques and low-
complexity algorithms for information freshness optimization are to be developed
through predicting user query patterns and incorporating delay-tolerant
responses at the application level. When multiple correlated information sources
present, a fundamental obstacle to information freshness optimization is the
lack of a well-defined application-level freshness metric; this issue will be
tackled. Moreover, it is to be demonstrated that the intricacies raised by the
correlations can be addressed efficiently through integrating domain knowledge
and deep reinforcement learning techniques. With recent studies confirming the
inadequacy of CSMA-based scheduling in terms of freshness optimization, a
decentralized TDMA-based medium access control (MAC) protocol is to be developed
and mathematically analyzed. Such a new MAC protocol is expected to provision
quantitative information freshness guarantee in the scenario of multi-agent
decision making; the outcome in this part hopefully can contribute an important
component for freshness-oriented network design in the system
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.