* 2008878
* CNS Core: Small: FLINT: Robust Federated Learning for Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 515,993.00

Federated learning enables machine learning on distributed datasets without
needing the learner to access directly the datasets owned by respective
stakeholders. The Internet of Things (IoT) provides a fertile ground for
applying federated learning, where distributed IoT devices produce a plethora of
data that are often private. However, IoT devices are vulnerable to environments
with inaccurate data samples and malicious attacks, which is a significant
challenge for federated learning. Agglomerating data in a federated and robust
manner may produce benefits to the economy and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of the Robust Federated Learning for
Internet of Things (FLINT) project include: (1) Formulate federated learning
(FL) in heterogeneous, dynamic IoT environments with unreliable and adversarial
clients. (2) Design new FL algorithms that are robust against hostile conditions
with benign, unreliable, and malicious clients injecting erroneous or poisonous
data. (3) Design novel incentive mechanisms to ensure rational clients gain non-
negative utility by contributing training data and resources. (4) Analyze
complexity, performance, and theoretical bounds of proposed algorithms. (5)
Build an IoT testbed to study the learning performance of robust FL solutions.
(6) Simulation experiments on real-world datasets to evaluate performance
scalability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FLINT project will offer graduate and
undergrad students a unique opportunity to gain interdisciplinary education in
the design of robust FL algorithms for IoT. Research findings will enrich
courses on cyber-physical systems and machine learning for IoT. The project will
attract women and underrepresented minority students, and attract primary and
secondary school students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. Dissemination of research results will be by means of the
project website, seminars and keynote talks, conference presentations, and
publications in top-tier journals and conference
proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FLINT project website
(https://tluocs.github.io/FLINT/) will maintain computational codes, models,
real world and experimental data for two years after the project period is over.
The website will provide two levels of access – Public and Login required – and
an account can be created via registration with no charge. An accompanying
GitHub repository will make the developed codes and simulation models available
to the community. Permission will be granted to use and distribute freely the
data and code with due acknowledgement of the copyright notice and the
authors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.