* 2008957
* SHF: Small: Scalable Formal Verification of ANN controlled Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Scott DeLoach, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) are increasingly being employed to monitor and
control Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), as in autonomous ground and aerial
vehicles. With increasing complexity and safety criticality of these systems,
formal-verification techniques that provide rigorous guarantees are urgently
needed. The broad goal of the research is to develop novel algorithms and
software tools for formal verification of ANN-controlled CPS (ANN-CPS). One of
the main challenges of existing techniques is their scalability to large number
of neurons and complex physical dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the novel
concept of Interval Neural Networks, coupled with ideas from formal methods such
as counter-example guided abstraction refinement and approximate bisimulation,
the project investigates scalable formal verification techniques for ANN-CPS.
The results of the project will enable rigorous analysis of complex ANN-CPS
possible, thereby enhancing their reliability in applications such as autonomous
driving. Further, the PI is engaged in course development, mentorship of
undergraduate and graduate students, and outreach activities for K-12 students,
with the broader aim of motivating and building the workforce for formal
analysis of cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.