* 2008049
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Scalable, Flexible, and Dependable Architecture Design for Heterogeneous Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Linke Guo, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The proliferation of widely deployed Internet of Things (IoT) has changed the
way people access information, transforming every aspect of their daily life.
Given different data transmission and service requirements, various different
wireless protocols have been developed and applied to IoT. This device
heterogeneity issue has become the major stumbling block to the scalability,
flexibility, and dependability of real IoT systems, such as industrial IoT,
smart manufacturing, and connected healthcare. This project is developing a
novel network-layer design in a hierarchical architecture for current IoT
systems, where an intermediate layer will be introduced to help collect data
from heterogeneous IoT devices. In particular, the first research thrust will
focus on network stability for large-scale data collection by leveraging mobile
multi-protocol gateways (M-MGs) as the intermediate layer to support dynamic
data traffic patterns. In face of the limited spectrum resource on coexisting
wireless protocols, the second research thrust will design adaptive and
hierarchical resource management schemes to better utilize available M-MGs for
data collection. Various types of uncoordinated protocols coexist in the same
wireless environment, which inevitably raises serious concerns on the security
of each communication link. The third research thrust will investigate secrecy
capacity enhancement approaches to prevent wireless attacks from compromising
the system dependability. The research activities are being thoroughly evaluated
via a combination of simulation, experiments, prototyping, and implementation in
practical IoT systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project will
serve as a key enabler to the network-level design of future heterogeneous IoT
systems. The proposed novel architecture can better handle the coexistence issue
in large-scale IoT systems, providing strong stability to the network
performance. By leveraging the inexpensive M-MGs or even smartphones, existing
IoT infrastructures do not need to have a complete retrofitting, which greatly
reduces the renovation costs and extends their application scenarios. The
developed theoretical analysis on the secrecy capacity of IoT will enhance the
existing knowledge to provide high-security standards in addition to existing
cryptographic approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.