* 2008422
* AF: Small: Combinatorial Optimization Problems in Vertex Centric Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Hsin-Hao Su, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 449,998.00

Vertex-centric models, such as the LOCAL model and the CONGEST model, are
prominent distributed models that capture how devices coordinate computation
without access to global information. Such models encapsulate the computation
arising in various distributed scenarios, including sensor networks, robotics,
wireless networks, and networks of biological agents. Combinatorial optimization
is a study of finding an arrangement of objects that optimizes certain
objectives. While many combinatorial-optimization problems can be solved
efficiently in the traditional centralized setting, progress on distributed
vertex-centric algorithms is largely falling behind. This project aims to
develop new algorithms for several fundamental combinatorial-optimization
problems in vertex-centric models. Developments in efficient vertex-centric
algorithms will facilitate the shifting of computing paradigms into highly
distributed systems. They will also enhance the technologies for autonomous
systems such as swarm robotics, self-driving cars, and unmanned aerial vehicles.
Moreover, algorithms developed in the models can be directly transformed into
algorithms for processing massive graphs in modern architectures using existing
frameworks such as Apache GraphX. To promote the vertex-centric models, the
project includes the development of a new course at Boston College that
integrates the theoretical and practical aspects of the models.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on the following three basic combinatorial-
optimization problems: (i) matching, which is to match up the entities so that
the total utility is maximized or minimized; (ii) routing, which is to route
multiple messages simultaneously from their sources to their destinations while
minimizing congestion and the delay; (iii) clustering, which is to partition the
nodes as consistently as possible with the correlation among the nodes. The
goals of the project are to develop new vertex-centric algorithms that compute
the answers as fast as possible while keeping the answers as close to the
optimal as possible. Achieving such goals involves establishing new tools and
techniques, which would lead to a deeper understanding of how to solve a wider
range of combinatorial optimization problems in the vertex centric models. Also,
as the techniques developed in the vertex-centric models usually require the
development of lightweight processes and exploitation of parallelism, they can
often be applied to other computational models such as streaming models, dynamic
graph models, local computation models, and massively parallel computation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.