* 2008768
* AF: Small: Algorithmic Foundation and Framework for Subdivision Methods in Motion Planning and Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Chee Yap, New York University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2024
* USD 498,996.00

This project addresses the fundamental problem of motion planning in robotics
and related problems in Computational Geometry. There are three general
approaches to robot motion planning: exact, sampling and subdivision. Exact
Methods give the strongest guarantees of reliability, but exact algorithms are
often unavailable or hard to implement. Roboticists today favor Sampling
Methods, but these methods have difficulty in finding paths in narrow passages
or in halting when there is no path. Subdivision Methods can overcome this
halting problem, and can be as practical and efficient as Sampling Methods.
However, Subdivision Methods today lack a clear foundation and non-trivial
complexity analysis. This project develops a novel theory of Subdivision Methods
in motion planning to provide both. The theory paves the way for a new class of
efficient, practical and flexible path planners. These algorithms are validated
by implementations and empirical comparisons with state-of-the-art path
planners. Taking a leaf from the highly successful Probabilistic Roadmap (PRM)
framework of the Sampling Methods, the researchers of this project formulate a
similar framework called Soft Subdivision Search (SSS) for their new algorithms.
The framework has several plug-and-play modules such as a search strategy and
two primitives to split and classify subdivision boxes. The framework allows
experimentation with a wide variety of algorithms, and is implemented in the
research team's open source Core Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new theory
of Subdivision Methods is based upon the twin foundations of resolution-
exactness and soft predicates. Resolution-exactness is a principled response to
the halting problem, and matches the needs of robotic systems with inherent
uncertainties. Soft predicates are easy to implement correctly using interval
methods and numerical approximation, and avoid the difficulties of exact
algorithms. The complexity analysis of (adaptive) subdivision algorithms is a
current challenge, which the research team addresses using the technique called
continuous amortization. The theory extends and applies to many problems in
Computational Geometry. It provides solutions where exact algorithms are
currently non-existent (e.g., Voronoi-diagram construction of polyhedral
objects) or impractical (e.g., Minkowski sum of polyhedra). Another significant
direction is to introduce the subdivision framework in the external memory (or
out-of-core) setting to reduce the I/O bottleneck when the input data is too
large to fit in main memory. Such algorithms are critical in many big data
applications. Overall, this project has the following potential impact.
Practical and reliable planning algorithms will speed up the deployment of robot
technology. Resolution-exactness provides the necessary safety factor as robots
are employed in human environments and used in mission-critical applications
like surgery. The ideas of soft primitives have broad implications for
Computational Geometry. They allow computational geometers to attack continuous
problems in Computational Science and Engineering (CS&amp;E) where exact methods
either do not exist or are unknown. The out-of-core extension enables these
algorithms to cover the entire spectrum of the input
sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.