* 2008286
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Small: Efficient and Policy-driven Burst Buffer Sharing
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Daniel Katz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 206,778.00

Modern scientific research heavily relies on supercomputers. Supercomputing
applications, such as traditional numerical simulations (HPC), data intensive
applications (Big Data), and most recently, deep learning (DL) applications, are
increasingly run on supercomputers to obtain timely results and explore new
research methods that combine multiple application types. However, a bottleneck
in their design reduces the potential performance of modern supercomputers. This
project, bbThemis, addresses this problem by enabling efficient and policy-
driven sharing of an intermediate storage layer known as a "burst buffer", so
that more scientists and applications can leverage state-of-the-art storage
techniques to significantly reduce their runtime and enhance the productivity of
their research. This project will deliver substantial gains to almost every
research area that uses HPC resources, leading to improved science and
engineering methods and products in all fields. This research will have an
immediate and significant impact on existing scientific applications and on
deriving guidelines for next-generation HPC system design, deployment, and
utilization. The project will also contribute to educational outcomes. In
addition to students working directly on project goals, results developed in the
project will be used in tutorial and training sessions at Texas Advanced
Computing Center’s summer institute in deep learning and other major
conferences, and in University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign student projects.
The project is aligned with the National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI)
to advance US leadership in HPC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, bbThemis
(https://github.com/bbThemis), leverages a suite of technologies, such as
disassociation of I/O processing from control logic, time-sliced intra I/O node
sharing, function interception for low overhead POSIX I/O, and metadata and data
placement for optimal individual application performance. It is investigating
how to best apply these technologies, by: 1) Identifying optimal burst buffer
configurations for a suite of representative supercomputing applications; 2)
Proposing, prototyping, and verifying different design options to address intra-
node and inter-node I/O performance sharing; and 3) Designing and evaluating a
set of sharing policies, such as fair sharing and priority sharing, with real
applications and I/O traces. This project will dramatically increase the sharing
capacity of existing burst buffers and enhance domain scientists’ productivity
at a large scale. It explores various sharing policies that permit efficient
sharing of I/O resources and that meet the requirements of computing centers.
The results will enable the provisioning of I/O resources, where users can
request specific IOPS or bandwidth for a period of time. The prototype burst
buffer sharing framework will immediately increase the capacity of existing
supercomputers with enhanced I/O performance. The lessons learned will guide
next-generation I/O system design for large scale systems. The general
improvement of HPC, Big Data, and DL applications will also increase the
coherence of the hardware and software used for data analytics computing and
modeling and simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.