* 2008761
* RI: Small: Modeling Co-Decisions: A Computational Framework Using Language and Metadata
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Philip Resnik, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2023
* USD 430,970.00

In many settings, entire groups are presented with a decision -- for example, a
set of legislators can be presented with a bill to vote on, a set of scientific
authors can decide whether or not to cite a piece of research in their papers,
or a set of social media users might decide whether or not to share a piece of
online content. It is very standard to look independently at choices made by
individuals, but a more complete scientific understanding of decision-making can
be obtained by looking at the decision process in terms of whether individuals
will make the same decision or not, taking into account what the individual
deciders do and do not have in common. This project is looking at that question
by developing new computational methods to help better understand what goes into
the decisions people make.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project begins with
computational models of co-voting in political contexts, moving from ''how does
an individual vote, and why?'' to ''do these individuals vote the same way, and
why?''. It generalizes and extends such models, going beyond established factors
such as party and state, by enabling incorporation of unstructured language from
bills to characterize the issues under consideration and to incorporate analysis
and comparison of individuals' language. The extended framework will be
validated by demonstrating improved predictive performance on datasets derived
from proceedings of the U.S. Congress, making possible direct evaluation against
prior work and enabling new substantive analyses of political rhetoric and
decision making. In the process, the project also develops richer analysis of
individuals' language using techniques that identify interpretable, task-
relevant language and by incorporating recently developed methods for
incorporating covariates into topic analysis. These advances will be validated
by incorporating them within the extended co-voting framework, and will also
contribute to the investigation of substantive questions about Congressional
decision-making. Finally, the project will address more general use cases by
applying the approach beyond the political domain, moving from modeling of co-
voting to modeling co-decisions, where a decision is a generalized vote. The
generalized model will be validated via application to the problem of scientific
citation recommendation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.