* 2008408
* CHS: SMALL: Collaborative Research:  Adaptive Development Environments: Modeling and Supporting Cognitive Styles of Software Developers
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Austin Henley, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,928.00

This research will investigate mechanisms to seamlessly support the different
cognitive styles and information needs of software developers, such that
development environments can model the developers' behavior and adapt to their
individual needs. Software development is a notoriously complex endeavor that
requires developers to use an environment where information is fragmented across
different tools and repositories. Although integrated development environments
may help, they are often inadequate in supporting developers' information needs.
Major barriers are caused by development environments not adapting to the
developers' cognitive styles and information needs. This project will advance
the knowledge of software developers' behavior and transform software
development tools to be more efficient and more inclusive to a wider population
of software developers. It also addresses a fundamental issue concerning broader
participation, that of individual differences in problem solving. Models and
tools that accommodate these individual differences may help level the playing
field.

The methodology involves four stages: (1) conduct empirical studies to
understand developers' information needs and cognitive styles, (2) build
predictive models of developer behavior based on their cognitive styles, (3)
create development environments that adapt to support developers' cognitive
styles, and (4) evaluate the effectiveness of the predictive models and the
adaptive environments. This work will generate a deep understanding of the
impact of cognitive styles on how developers learn and make sense of the
development history to place their work in the context of past and ongoing
changes. It is novel in providing an integrated perspective on the broader set
of history explorations in which programmers engage when they are programming as
well as in leading to empirically validated predictive models that not only
model how development activities are influenced by differences in cognitive
styles, but also by the development task at hand. Key goals include the design
and evaluation of a novel environment that not only allows developers to
seamlessly explore different aspects of the development histories, but also
adapts to support the individual needs of a developer. Extensive curated
versions of the collected data will be developed and shared with the scientific
community to promote additional research into the topic.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.