* 2008971
* NSF-BSF: CNS Core: Small: Machine Learning for Real-Time Network Rate Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Philip Brighten Godfrey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Any time an application uses the Internet, behind the scenes, rate control
algorithms decide how quickly to transmit data. These algorithms have a critical
task; sending too slowly causes delay or reduced video quality, and sending too
quickly causes congestion that impacts both the sender and other users. Rate
control is a persistent challenge in networking, as it has to deal with a wide
range of dynamic environments while making millisecond-level decisions with
limited information. This project is developing new approaches to rate control
based on an area of machine learning known as reinforcement learning, leading to
potential improvements in performance and functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
a high level, the project seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of the
use of reinforcement learning for rate control, and apply that understanding to
the areas of adaptive bitrate (ABR) video as commonly used in modern web-based
video, and to transport layer congestion control, such as the Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP). The work will begin with algorithmic foundations by
exploring what level of complexity of learning algorithm (ranging from bandit
algorithms to deep neural networks) is necessary to achieve high performance.
Next, the project will broaden the semantics of inputs and outputs of rate
control, including a scavenger rate control protocol and an improved multipath
TCP. Finally, the project will use novel automated methods to improve the
robustness of rate control protocols in unexpected
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project can offer
significant performance improvement for deployed protocols, which is of
increasing need as modern and emerging applications have ever more demanding
network requirements. For example, low latency communication and high quality
real-time video are valuable for interactive conferencing, augmented and virtual
reality, Internet of Things, edge computing, and more. The project also plans to
provide research opportunities for underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project, including papers and
open-source code, will be available at http://pccproject.net and at the code
repository, https://github.com/PCCproject&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.