* 2008904
* RI: Small: Learning Resilient Autonomous Flight Behaviors by Exploiting Collision-tolerance
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kostas Alexis, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2024
* USD 389,634.00

This project investigates the potential of a new class of aerial robots that
exploit collision-tolerance to mitigate risks and challenges during autonomous
flight. Modern autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles strive to avoid any possible
collision with the environment, a goal which is often hard to achieve and even
harder to guarantee. Looking at the animal kingdom, one can observe an
alternative paradigm. Small flying insects for example often come in collision
with the environment but this does not hinder them from continuing with their
lives and tasks. They survive a collision with little to no problem. Inspired by
this fact, this project aims to understand the interplay between collision-
tolerance and autonomy for agile navigation. Redefining what constitutes “safe
navigation” for a small aerial robot, a new class of resilient micro flyers will
maximize agility in autonomous flight, while keeping collision risks and
possible impacts of a collision below certain acceptable thresholds. This new
type of resilient aerial robots will in turn be valuable in a set of real-world
applications such as the inspection of hard to access, narrow and visually-
degraded environments. This includes but is not limited to the exploration of
underground facilities, accessing cargo tanks through manholes and more. In
addition, this project strives to contribute into advanced university education
and K12 outreach. The latter crucial goals are achieved by close connections
between the envisioned research and university classes, and through synergies
with established outreach mechanisms to teachers and K12 students in the State
of Nevada. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these goals, this project builds on top
of four research directions. First, it examines a set of alternative collision-
tolerant designs for aerial robots by investigating the different advantages and
disadvantages of rigid and compliant designs. Second, it aims to design a new
“expert” motion planning strategy that explicitly models the risk of a collision
and its effect in autonomous navigation. For the latter, the research team will
also model the effect of collisions in the ability of the robot to reliably
localize. Third, the project team will examine the potential of reinforcement
learning methods in the framework of collision-tolerant autonomous flight. Given
the hybrid nature of the dynamic phenomena governing collisions and the effect
of collisions in the onboard localization functionality of a flying robot, the
project envisions a set of contributions in new approaches for learning to
navigate that mitigate localization uncertainty through collision resilience and
have minimal computational requirements. Eventually, the project aims to
facilitate a new class of resilient flying robotic systems capable of supporting
multiple real-life applications such as those of industrial and underground
inspection. At the same time it aims to introduce leading-edge research to both
undergraduate and graduate education activities, alongside strengthening
outreach efforts towards K12 students and their
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Robust Intelligence (RI) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.