* 2008074
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Learning from Multiple Biased Sources
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Clayton Scott, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The field of artificial intelligence, and especially machine learning, is
concerned with automating the performance of a task by learning from past
performances of that task. Examples include classifying images and successfully
navigating a maze. Classical machine learning methods assume that past
occurrences of a task, or “training data,” accurately represent future
occurrences of the task. In many applications, however, training data are drawn
from multiple sources that reflect future occurrences with varying degrees of
quality. Examples include images labeled by crowd-sourced users or navigation of
randomly simulated mazes. The objective of this project is to develop
theoretical foundations of learning from multiple biased sources. The work will
be motivated by applications in crowdsourcing and autonomous navigation as
described above, as well as in video surveillance and nuclear threat detection.
This research will support the cross-disciplinary development of a diverse
cohort of PhD and undergraduate students at the University of Michigan and at
Boston University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the
investigators will establish theoretical foundations for four broad classes of
machine learning problems for which virtually no theory presently exists: (1)
Classification from multiple corrupted sources, (2) Clustering with overlapping,
nonparametric clusters, (3) Sim2Real reinforcement learning, and (4) Zero-shot
learning. This project's theoretical contributions will take the form of
generalization error bounds, regret bounds, and sample complexity bounds, while
also emphasizing distribution free or general nonparametric models wherever
possible. To address the challenges of eliciting and aggregating biased
information from multiple sources, the analyses will develop new technical
tools, including weighted Rademacher complexity, regret analysis from biased
bandit feedback, and oracle inequalities for density estimation, that are likely
to find application in other learning settings. The research resulting from this
effort will highlight distinctive features of learning from multiple sources,
including various questions associated with multiple sample sizes. More
generally, the research develops principled approaches for integrating
heterogeneous data sources in both batch and sequential learning settings and
under a variety of inter-source dependence models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.