* 2008527
* CIF: Small: Timing Optimization Over Random Network Asynchrony - Theory And Distributed Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Chih-Chun Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2023
* USD 165,000.00

A key force driving technology revolutions in the 21st century is the ever
accelerating deployment of more powerful but physically smaller
computing/sensing devices that are constantly and interactively connected
through newer-generation wireless networks. There is interest in supporting
device densities of up to one million devices per square kilometer, which, once
achieved, would enable exponentially many innovations that further transform the
landscape of modern society. A grand challenge of supporting this massive scale
of machine-type communication is that modern wireless networks, while offering
high throughput and broad coverage, are inevitably susceptible to random delay.
This delay results in a phenomenon called "network asynchrony," for which any
message sent by a device is always outdated to some random degree when it
actually arrives at its intended destination. As such, the local views of any
two nodes regarding network information are always "out-of-sync," and the key
challenge is how each individual node can optimally communicate and collaborate
with others despite their asynchronous local views. This project investigates
the optimal network collaboration policies under network asynchrony, with
results potentially leading to a high-performance design paradigm for the much-
needed next-generation machine-type communication protocols, substantially
improving the communication efficiency of autonomous vehicles, sensor networks,
and many other Internet-of-Things devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the
recent discovery of data freshness control, this projects studies how sensors
and controllers, and the entire network in general, can optimally collaborate
over a temporally noisy information loop, and particularly how to perform
(transmission) timing optimization over random network asynchrony. Three major
thrusts will be investigated. In thrust 1, a new fixed-point equation framework
crystallizing the existing theoretic developments will be explored, opening up
new venues for optimal scheduling characterization and numerical evaluation. In
thrust 2, new distributed algorithms and data-freshness-control schedulers that
optimally adapt to any unknown delay distribution will be developed. In Thrust
3, joint consideration of acknowledgement-centric, acknowledgement-free, and
hybrid designs. and quantifying the impact of transport-layer design choices on
data freshness control will be investigated. The results of these thrusts will
lead to new theoretical characterizations, distributed algorithms, and protocol
designs for autonomous machine-type communications in a way similar to the
development of TCP-based flow-control algorithms in the early days of Internet
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.