* 2008471
* SHF: Small: EVE: Ephemeral Vector Engines
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christopher Batten, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Data-parallel kernels dominate the computational workload in a wide variety of
demanding application domains, including graphics rendering, computer vision,
audio processing, physical simulation, machine learning, and graph processing.
Since it is no longer possible to rely on technology scaling for inevitable
improvements in transistor performance and energy efficiency, there is renewed
interest in specialized hardware to improve performance and efficiency compared
to general-purpose processors for codes with significant amounts of data-level
parallelism (DLP). Unfortunately, this specialized hardware lies idle when these
computing systems are executing the many other interesting workloads that lack
DLP. This project is exploring a new approach that is able to create specialized
hardware "on-demand" by reconfiguring the memory already contained within modern
computer systems to handle both storage and computation. The project's broader
significance and importance are rooted in the need for computer architects to
creatively mitigate the challenges imposed by the looming end of Moore's law,
and the potential transformative impact of a software/hardware co-design
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two popular styles of hardware accelerators for
exploiting DLP include data-parallel acceleration (DPA), which focuses on moving
data in main memory to the compute hardware, and processing-in-memory (PIM),
which focuses on moving compute hardware to the data in memory. In-situ
processing-in-memory (PIM) is a recently proposed approach that attempts to
significantly reduce the area overhead associated with exploiting data-level
parallelism while at the same time reaping most of the benefit. In-situ PIM uses
bit-line computation to perform basic bit-wise logical operations in a single
read of a traditional memory array. Each memory column can be further
transformed into a bit-serial ALU by adding extra logic, multiplexing, and state
elements in the peripheral circuitry. This project makes two key observations
about prior work on in-situ PIM: (1) in-situ PIM lacks compelling programming
models; and (2) in-situ PIM requires massive parallelism to outweigh bit-serial
execution overheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is exploring ephemeral
vector engines (EVE) as a new approach to address these challenges. EVE enables
dynamically repurposing one or more private L2 cache ways to serve as on-demand
(i.e., ephemeral) vector engines implemented using a novel reconfigurable bit-
serial/bit-parallel in-situ processing-in-SRAM. EVE supports the unmodified
RISC-V vector instruction set and can be rapidly reconfigured to use either bit-
serial or bit-parallel execution. Bit-serial execution provides higher
throughput but longer latencies, while bit-parallel execution provides lower
throughput but shorter latencies. This project is using a vertically integrated
research methodology spanning circuits, microarchitecture, architecture, and
applications to explore three research thrusts. Thrust 1: EVE Circuits is
exploring how to implement reconfigurable bit-serial/bit-parallel compute logic
in the periphery of the SRAM array so as to minimize area, energy, and timing
overhead. Thrust 2: EVE Microarchitecture is exploring how to efficiently map
higher-level vector instructions into lower-level micro-operations. Thrust 3:
EVE Architecture is exploring how to integrate the EVE microarchitecture into a
complete system accelerating applications with regular DLP, while adding little
to no area, energy, performance overhead for applications without regular
DLP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also pursuing two broader impact
initiatives. The first is an ambitious yet concrete effort to increase
participation of women in computer engineering by organizing a week-long
computer engineering design experience for high-school girls. The second is an
initiative to better preparing Cornell graduates for the post-Moore's law era,
by integrating open-source CAD tools and the emerging PIM architectural approach
into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.