* 2008365
* SHF: Small: Leveraging Monolithic 3D for Architectural Innovations
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Vijaykrishnan Narayanan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The design of more efficient processors is a major driving force of the
computing industry. Over multiple decades, reducing the size of transistors,
which are the building blocks of microprocessors, has been the main driver for
efficiency improvements. With this trend of transistor shrinking nearing the
physical limit, this research explores three-dimensional chips, where
transistors are stacked in multiple layers, as an alternate approach to enhance
efficiency. A major challenge with three-dimensional chips is the large
dimension of the connections compared to the transistor itself. This project
will leverage a new technology called monolithic three-dimensional design (M3D),
where inter-layer connections are of dimensions similar to that of a transistor.
This research will result in new M3D-based designs for microprocessors that
reduce energy and time consumed in interconnections, and enable new functional
features for microprocessors. The project will also enhance the national
workforce development efforts by training undergraduate, graduate and
underrepresented groups in a much-needed area of semiconductor electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve synergistic exploration of
process technology and M3D-based architectural design spaces of processors
towards achieving transformational impact on processor and accelerator
performance. The research will first develop a simulation infrastructure that
enables systematic exploration of the space by varying the architectural and
technology parameters. Leveraging the simulation infrastructure, this project
will perform the following tasks: (1) evaluation of layer-wise partitioning of
processor core and cache structures; (2) design of primitive compute functions
for integration with the cache memories; (3) design of M3D-enabled application-
specific accelerators; and (4) integration of heterogeneous memory technologies
to provide support for power efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.