* 2008344
* Critical Early DKIST Science: Spectropolarimetric Inversion in Four Dimensions with Deep Learning
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Stanley Curtis Dodds, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2024
* USD 668,938.00

The solar photosphere is an amazingly complex system of interacting plasma
structures, each with its own complex magnetic field. In order to determine
their physical parameters, one must solve a complicated “inversion” problem.
Current methods are so slow as to be incapable of keeping up with the volume of
data to be collected by NSF’s Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST). This
work will pioneer the use of Deep Learning, in effect “teaching” a supercomputer
to determine physical parameters of the solar photosphere given data from DKIST.
This new tool will also advance the field of machine learning by adapting the
technique to a complex astrophysical phenomenon. A post-doctoral researcher and
a graduate student at the University of Hawaii will both be trained in these
novel methods as a part of the work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will create
spectropolarimetric data and Stokes parameters for simulated photospheric
structures by modeling these structures using the MURaM MHD code. These
simulations will be used to ‘train’ a computer program to identify state
parameters using open-source Deep Learning (DL) models, or convolutional neural
networks. The DL system will then be validated through comparison to SIR
inversion codes. The team will explore the domain adaptation methods to reduce
differences between the simulation and observation. In the final phase of the
work, the Deep Learning system will then be tested and refined using time
sequences of multi-line Stokes data from DKIST’s DL-NIRSP instrument, due to
start operations as a “first light” instrument on
DKIST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.