* 2008490
* Collaborative Research:  Discriminating Between Galactic Feedback Models with Next Generation Observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Paul Torrey, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2024
* USD 403,180.00

Stars form in galaxies from cool gas, but the act of star formation and the
evolution of those stars can reheat the gas or blow it away. This stellar
feedback on the growth and evolution of galaxies is an important part of
understanding how galaxies grow over cosmological time. The project will use
their own model for stellar feedback within larger cosmology simulations. They
will produce thousands of simulated galaxies that can be compared with observed
galaxies to better understand the influences of feedback in cosmology. The
project will also establish a field trip program for middle school students in
underserved school districts in Florida. The students will visit the local Santa
Fe planetarium. The project will assess the impact of this program using the
University of Florida Center for Precollegiate Education and
Teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will incorporate an existing explicit
stellar feedback model (Smuggle) into the existing AREPO cosmological simulation
code. Smuggle models gas cooling, star formation, and stellar feedback. AREPO is
the basis for the Illustric cosmological simulations. The project will self-
consistently produce thousands of galaxies from within these simulations that
can then be compared with observations. The bulk of the broader impacts of this
project will be performed at the University of Florida. The project will
establish a field trip program for middle school students in underserved school
districts in Florida. The students will visit the local Santa Fe planetarium.
The project will assess the impact of this program using the University of
Florida Center for Precollegiate Education and
Teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.