* 2008197
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Greater Philadelphia Region LSAMP (Philadelphia AMP)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2025
* USD 3,184,952.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. In accordance with the LSAMP mission, the
Greater Philadelphia Region Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(Philadelphia AMP) will continue to execute its STEM Pathways and Research
Alliance (SPRA) activity by including a new and innovative research on student
identity and exploration of STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Philadelphia
AMP consists of nine diverse institutions that collaborate to realize a common
mission of broadening participation in STEM. The Alliance will utilize its
operational infrastructure to increase the capacity of its partner institutions
to recruit, retain and graduate more underrepresented minority STEM students (by
substantially expanding their capabilities to attract, develop and support STEM
student talent). Specifically, Philadelphia AMP proposes to accomplish the
following programmatic objectives: a) increase student engagement, retention,
and progression to STEM baccalaureate degrees for underrepresented racial and
ethnic groups; b) increase intra-and inter -institutional partnerships and
collaborations, including community college connectivity enabling the successful
transfer of underrepresented students from 2-year to 4-year institutions in STEM
programs, as well as partnerships / collaborations with other NSF and/or other
federally-funded programs; c) increase student access to high quality STEM
mentoring, and national and international undergraduate research experiences; d)
facilitate seamless transition of underrepresented students into STEM graduate
programs; e) Enhance documentation of student accomplishments and movement to
graduate study and /or industry; and f) stimulate, document, publish, and
disseminate new research and learning on broadening participation in STEM
disciplines as it relates to operationalizing and examining student learning as
an integrated process of exploring and taking steps to attain STEM career
identities over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.