* 2008799
* SHF: Small: Beyond Accelerators - Using FPGAs to Achieve Fine-grained Control of Data-flows in Embedded SoCs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Renato Mancuso, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,857.00

Modern computing systems are to become context-aware by exploiting knowledge of
their environment and taking complex decisions based on a multitude of sensory
streams. On the other hand, in safety-critical and high-integrity systems, the
capability to detect and correct violations of timing and security invariants,
i.e., self-awareness, is of the utmost importance. Unfortunately, as platforms
grow in complexity to improve context-awareness, the inter-play between
concurrent software components and the underlying hardware becomes hard to
predict and to reason about. Therefore, there exists a fundamental tension
between context- and self-awareness. This research tackles the challenge of
achieving strong self-awareness without trading off system complexity. It does
so by defining a new class of software-shaped (SOSH) platforms that provide
direct control over the flow of data exchanged between hardware components. SOSH
platforms can be implemented today using existing and commercially available
hardware that includes traditional processing units and reprogrammable logic on-
chip. SOSH data-flow manipulation primitives are constructed in reprogrammable
hardware and interposed between traditional central processors, memory modules,
and I/O devices. By turning memory and I/O data-flows into manageable entities,
a new degree of introspection is unlocked, which constitutes the premise for
self-awareness. The project explores key design principles in the definition and
implementation of low-overhead SOSH primitives for operations over data-flows.
It investigates research avenues on the use of the SOSH paradigm to enact
workload profiling and prediction; to implement advanced memory models; to
perform security threat identification and mitigation. Evaluation metrics
include achievable performance envelopes, expressiveness of programming
interfaces, and level of control over access to confidential data and system
bottlenecks. The milestones achieved in the definition of SOSH components will
be immediately transitioned into practice. Areas of impact include, but are not
limited to, civil avionics, autonomous driving technology, analytics engines,
and privacy-hardened data stores. The obtained results will be disseminated in
peer-reviewed journals, international conferences, and workshops. In addition, a
set of publicly available repositories of code, hardware designs, and datasets
will be maintained throughout the lifespan of the project and for a minimum of
three years thereafter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is a
technology to achieve strong self-awareness in complex systems. The key
observation is that the interplay between software and hardware modules (i.e.,
CPUs, GPUs, DSPs, memory modules, and I/O devices) is embedded in the flow of
data they exchange. Thus, turning data-flows into observable and manageable
entities enables an unprecedented degree of self-awareness. From this
observation, a new paradigm for software-shaped (SOSH) platforms is introduced.
In SOSH platforms, the software can instantiate hardware modules to constantly
monitor data-flows. It can define policies and performance envelopes for data-
flow exchanges, and specify actions that affect both hardware and software
components in case of a policy violation. The SOSH methodology targets
commercial platforms that integrate embedded processors and programmable logic.
Support for partial dynamic reconfiguration is also leveraged to achieve runtime
adaptation. Four super-classes of data-flow manipulation primitives are
considered. First, merging primitives enable the definition of rules to join
data-flows from different components. Next, reordering/filtering primitives
adapt seminal results in stream-processing to reduce and reorganize the amount
of data moved between components. Third, profiling/logging primitives support
the extraction of data-flow characteristics for prediction and state/progress
tracking of application workloads. Lastly, splitting primitives allow selective
re-routing of sub-flows to improve timing and relieve congestion at the
performance bottlenecks. The SOSH paradigm lays the basis for novel approaches
for the design and analysis of high-integrity and safety-critical systems. More
broadly, SOSH platforms represent the first appearance of a new class of truly
self-assessing and self-modifying systems, shaking the foundations of
traditional hardware/software layers as non-participating entities. In SOSH
platforms, the software can systematically inspect and influence the behavior of
the hardware; while the hardware constructs and leverages knowledge of
applications to enact goal-aware management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.