* 2008564
* CHS: Small: High Resolution Motion Capture
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ladislav Kavan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,690.00

This project studies a new type of full-body motion capture technology which has
been enabled by recent advances in deep learning and high-resolution digital
cameras. Unlike classical motion capture systems which rely on suits with small
attached spheres that serve as markers, this project introduces a new type of
suit using a special printed pattern instead of any attachments. This pattern
will contain a new type of markers with two distinct advantages: (1) the ability
to automatically detect which marker is which, and (2) a significantly more
dense set of markers than previous systems. The proposed approach is fully
passive and therefore easy to use, relying only (a) indoor lighting or natural
daylight and (b) a suit made of elastic fabric with a special printed pattern,
but without any wires or batteries. The only required electronics are standard
digital cameras, ranging from just a few cameras to massive multi-camera
systems. This flexibility will allow us to support applications on various
scales, from individual researchers or makers to large institutions or
production studios. New technology for full-body capture, featuring higher
accuracy while being easy to use, has the potential to impact research and
clinical studies of human motion, e.g., in orthopedics, sports medicine,
rehabilitation, physical therapy and ergonomics. High-quality human motion data
can also facilitate better virtual or augmented reality systems and
applications. By combining computer science and human motion, motion capture
systems enables unique educational and outreach opportunities involving
activities popular among young people, such as sports and gymnastics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea of using a new type of motion capture suit with
texture-based markers recognized using artificial neural networks has not been
explored before and opens up many interesting research questions such as "Which
types of markers and suit textures will lead to the best detection and labeling
results, despite large elastic distortions induced by the motion of the skin?"
The proposed computing methodology requires training and validation of neural
networks and contributes to research on the following topics: (1) synthetic data
generation, (2) automated data augmentation, (3) confidence calibration of
neural networks, in particular teaching neural networks to quantify the risk of
errors in their own predictions. To further improve robustness and accuracy, the
probabilistic output of neural networks will be combined with priors, such as a
3D deformable shape model; this can be done in a principled way via Bayesian
inference, which leads to research problems combining continuous and discrete
optimization. Finally, the high-resolution data produced by the envisioned
system motivates research on improving the anatomical realism of deformable
shape models, in particular data-driven modeling of joint kinematics and muscle
activations. The envisioned full-body capture system will be designed to be easy
to replicate and deploy at various institutions, clinics or studios. This
project will share research results through common open source codebase,
facilitating collaboration and data sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.