* 2008884
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Scalable ACID Transactions for Persistent Memory Databases
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Simon Peter, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 05/31/2022
* USD 284,985.00

This project addresses the inability of current database systems to keep up with
the ever growing demands of applications that analyze and extract information
from machine-generated data sets, such as Internet-of-Things sensors and
machine-learning systems. Intuitively, doubling a system's computing resources
should double the load that the system can process per unit of time, but that is
not true of today's databases: beyond a fairly modest system size, adding more
computing resources does not scale to proportionate gains in performance. The
key reason is that databases, to perform correctly, must limit concurrent access
to some critical data structures: adding more resources increases competition
for access to these data structures, creating a bottleneck for the system's
performance. This project introduces a key innovation towards scalable
databases. It frees the database from the need, whenever a databases record is
modified, to immediately update range indexes---a common form of data
organization in databases that tend to become a hotspot when databases try to
scale up their computing resources. To remove this bottleneck, this project
develops a new scalable interface: per-processor-core queues absorb index
updates and merge them in the shared range index data structures periodically,
in the background. Eliminating synchronous updates to range indices does not
weaken the database guarantees: the standard correctness criterion of
serializability is achieved by globally ordering transactional updates using
multi-part timestamps derived from a system-wide clock; data durability is
achieved by storing per-core queues in non-volatile memory; and a new data
structure ensures that reads performed on individual records return their most-
recently committed value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Databases are a critical
component of modern planet-scale applications. By eliminating scalability
bottlenecks and leveraging emerging non volatile memory technology, this project
will dramatically reduce the cost to provision databases. In particular, a large
fraction of operational cost in multi-billion-dollar data centers is spent on
powering a growing number of servers. Improving the scalability of multiple
processor cores will increase the density of database deployments, reducing
drastically the number of servers required to provision a database: the savings
can defer the need for new data centers and storage devices, as more useful work
is achieved with existing servers, or reduce energy consumption for existing
workloads. The work will also influence the education of the next generation of
database engineers. Proposed lecture and project materials will prepare students
to identify scalable database designs when responding to future changes in
hardware and application workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.