* 2008048
* CNS Core: Small: Autogenerating fast packet-processing code using program synthesis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Anirudh Sivaraman Kaushalram, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Computer networks are a foundational part of today’s digital society. A critical
component of these networks is the infrastructure of base stations, access
points, and routers that glues computers together, and moves network traffic
(broken up into ‘packets’) from place to place. Over time, in addition to packet
forwarding, the network infrastructure has taken on many additional requirements
to make it more efficient and robust, such as attack detection and prevention,
access control, load balancing, packet scheduling, and measurement. To implement
these requirements, new network devices have emerged that are ‘programmable’.
This proposal proposes to develop novel compiler technology to enable fast,
efficient network programmability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programmable network
devices (e.g., switches, SmartNICs, and FPGAs) are now rapidly becoming
mainstream. While it is easy to get started with programming these devices, it
is still hard to write fast packet-processing code that fits within the resource
constraints of each device. Writing such fast packet-processing code today
largely falls to experts with deep knowledge of the underlying hardware. While
compilers should alleviate the burden of generating high-performance code, the
compilers for these devices are still preliminary, and developing good compilers
takes significant engineering effort and time. In response, the proposal
proposes the use of program synthesis technology to build compilers that
generate high-quality machine code for packet processing. This proposal has
three key thrusts: (i) Code generation for programmable networks-developing code
generators that generate high-quality machine code from a higher-level language
(e.g., P4 or C) for a variety of different packet-processing substrates like
programmable switches, FPGAs, and x86 processors. (ii) Speeding up program
synthesis for code generation: Specializing program synthesis algorithms to the
use case of code generation and speeding up synthesis algorithms in the process,
so that code generation using program synthesis isn’t significantly slower than
code generation using rule-based compiler techniques. (iii) Pushing the
boundaries of synthesis-based code generation: Exploring relaxed notions of
equivalence between higher-level programs and generated machine code so that
higher-performance machine code can be generated at the cost of some loss of
accuracy relative to the original program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.