* 2008927
* CIF: Small: Statistical Learning Methods for Communications, Sensing and Control in Actuated Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Scott Acton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 164,971.00

As the development of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) or drones advances, there
is potential for such aerial vehicles to be used to enhance and extend the
cellular wireless communication infrastructure. As humans, we already engage in
decisions about communication and actuation when using wireless communications.
If we feel our connection is bad, we move in the hopes of experiencing a better
wireless channel between our cellular phone and a base station. Wireless
communications suffer from several deleterious propagation effects such as
random fluctuations in signal strength, signal blockage due to obstructions and
multipath effects which are due to signals bouncing off of buildings and other
large objects. A mobile base station could serve to mitigate these effects by
moving where additional coverage is needed, including the tracking of mobile
hotspots (where there is extra traffic or congestion). To achieve this UAV
enhanced communications infrastructure, this year-long project seeks to answer
some key questions about cooperative and decentralized estimation as well as
localization.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this exploratory project, a collection of
UAVs is envisioned to work in concert. To this end, both centralized and
distributed methods for estimation among the UAVs will be considered. Building
on prior work on observation driven scheduling, the case of unknown underlying
distributions of the sensed signal will be considered. In particular, data
driven methods which enable the implicit learning of those distributions in a
decentralized fashion will be developed. Observation driven scheduling will also
be fully decentralized and different consensus-based strategies will be
theoretically analyzed in terms of their performance. Tensor factorization-based
non-parametric localization methods will be made more practical. In particular,
a method for determining the number of targets in a field to be localized will
be developed; prior work assumed that this number was known. Channel estimation
based on feature maps and the non-parametric tensor factorization methods will
be developed. A performance analysis of feature map-based methods will
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.