* 2008594
* NSF-BSF: RI: Small: Planning and Acting While Time Passes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Wheeler Ruml, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,807.00

Planning allows intelligent systems to select actions aimed towards achieving
their goals. However, traditional planning methods assume that the world evolves
slowly enough, or that the problems to be solved are sufficiently simple, that
the world can be considered static during planning. This limitation means that
most current planners are unable, for example, to realize that it might be
better to quickly find a suboptimal plan to take the bus that is about to leave,
rather than to carefully deliberate about optimal plans and thereby miss the bus
altogether. Currently, planning representations and algorithms are laboriously
manually engineered to ensure that the system responds quickly enough for the
intended application, essentially ducking the issue of the passage of time while
the system is planning. This project enables more robust and general-purpose
intelligent systems by developing new "situated planning" methods that reason
about their own reasoning enough to overcome this
limitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consider two settings for
situated planning. The first is the traditional batch setting, in which all
decisions are made before plan execution begins. Three challenges will be
addressed: 1) Formalizing a model of planning while time passes and analyzing
its computational complexity, 2) Simplifying the resulting "reasoning about
reasoning" problem enough that it can be approximately solved repeatedly during
the planning process, including identifying tractable subclasses and greedy
heuristics, and 3) Estimating the information needed for doing this reasoning
on-line. The second setting is incremental planning, where execution of actions
can be interleaved with additional planning. Three additional challenges will be
addressed: 4) Formalizing situated planning with action costs , 5) Developing a
continual situated planner that improves a plan while it is being executed, and
6) Addressing online situated planning, where actions can be dispatched for
execution before a complete plan has been found. Solving these situated planning
problems will result in practical and flexible planners that can smoothly
interpolate their behavior in a time-aware way between batch and incremental as
appropriate, thereby broadening the range of applications that can be addressed
by intelligent systems. Project results will be integrated into the open source
OPTIC planner and ROSPlan robot control framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.