* 2008530
* CNS Core: Small: Flexible Spectrum Allocation in Next-Generation Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Vinod Vokkarane, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 365,984.00

High-speed optical core networks have become essential for supporting large-
scale data transfers over long distances with low latency and high throughput.
In recent years new technologies have emerged that provide for a significant
increase in network bandwidth and more flexibility in how that bandwidth is
used. For example, the development of Elastic Optical Networks (EONs) has
introduced bandwidth-variable switching and dynamic spectrum resizing.
Similarly, the paradigm of Space Division Multiplexed (SDM) optical networks has
the potential to multiply the line rate of each network link. Even with support
from such technologies, the growth of scientific applications and cloud services
demands that the technologies be intelligently harnessed to make the most of the
bandwidth available. The recipe for success, then, calls for not merely the
employment of inherently fast networks with tremendous bandwidth availability,
but also smart and efficient resource allocation. This project focuses on that
challenge: developing novel flexible resource allocation strategies across
multiple resource domains in order to efficiently and successfully provision
core networks for future extreme-scale applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project will conduct a comprehensive investigation into the benefits of
combining resource assignment flexibility in emerging network technologies. It
will establish a baseline against which improvement in flexible allocation
algorithms may be developed and evaluated. The specific research objectives of
this project are to: &lt;br/&gt;1. Investigate the flexibility enhancements
inherent to emerging optical network technologies, such as temporal flexibility,
spatial flexibility, and spectral flexibility, and their impact on resource
efficiency in Elastic Optical Networks.&lt;br/&gt;2. Extend the flexible
resource allocation techniques to next-generation SDM-EON with careful
consideration to the additional degree of core flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Investigate coordinated Routing, Modulation, Core, and Spectrum Assignment
algorithms that incorporate lightpath switching, lightpath segmentation, and
delayed spectrum allocation. &lt;br/&gt;4. Perform an in-depth analysis of the
proposed techniques for both EON and SDM-EON architectures in terms of hardware
cost-benefit and algorithm complexity.&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential
to have direct impact on research networks supporting the Extreme-Scale Science
Community. Participation of women and URM will be encouraged through the UMass
Lowell Urban Massachusetts Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
scholars program and through the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.