* 2008812
* RI:Small:Investigating techniques that couple Markov Logic and Deep Learning with applications to discovering strategies to improve STEM learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Deepak Venugopal, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 429,482.00

The goal of this project is to develop novel techniques to integrate different
but complementary approaches in artificial intelligence (AI). This research
combines the strengths of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) and Markov Logic Networks
(MLNs) to address key shortcomings of those techniques when used by themselves.
In particular, the proposed work will address the limitation of DNNs with
respect to utilizing background knowledge in learning a model. The fact that
DNNs typically do not utilize background knowledge explicitly often results in
models that over-fit the training data and generalize poorly on new datasets. On
the other hand, statistical relational models such as Markov Logic Networks
(MLNs) encode complex background knowledge explicitly but lack inference and
learning capabilities that are as scalable and accurate as DNN-based methods.
The project will develop novel techniques in which MLNs provide the DNN with
task-specific background knowledge which helps the DNN to learn more
generalizable models. Further, this project will apply these novel techniques to
significantly improve personalized learning in adaptive instructional systems
(AISs) for STEM topics. The project will yield i) general-purpose open-source
software for learning and inference that can be used by a broad range of
application domains and ii) specific models for core tasks in AIS-based learning
(e.g. inferring student problem-solving strategies) that can significantly
improve the adaptive capabilities of AISs which results in better student
engagement and learning. The project will impact a number of communities
including machine learning, artificial intelligence, artificial intelligence in
education, and educational data mining. The outcomes of our work will be widely
disseminated through publications in top conferences and journals,
presentations, a website, social media, and training materials for researchers
and practitioners. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Existing approaches that incorporate
background knowledge into DNNs do so using a Bayesian framework where the types
of priors are typically simple to ensure tractability of Bayesian inference. The
main technical contribution of this project is to address this limitation by
developing DNN models that incorporate rich relational knowledge specified in
the form of an MLN. To do this, the project will i) develop new representations
that encode symmetries (or exchangeability) in the MLN distribution as sub-
symbolic embeddings, ii) develop efficient DNN-based learning algorithms for
relational data by exploiting exchangeability of variables specified implicitly
by the MLN and iii) develop interpretable generative models using Generative
Adversarial Networks utilizing symmetries specified by the MLN to traverse
across diverse modes in the distribution. The AIS tasks that will be developed
as part of this project will use large-scale datasets and thus convincingly
demonstrate the scalability of the proposed models in real-world problems.
Further, the models developed for the AIS tasks will help us better understand
student needs and learning processes which in turn can inform improvements of
advanced educational technologies for STEM topics and help validate and refine
human learning theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.