* 2008460
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Deep Sparse Models: Analysis and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Zhihui Zhu, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Scott Acton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 205,479.00

Deep convolutional neural networks are a class of mathematical models that
provide a variety of machine learning tools with impressive success, often
obtaining state-of-the-art results across different fields. Yet, their
theoretical understanding and the fundamental ideas behind these algorithms have
remained elusive. These questions are essential to recognize and characterize
their limitations, to provide guarantees for their performance, and even to
develop and engineer improved practical models. A promising approach to obtain
this understanding is to make assumptions about the class of samples on which
these models are deployed (e.g., so that these are "simple enough") with the
intention of providing theoretical insights about them. Further understanding of
this 'multi-layered convolutional sparse model' is what this project seeks
accomplish, broadening the understanding of its related optimization and
learning problems, and shedding light on deep learning
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to advance the state
of the art in generalized sparse models of different numbers of layers, focusing
on both inference and learning problems. Provable and efficient optimization
methods will be derived for the inverse problems associated with multilayer
sparse models by relying on new results in proximal gradient and subgradient
descent methods. This proposal will further extend the formulation of the
pursuit to other settings, increasing stability and robustness to the choice of
parameters and to outliers. Furthermore, efficient algorithms for the
corresponding unsupervised learning problem will be proposed and analyzed.
Questions of sample complexity and generalization bounds will in turn be studied
in supervised learning settings. Throughout this project, the resulting
algorithms will be studied in terms of their relation to specific convolutional
network architectures. The project brings together combined expertise in signal
processing, dictionary learning, machine learning, and the design, analysis and
implementation of optimization methods for large-scale
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.