* 2008110
* Collaborative Research: Tests of Dark Matter physics with isolated dwarf galaxies in the Dark Energy Survey
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Annika Peter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 406,886.00

One-quarter of the Universe consists of a form of matter whose nature is unknown
--- dark matter (DM). The most striking prediction of the leading cold dark
matter (CDM) paradigm is the existence and abundance of small collapsed clouds
of dark matter, called halos. Small “dwarf” galaxies are expected to live in
these small DM halos. By using observations of dwarf galaxies to count halos,
the investigators will test CDM models. The investigators will complete a census
of dwarf galaxies near our Milky Way Galaxy. With these observations, the
investigators will search for a connection between galaxies and DM halos. The
investigators will share the exciting story connecting galaxies to DM through a
planetarium show developed in collaboration with the Ohio State University’s
Slettebak Planetarium. The investigators will also assess and improve an early
start summer program for undergraduates from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use a combination of optical data
from the Dark Energy Survey (DES) and radio data from the Parkes-IMAGINE atomic
hydrogen survey to detect and characterize nearby dwarf galaxies that contain as
few as a million solar masses in gas and stars. They will use this census of
dwarf galaxies to build theoretical models connecting dwarf galaxies with the
dark matter halos that they inhabit. They will explore both isolated dwarf
galaxies and ``satellite” galaxies orbiting more massive galaxies. Because much
of the existing work on the connection between dwarf galaxies and their DM halos
focuses on satellite galaxies, we must determine how the evolution of the stars
and gas in satellite galaxies affects the matching between galaxies and their
halos. The investigators will build a semi-empirical theoretical framework to
interpret the data in the context of CDM. The investigators will use a variety
of techniques, including surface-brightness fluctuation distance measurements on
wide-field imaging data, automated dwarf galaxy and globular cluster
identification and cross-matching between the stellar and atomic gas components
of small galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.