* 2008123
* NSF-BSF: HCC: Small: Computational Imaging with Speckle Correlations for Material Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Ioannis Gkioulekas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2024
* USD 499,859.00

Light scattering materials are ubiquitous: from biological tissues and minerals
to the atmosphere and clouds, cosmetics, and many industrial chemicals. When
viewed under coherent imaging conditions such as laser illumination, these
materials create "noisy" images containing small spurious spots of color known
as speckle, which severely degrade image quality. Despite their seemingly random
nature, speckle images have strong statistical properties that are highly
informative of the material producing them, and can be used to enable remarkable
imaging capabilities (for example, being able to see through or focus inside a
material). However, realizing these capabilities in practical application
settings where scattering is important (tissue imaging, fluorescence microscopy,
remote sensing, material fabrication) remains a challenge due to our incomplete
understanding of speckle statistical properties. This project will use
techniques from computer vision and computer graphics to greatly enhance our
understanding of these properties, and significantly expand the scope of
possible applications, thereby having transformative impact in areas such as
medicine and material science. The project will additionally create a new point
of convergence between vision, graphics, optics, and imaging, establishing new
research directions and methodological approaches within and across these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving the project's goals will require
developing a better understanding of the limitations inherent in speckle
statistics, and using this knowledge to invent better imaging algorithms. To
date, efforts towards this direction have been hindered by difficulties in
simulating speckle effects stemming from the complexity of the wave-optics and
multiple-scattering phenomena underlying them. This project will change this
state of affairs through three tightly coupled research thrusts: 1) Simulation
The project will first develop Monte Carlo rendering algorithms that efficiently
simulate physically accurate speckle images and different types of statistics
(spatial, temporal, spectral). These tools will be used to perform a thorough
qualitative and quantitative investigation of the statistical properties of
speckle images, with emphasis on application-relevant settings. Phenomenological
discoveries will be backed by theoretical analysis of the underlying physics. 2)
The project will develop new algorithms for speckle-based imaging through
scattering, using the insights from the exploration of speckle statistics. These
algorithms will be designed to specifically exploit additional statistical
structure in speckle images that currently remains untapped. The improved
performance of the developed algorithms will be demonstrated through experiments
on tissue phantoms and under conditions emphasizing fluorescence imaging
applications. 3)The project will develop computational imaging systems that use
the rich information available in speckle images to characterize the optical
scattering properties of material samples (for instance, for material quality
control). The use of speckle measurements will endow these systems with a
combination of accuracy, efficiency, and generality that is not available in
existing scattering acquisition technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.