* 2008720
* RI: Small: A Novel Framework for Informed Manipulation Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Lydia Kavraki, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 433,000.00

Humans use many types of manipulation to accomplish daily tasks and easily
sequence and execute pertinent actions. Robots are confined to very simple tasks
that are often painstakingly broken down to an excruciating level of detail by
humans who operate those robots. Today, more than ever, there is an urgent need
to develop robots that reason about manipulation as seamlessly as humans do.
Manipulation planning finds a sequence of actions that move the robot and the
objects it interacts with from a start state to a goal state. In doing so,
contacts are formed and broken, limits are imposed, and some high-level
reasoning occurs:. Grasping, placing, regrasping, and rearranging objects often
take place. The combination of manipulation planning with classical AI planning
and formal methods will lead to the kind of behavior that is expected from a
robot capable of cleaning a hospital room, performing tasks in an ICU, or
assisting a recovering patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advocates a
novel, unifying framework for manipulation planning. It adopts a constraint-
centric view, in particular using manifold constraints which define lower-
dimensional subspaces, or modes, among which the robot must transition. The
definition of transitions is also constraint-centric, defined by the combination
of the constraints which define modes, and is only possible within the unified
approach used to consider modes. The work depends on constructs from
differential geometry and the use of multi-resolution search schemes. First, the
project will generalize sampling-based algorithms for robot motion planning by
decoupling the planning strategy from the satisfaction of constraints often
found in manipulation. Second, the concept of a transition graph between modes
will be defined and exploited during search to automatically find viable
transitions between modes and produce manipulation plans. The work will start
with a specific but general type of constraint, manifold constraints, and later
expand to other types. The proposed research will investigate optimality and
robustness guarantees provided by the proposed framework and will identify the
limits of using constraints as a unifying construct in manipulation planning.
The work will be supported by extensive experimentation in both simulation and
realistic scenarios that involve several objects, cabinets, shelves, a mobile
manipulator, and two stationary state-of-the-art
manipulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.