* 2008116
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Learning Maker Skills By Building Game Props
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Stefanie Mueller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 417,923.00

Fabrication devices, such as laser cutters and 3D printers, enable ordinary
people to fabricate their own physical objects. These tools are driving
innovation and entrepreneurship. However, rising availability of fabrication
devices does not correlate to a rise in education. Many designs that makers are
creating suffer from practicality, durability, and reliability issues. One
promising group for addressing this problem is young learners who have the
potential to become the next generation of engineers and innovators. This
project explores teaching skills for fabrication to high school and
undergraduate learners through games. Recent advances in virtual-physical game
play enable players to use physical props in a game. For instance, a physical
fishing rod made from cardboard and sensors is cast by the player to acquire
virtual fish in the game. While today these physical props are used to increase
immersion, they are not yet used for teaching. With the funding from this award,
the team of researchers investigate how the act of building a physical game prop
can be used to teach players fabrication, electronics, and programming skills.
This research will provide insights into what skills can be effectively taught
through games and how designers can leverage game mechanisms to create immersive
game play to facilitate learning. The project will develop and release as open
source a suite of games for acquiring fabrication skills. It will engage diverse
high school students, undergraduate students, and fabrication lab and makerspace
communities as co-developers and users of the educational games. As games are
developed, the researchers will use their network within the fabrication and
educational communities to publicize and integrate the games into additional
environments, from schools to summer camps to community organizations.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By combining methods from the learning sciences,
educational game design, human-computer interaction, and design-based research
literature, this research will conduct an iterative design process to
investigate: (1) knowledge maps connecting skills and concepts that can be
integrated with game mechanics to teach new fabrication tasks, through
conducting interviews, contextual inquiries, and landscape analyses; (2) theory
and principles for designing and evaluating maker-learning games, including
mechanisms for recording user interaction with the game, such as click analysis,
time between tasks, and in-game user feedback; (3) implications for evaluating
learners’ increases in knowledge and experiences, through mixed methods user
studies that compare pre- and post-training learning gain and result in
qualitative and quantitative findings; and (4) a game-fabrication infrastructure
to facilitate the transfer of activities from one game to another and broaden
the applicability of the maker-learning concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.