* 2008504
* Large solutions for systems of hyperbolic conservation laws and wave equations in one and multiple space dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Geng Chen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 264,998.00

This research project is aimed at the investigation of two types of mathematical
models, which are widely used to describe the wave-like motion in gas dynamics
and physics of liquid crystals. The first model considered in this project is
the Euler system of differential equations. As one of the most fundamental
systems for fluid dynamics, the Euler system has been extensively used in
physics and engineering and is among the oldest partial differential equations,
first introduced in the 16th century. However, many fundamental theoretical
issues pertaining to the Euler equations have remained unresolved. One of the
most important open problems is how the solutions that develop strong shock
waves behave over long time spans. This project aims at the fundamental
understanding of this problem, following the related Principal Investigator's
and collaboratorsâ€™ recent progress. Another mathematical model considered in
this project is a wave model describing liquid crystals. The Principal
Investigator (PI) and collaborators recently found a new type of cusp-like
singular solutions. This opens a new direction in this field. This research
project seeks to deepen understanding of the structure of solutions after the
singularity formation. This project will include several research-related
undergraduate and graduate student training projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project the PI aims to capture features of solutions that include
singularities, such as shock wave and cusp singularities, for some nonlinear
wave equations. This will answer a very important and fundamental question for
these equations: How do solutions behave beyond the formation of a singularity?
Both analytical and numerical techniques will be used to enhance the current
understanding. The first goal of the project is to better understand the large-
data solutions for the compressible Euler equations, which develop shock waves.
The PI will study the existence of solutions with large total variation, the
generic properties of solutions, and the optimal lower bounds on the density.
The second goal is to study the global existence, uniqueness, and stability for
solutions of full Poiseuille flow of nematic liquid crystals via the Ericksen-
Leslie model. In a recent discovery, the formation of cusp singularities was
found by the PI and collaborators. To overcome the challenge caused by the new
singularity, many analytical techniques, including a new transformation of
coordinates and an optimal transport metric, will be
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.