* 2008634
* EAGER: SaTC: Collaborative: Addressing Social Media-Related Cybersecurity and Privacy Risks with Experiential Learning Interventions
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Dominic DiFranzo, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 01/31/2023
* USD 19,999.00

The goal of this work is to create and evaluate experiential learning
interventions to address privacy and cybersecurity risks at scale, particularly
around populations with special privacy and security needs. These experiential
learning interventions will provide both instructional content and customizable,
realistic simulations of various social media environments in which to practice
it; an initial platform for developing these interventions, along with a small
set of pilot interventions aimed at general middle school audiences, have
already been developed as part of the Social Media TestDrive initiative.
Building on those resources, the first main aim of the project is to identify
youth subgroups for whom the pilot interventions are less effective, then
develop versions of those interventions targeted to the unique needs and
characteristics of those subgroups. This will be done by integrating methods
from inclusive privacy research and contextual inquiry, both of which aim to
develop deep understanding of subgroups in a larger population. The second main
aim is to explore the potential for experiential learning-based interventions
across the lifespan, through doing formative work with older adults to identify
their particular privacy needs and concerns and developing an intervention
suited to those needs. The third main aim is to enhance the platform’s content
creation and data collection capabilities, in order to make it more widely
available for social media simulation-based interventions. Together, these
activities expand the quality, scope, and impact of research around simulation-
based educational interventions for privacy and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.