* 2009125
* CNH2-L: Resilience to drought or a drought of resilience? The potential for interactions and feedbacks between human adaptation and ecological adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Jay Lennon, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,439,923.00

Increasing environmental variability will increase drought in many regions.
Agricultural systems are already responding to increased drought through human
decisions, such as the installation of irrigation systems, and through changes
in the diverse microbial communities that inhabit agricultural soils. In some
cases, microbial responses to drought might protect plants from drought,
reducing the need for farmers to respond. Reciprocally, human decisions, such as
deciding to irrigate or installing cover crops, might affect microbial
communities and the ability of those microbes to protect crops from drought.
Interestingly, different human decisions are likely to have different effects.
Irrigation might actually cause microbial communities to become less protective
to plants, while practices that increase soil health (e.g., cover cropping or
crop rotation) might promote the ability of microbes to protect plants from
drought. As a result, irrigation has the potential to generate feedbacks that
reduce the power of microbes to protect plants from drought and instead increase
reliance on irrigation. In contrast, practices that promote soil health have the
potential to increase protective microbial communities and cause feedbacks that
increase long-term resilience. It is unclear, however, when such feedbacks are
likely to develop, which agronomic management strategies or soil characteristics
will prevent or promote such feedbacks and how farmers will respond to knowledge
of the benefits provided by their microbial communities. The research team will
test how both farmers and microbes respond to drought, how farmer decisions
influence microbial communities, and how microbial communities and the potential
drought tolerance they provide might protect farmers from climate change and
influence farmer management decisions. The research has direct societal benefit
through improving agricultural practices. The resulting data along with
suggested strategies for promoting the capacity of microbes to protect their
farms from drought will be shared with the team's partner farmers. The team also
will communicate their findings to rural audiences more broadly through public
exhibits presented at state fairs and local museums. Finally, the research team
will share strategies for integrating social science and biological data with
other researchers by hosting a workshop and will contribute to the training of
the next generation of scientists through mentorship of post-doctoral scholars,
graduate students, and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will use the concept of adaptation to bridge social science and
ecological research to investigate how both human decisions and microbial
communities influence resilience to drought and how social and ecological
domains coevolve overtime, toward greater or reduced long-term resilience of
desirable ecosystem functions. The research combines evolutionary theory and
trait-based approaches in community ecology to predict when microbial
communities will change in ways that promote ecological adaptation and plant
resilience to drought, and they draw from past sociological findings, decision-
making models and path-dependency theory to predict human adaptation and when
farmers are most likely to pursue management that influences both short- and
long-term resilience of crop yields. The researchers test these predictions by
combining farmer surveys and interviews with experiments testing the capacity
for microorganisms to protect crops from drought stress to explore human
adaptation, ecological adaptation, and the resulting socio-ecological
interactions and feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.