* 2009409
* How are HI Disks Fed? Probing the Drivers of Regulated Galaxy Growth
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Sanchayeeta Borthakur, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 629,240.00

Disk galaxies form stars through clouds of cold gas in their disks. As the stars
form, the cold gas content is reduced. In order for galaxies to continue to form
stars, they must acquire cold gas from outside. The process of accreting gas
from intergalactic space is called condensation. This project will use
observations from the Very Large Array (VLA) and the Hubble Space Telescope to
map out the cold disk gas and the infalling intergalactic gas in order to better
understand the process of condensation. The project will target 35 nearby disk
galaxies for their observations and will compare the results with computer
simulations of the growth and evolution of galaxies. The data from these
observations will be converted to 3D visualizations for use in public and
classroom settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use 21-cm data from
the VLA and QSO absorption spectroscopy to trace the rotating HI disk to large
galactic radii so that they can identify gas clumps that are inconsistent with
the rotation of the disk. They will look for a correlation between the incidence
of condensing clouds and the prevalence of young stars and stellar feedback. The
VLA maps will be compared to mock images from simulations in order to estimate
the source of the condensing clouds. The project will produce data products that
will be available to the astronomical community through the VLA-Disk website.
They will also produce interactive 3D visualizations for use in public outreach
and within the classroom. Use of these interactive tools will be introduced to
local high-school teachers at an annual StarLab workshop and their effectiveness
will be evaluated through surveys of the teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.