* 2009150
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Subsurface Damage and Residual Stress during Ultra-Precision Machining of Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Woo Kyun Kim, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 210,699.00

Ceramic materials have found various applications, especially under harsh
conditions, thanks to their superior mechanical, electrical, optical, chemical,
thermal, and biocompatible properties. However, since ceramics shatter upon
impact rather than deform, manufacturing ceramic components with complex
structures of high-quality surfaces is a challenge. Ultra-precision machining of
ceramics has found a way to overcome this challenge by cutting or removing very
tiny amounts of material. However, its productivity is not satisfactory and an
understanding of the material behavior under cutting, especially at atomic
scale, remains elusive. This award is to find optimized machining conditions for
ceramic materials based on an improved understanding of material failure. This
understanding is obtained by a combined strategy of state-of-the-art experiment
and atomistic simulation approaches coupled with machine learning algorithms.
This approach facilitates the machining of advanced ceramics without the need
for extra post-processing, which is expensive and time consuming and, thus,
achieves industry-required productivity. Moreover, by improving the fabrication
process and damage control of ceramic materials, high quality ceramic components
such as engine blocks, camera lenses, high energy lasers, and biomedical
implants are possible, which benefits U.S. industry and economy. This research
engages students from historically underrepresented groups in research
experiences, leveraging programs such as Graduate Engineering Research Scholar
and Women in Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
research combines experiment and atomistic simulations to understand how
residual stress and subsurface damage form during ultra-precision machining of
ceramics by considering three representative ceramic materials; two hard
ceramics, sapphire and zirconia, and one soft ceramic, potassium dihydrogen
phosphate. Ultra-precision machining of ceramics depends on the anisotropy in
their crystal structure and its influence on the critical depth-of-cut where the
ductile-to-brittle transition occurs. The cutting experiments are designed to
quantify changes in residual stress and subsurface damage under various cutting
conditions while the atomistic simulations provide a detailed understanding of
the ductile and brittle behaviors of ceramics at the atomic scale during
machining. Molecular dynamics methodology is employed for atomistic simulations.
In particular, the multiscale approach, based on the atomistic-continuum
coupling, enables performing simulations in more realistic and near-experimental
conditions. Moreover, experiments and simulations provide sampling conditions
for the machine learning algorithm based on K-nearest neighbor calculations,
which determine the optimal cutting conditions necessary to minimize residual
stress and subsurface damage and cracking. The machine learning predictions are,
in turn, verified by machining experiments and simulations. With this knowledge,
aggressive rough cutting is applied to meet scalable material removal rate while
controlling residual stress and subsurface damage, followed by finish ductile-
mode cutting to remove cracks and smooth out the
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.