* 2009996
* Collaborative Research: Mapping the Supernova Polarization Landscape
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jennifer Hoffman, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2023
* USD 259,361.00

Supernovae, or the explosions of massive stars, are critical to understand, both
because they produce and disperse many of the atomic elements that make up
planets and life, and because their brightness throughout the Universe is used
to measure the expansion of the Universe. Supernova (SN) explosions are not
spherical, but rather geometrically complex phenomena, whose aspherical
structures cause variations in observed characteristics over time as the
explosion evolves. A research collaboration between the University of Denver
(DU) and San Diego State University (SDSU) uses an observational technique
called spectropolarimetry to provide detailed three-dimensional information
about SNe, probing spatial scales that cannot be resolved through direct imaging
from earth or even from space. Spectropolarimetry combines detection of the
polarization of light from a supernova with measurement of the spectrum of that
light. This information reveals the changing densities, temperatures, and
illumination patterns in the ejecta over time; and gives clues to the explosion
mechanisms and the nature of progenitor systems. The project will advance the
future of discovery by training students in these types of observations and
modeling. It will also contribute to the training of a future diverse STEM
community. The investigators will develop a hands-on learning module
demonstrating the concept of polarization, for direct integration into two
activities: the DU SciTech camp, co-directed by the DU principal investigator
(PI), which brings middle-school girls of color to campus for a week-long
discovery-based STEM camp each year, and also the extensive outreach activities
led by the SDSU PI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientists will use data collected
from 2011 to 2018 by the Supernova Spectropolarimetry (SNSPOL) Project, the
largest existing database of spectropolarimetric observations of SNe of all
types, which includes 106 SNe of all types, with 50 observed at 3+ epochs. They
will interpret these data with new state-of-the-art modeling techniques.
Observational surveys are discovering supernovae and related transients at an
ever-increasing rate. The project will broaden the scientific impact of these
discoveries by greatly expanding the existing catalog of SNe examined with
spectropolarimetry and quantitatively establishing the common signatures of each
SN type. The multi-epoch observations in the SNSPOL database trace each SN’s
evolution as the photosphere recedes, probing ever deeper into the ejecta and
revealing clues to the very nature of the explosion itself. Extracting and
analyzing the most salient spectropolarimetric features from these data will
make the wealth of information they contain available to future researchers. The
results will build a fuller understanding of the 3D nature of SNe of all types
and form a key discriminant for stellar explosion
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.