* 2009469
* Understanding instrumental systematics for the CMB-S4 ultra-deep survey
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Colin Bischoff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 237,741.00

The CMB Stage-4 experiment is a next-generation array of telescopes that will
measure the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) to push the boundaries of our
knowledge of fundamental physics and astrophysics. One component of CMB Stage-4
is the ultra-deep survey, which will measure the polarization of the CMB at
degree angular scales with unprecendented sensitivity. Polarization maps from
the ultra-deep survey will be a powerful tool to search for primordial
gravitational waves, so long as the maps are free of contamination due to
instrumental systematic errors. This award will support development and analysis
of detailed simulations targeting systematics for the ultra-deep survey, using
lessons learned from the current generation of CMB telescopes. The simulations
will inform the design of CMB-S4 and provide a testing ground for development of
mitigation techniques. This program will also support a scientific computing
bootcamp for incoming graduate students in the University of Cincinnati physics
bridge program, making sure that these students have necessary tools for success
in graduate school and their future careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primordial
gravitational waves are a prediction of inflationary theories, which are the
leading explanation for the initial conditions of our universe. The most
powerful technique to search for these gravitational waves is using the B-mode
(curl-type) polarization of the CMB, which is not sourced by density
perturbations. However, primordial B-mode polarization must be very faint, so a
critical challenge is to control all effects that might leak temperature or
E-mode fluctuations into B-modes. It is also necessary to separate primordial
CMB signals from lensing-induced secondary anisotropies and Galactic foreground
emission; these challenges require combining data across angular scales and
observing frequencies at high fidelity. Past and current CMB experiments have
demonstrated good control over systematic errors, but the raw sensitivity of
CMB-S4 requires correspondingly lower levels of systematics. The CMB-S4
forecasting effort has provided guidelines for the acceptable level of spurious
contamination in the maps, but detailed simulations are necessary to connect
these limits to specifications on instrument design and calibration. The work
supported by this award will establish these connections through a series of
targeted simulation sets. The process of generating and analyzing these
simulations will also contribute to the development of CMB-S4 data
pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.