* 2009698
* Imaging Planet Formation Inside the Diffraction Limit
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Stephanie Sallum, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,511.00

A research team led by a Principal Investigator from the University of
California-Irvine will survey young, nearby stars looking for evidence of planet
formation. Thousands of observations of mature planetary systems and of young
stars around which planets are thought to form now exist. Despite this wealth of
data, remarkably little is known about how planets form. Direct images of
forming planets are needed to better understand this process. While the large
distances to young stars make these observations difficult, forming planets
should be detectable by today's telescopes. This program will use a new imaging
method to search for planets around a large sample of young stars and has the
potential to detect giant forming planets. Undergraduate students will be
mentored through the Cal-Bridge and CAMPARE programs, which aim to increase the
number of underrepresented students who complete graduate studies in physics
and/or astronomy. Of the graduating Cal-Bridge scholars in the last four years
(all of which have been underrepresented minorities or women, or both), 82% have
gone on to a graduate program in physics and/or astronomy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will conduct a survey of about 35 transition
disks to detect forming planets that might be causing the protoplanetary disk
clearings. The survey will use the high-resolution imaging technique of non-
redundant masking (NRM), which turns a conventional telescope into an
interferometric array via a pupil-plane mask. The NRM observations will resolve
orbital separations several times smaller than traditional methods (down to ~7
Astronomical Units for most targets). The survey will be carried out using the
Keck/NIRC2 imager at 3.8 microns, making it more mass-sensitive than previous
protoplanet searches, which were executed at shorter wavelengths. In its
entirety, the survey will constrain the underlying rapidly-accreting planet
population in these objects to within ~15% at 95%
confidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.