* 2009351
* Preparing Secondary Teachers to Teach Quantum Information Science
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Karen Matsler, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 03/31/2022
* USD 97,718.00

The National Quantum Initiative Act (NQIA) was signed in December 2018 to ensure
the United States remains competitive in technology and quantum information
science. Quantum information science is fundamental to technology (e.g., cell
phones), national defense, navigation (e.g., GPS), energy systems, banking
security, and more. It is critical for the future workforce to understand basic
principles of quantum mechanics and exposure to that knowledge should begin in
grades K-12. Currently, most U.S. educators lack content background and
confidence in teaching quantum information science. Furthermore, not all K-12
students take physics (some schools don't even offer it) and even fewer will
major in physics in college. Educators who recognize the relevance of quantum
mechanics don't have adequate resources, curriculum, or content background to
effectively introduce or teach quantum information science to students. This
project brings quantum information science to the forefront with a focus on the
future by supporting the pre-university pipeline, specifically secondary STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) educators, so they can prepare
students to enter the workforce or universities, with a background in
quantum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to
provide content and support for teachers to develop a sense of how quantum
information science and technology will affect their students. The objectives
include providing: 1) opportunities for secondary educators and students to
understand principles and applications of quantum information science; 2)
developmentally appropriate classroom resources which support understanding
quantum concepts; 3) an increased awareness of quantum-smart and diverse career
opportunities related to quantum information science; and 4) an increased
confidence (students and educators) with regard to understanding quantum
concepts. This project will provide conferences and workshops that will broaden
exposure to quantum physics to help change the perception that quantum
information science is something only physics majors can understand. These
opportunities will allow educators to return to their schools prepared to
immediately engage students in quantum information science using appropriately
vetted resources and the most current and relevant background knowledge
available. The conferences will build upon quantum information science materials
developed in Canada and Europe. The conferences and workshops will help equip
educators to create learning environments conducive to helping students gain a
deeper appreciation for quantum information science and its fundamental science,
thereby increasing the potential for quantum-smart
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's Discovery
Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in the Directorate for Education &amp; Human
Resources. DRK-12 seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. This project is co-funded by
the Division of Materials Research and the Division of Physics in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.