* 2009251
* Interpretable and Deblended Photometric Redshifts with a Deep Capsule Network
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Newman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2023
* USD 535,578.00

Studies of cosmology, galaxy evolution, and galaxy clustering all critically
depend on redshift measurements. However, spectroscopic redshifts can only be
obtained for a small fraction of the galaxies detected in current and next-
generation deep imaging surveys, so most redshifts must be estimated from the
images alone. This project introduces a promising new neural network
architecture, called a deep capsule network, which will leverage pixel-level
information from imaging surveys to estimate photometric redshifts. Principal
objectives are 1) achieving state-of-the-art accuracy on a common wide-field
test data set; 2) extending these methods to higher redshifts using Legacy
Survey imaging and Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument data; and 3) combining
the resolved optical imaging with integrated multiwavelength photometry in the
ultraviolet and infrared, focusing on very low redshift galaxies that might host
gravitational wave sources. The work includes graduate and undergraduate
research, and a summer research boot camp and weekly seminar series. All course
materials from the bootcamp will be made publicly available with open
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estimating photometric redshifts is a well-posed
problem for machine learning algorithms because spectroscopic redshifts can
provide definitive measurements for training. The pooling operation that fueled
the widespread success of convolutional neural networks throws away fine-grained
spatial information and ultimately limits their ability to generalize to novel
viewpoints and to parse blended objects. The deep capsule network overcomes
these drawbacks of convolutional neural networks, and is much more easily
interpreted. Projects to be carried out, and suitable for student research,
include combining Sloan capsule network results with other photo-z methods to
improve overall accuracy, and applying capsule networks to simulated data
specifically to test performance on blended objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.