* 2009803
* Developing Teachers' Epistemic Cognition and Teaching Practices for Supporting Students' Epistemic Practices with Scientific Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Clark Chinn, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,105,309.00

This project aims to investigate needs and challenges in developing an informed
public able to evaluate empirical evidence generated from scientific activities.
At the core of this research are two intertwined issues: (1) epistemic practices
--how people acquire knowledge of science and how they evaluate knowledge
sources; and (2) how people improve their abilities to evaluate these knowledge
sources so as to improve their abilities to develop and use scientific
knowledge. While much science education research has focused on helping students
develop these abilities such as through scientific argumentation and modeling
(hereafter referred to as scientific thinking), much less research has focused
on how teachers acquire this understanding and how their understanding informs
their instruction. Until recently, the science education field has lacked a
comprehensive framework to support the acquisition, evaluation, and use of
scientific knowledge sources. This project uses a new theoretical framework that
specifies criteria for developing these scientific thinking skills that include,
among others, the value that people place on scientific aims, the cognitive
engagement needed to evaluate scientific claims, and the scientific skills that
will enable one to arrive at the best supported explanation of a scientific
phenomenon. The project will work with high school biology teachers to
investigate their own understanding of scientific thinking, how it can be
improved through professional development, and how this improvement can
translate into practice to support student learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will work with 20 teachers and classrooms that will impact approximately
1500 to 3000 students. Teachers will act as design collaborators in three
iterations of design and development activities with a goal to produce effective
professional development supports with proven student outcomes that can be
broadly disseminated. Data collection each year will entail: (1) 40 to 60 video-
recordings of teacher instruction and student interactions; (2) Content and
pedagogical content knowledge surveys from teachers and students; (3) Teacher
pre- and post-interviews; and (4) Teacher and student artifacts that demonstrate
the extent to which scientific thinking has been achieved. The data will be
analyzed through a mixed-methods approach. Qualitative data will be analyzed
through validated coding manuals that specify a range of abilities in scientific
thinking. Likert-scale and open-ended survey questions will be used to measure
changes in instruction and learning outcomes in various factors related to the
research goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models, and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.