* 2009198
* Collaborative Research: Nanoparticle-Enabled Mechanisms for Growth Control in Immiscible Alloys under Regular Cooling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Lianyi Chen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2021
* USD 66,872.00

Immiscible alloys - alloys composed of two elements which do not form compounds
- are scientifically important and can offer unusual properties to enable a wide
range of applications, such as bearings, superconductors, electrical contacts
and switches, and giant magnetoresistive materials. However, it has been a long-
standing (over 100 years) challenge to obtain the desired structures in these
alloy to achieve the unique properties for applications envisioned. This award
supports fundamental research to provide a transformative technology to obtain a
uniform dispersion of fine minority phases in immiscible alloys during regular
cooling. This work will enable the production of immiscible materials with
exciting properties for practical applications. Course modules and teaching
materials will be developed to provide undergraduate and graduate students with
interdisciplinary training on nanotechnology and nano-metallurgy. The program
will aim to attract, retain, and engage students from underrepresented groups.
K-12 students and teachers will be exposed to the new technology through
outreach activities. Partnerships with companies will facilitate technology
transfer to real world.&lt;br/&gt; The objectives of this research are to
establish fundamental knowledge bases to fully understand and effectively
utilize nanoparticle-enabled mechanisms for controlling diffusional and
colliding growth of the minority phase to obtain finely dispersed microstructure
during regular cooling of immiscible alloys. Four highly interrelated tasks are
planned to achieve the objectives. Task 1 is to conduct fundamental study to
understand the principle of interfacial assembly of nanoparticles in immiscible
alloys. Task 2 will conduct theoretical and experimental studies to understand
the nanoparticle-enabled mechanisms of diffusional growth control and
coagulation resistance. Task 3 is to characterize the micro/nano structures and
properties of the resultant immiscible alloys with and without nanoparticles.
Finally, Task 4 seeks to establish the processing/microstructure/ property
relationships to guide potential industrial applications. This project will
significantly advance the fundamental knowledge for controlling the growth of
minority droplets in immiscible alloys to achieve finely dispersed
microstructure in matrix even under regular cooling rates by rapid nanoparticle
coating. Substantial fundamental insights on nanoparticle assembly in immiscible
alloys, diffusion blocking/restriction mechanisms by nanoparticles,
nanoparticle-enabled colliding growth control will be obtained. The
processing/microstructure/property relationships will be understood and
established to enable a rational design of advanced immiscible materials with
desired properties for wide applications.