* 2009735
* Probing Gravity on Cosmic Scales with Galaxy Clustering and Weak Lensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* David Weinberg, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 229,902.00

The project will use simulations of dark matter structure growth over
cosmological time combined with models for the growth and structure of galaxies
and galaxy clusters to develop tools to use data from two dark energy surveys to
better understand how dark matter clustering creates the structure we see in the
universe today. The approach to be used will use emulators to produce synthetic
observations from different models of galaxy clustering. These synthetic
observations will be compared with observations to determine which models best
reproduce the galaxy clustering seen today. The project will also support
education and public outreach efforts at Ohio State University as well as
continued support for the combination of art and science projects that relate to
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop analysis tools
for use with data from the Dark Energy Survey (DES) and the Dark Energy
Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI). The project will construct emulation tools for
model predictions based on cosmological N-body simulations populated with
galaxies according to halo occupation distribution models. The tools will be
applied to three main areas: (i) measuring the evolution of dark matter
clustering by combining galaxy-galaxy weak lensing with galaxy clustering; (ii)
measuring the evolution of dark matter clustering by combining cluster weak
lensing with projected cluster-galaxy cross-correlations and galaxy auto-
correlations; and (iii) measuring mean infall velocity profiles around clusters
using reshift-space distortions of the cluster galaxy cross-correlation
function. The project will indirectly support a number of outreach and
broadening participation efforts at Ohio State University through the
involvement of the PI as chair of the Astronomy Department. The PI will be
directly supporting engagement in combining art and science projects,
specifically instigating a course that would teach animation students from OSUâ€™s
Advanced Computing Center for Art and Design program to create works for the
immersive environment of a planetarium dome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.