* 2009717
* CNH2-L: Human waste and its role in creating at an integrated socioenvironmental system at an urban-wilderness continuum.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* John Bock, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,599,576.00

Antibiotic resistance and foodborne disease present an escalating public health
crisis, with agriculture production systems identified as a critical control
point. However, antibiotic resistance and foodborne pathogens are increasing
even in remote locations far from agricultural production, and our understanding
of how human food waste from agricultural products may contribute to the
movement of antibiotic resistance and foodborne pathogens across landscapes is
meager. This project investigates how human food waste contributes to the
movement of antibiotic resistance and foodborne pathogens and how we can manage
these interactions across socioenvironmental systems. It will create new
theoretical and practical knowledge regarding these issues and create new
forecasting tools that can be used to manage the spread of agricultural-
associated antibiotic resistant, foodborne pathogens. Project goals include: 1)
Producing cross-scale, multisector longitudinal data sets, 2) Identifying key
system processes, interactions, feedbacks, and control points, and 3) Developing
new knowledge, theory, and tools that are generalizable and can be used to
predict and forecast management needs in urban planning, waste management,
sustainable development, public health, and land management. Tools evolving from
this work will be useful for managing the retail sale and movement of
agricultural products, human food waste, and scavenging wildlife across urban
and protected landscapes. The educational and training activities associated
with this project will support the development of a new generation of
researchers focused on issues related to coupled natural-human
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibiotic resistance and foodborne disease
outbreaks are a significant public health threat and growing environmental
challenge in the United States and across the globe; however, we lack clear
understanding of the non-linear processes that drive the dissemination of
antibiotic resistant, foodborne pathogens across socio-environmental systems,
including within remote landscapes without commercial agriculture. This project
will advance understanding regarding: 1) if and how transportation of
agricultural products and human food waste disposal drives novel antibiotic
resistant, foodborne pathogen introduction and dispersal, and 2) if and how
interactions and feedbacks at different spatial, temporal, and biological scales
influence the health of human and animal communities and ecosystem function
within and between integrated socio-environmental systems. Field data from
aquatic and terrestrial landscapes will be integrated with laboratory studies
that feed into a bioeconomic modeling framework to capture feedback loops among
human decisions, animal community dynamics, environmental conditions, antibiotic
resistance, foodborne pathogen transmission, and health impacts. This framework
will be used to test hypotheses, characterize interactions and emergent
phenomena, and identify critical leverage points to halt the transmission of
food waste-associated antibiotic resistant foodborne pathogens through
integrated socio-environmental systems. Overall, this research advances
understanding of disease transmission and antibiotic resistance in coupled
natural-human systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.