* 2009131
* Heavy binary black holes in the making: constraining the physics of chemically homogeneous evolution using gravitational waves and electro-magnetic surveys of local analogues
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Selma de Mink, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 415,538.00

Gravitational wave searches are now detecting the mergers of binary black holes
and neutron stars (very compact stellar remnants) at a rate of almost one per
week. Arguably, the biggest surprise is the detection of very heavy binary black
holes with masses more than thirty times that of the Sun, well in excess of the
known black hole binaries in our galaxy. A research group at Harvard University
will carry out a theoretical investigation to help understand how these heavy
binary black holes form. The scientists expect to learn more about the lives and
deaths of massive stars, which are important in the history of the Milky Way and
other galaxies, since they produce many of the chemical elements and influence
their surroundings by emitting ionizing radiation and outflows. The lead
researchers also plan to modernize STEM education through the development of a
hands-on computer lab that will make direct use of the data and software that
result from the project, and work to increase in participation of women and
minorities in theoretical and computational astrophysics, through efforts that
are supported by, and complementary to, the project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
two most popular ideas to explain the how heavy black holes are made are (i) the
classic common envelope scenario and (ii) the dynamical formation scenario. Both
are promising in some ways, but also face serious challenges and open questions.
This research project will investigate a third possibility called the chemically
homogeneous scenario, in which the stars in the system are very close at birth.
Such stars are tidally deformed and believed to be prone to instabilities that
cause chemical mixing. This supplies the nuclear burning regions with extra fuel
and leads to very compact massive helium stars, which eventually collapse into
black holes. The principal investigator and a graduate student will conduct an
extensive theoretical investigation of this channel. The primary aim is to
provide predictions that can be used to constrain the scenario by comparison
with observations of the properties of local populations of massive near-contact
binaries (periods, mass ratios, and surface abundances). The secondary aim is to
compare with existing and future gravitational wave observations (merger rates,
distributions of masses and mass ratios, effective spins, eccentricities, and
orbital variations). The team hopes that these efforts will lead to the first
solid constraints or upper limits on how much this channel contributes to the
massive black hole population and on the physics that drives this channel. This
project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.