* 2009840
* Calibrating Stellar Gyrochronology Using Improved Rotation Period Measurements
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Marcel Agüeros, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 522,662.00

Stellar rotation provides a promising, yet flawed means for age-dating stars.
Recent surveys of rotation in open clusters revealed that spin-down stalls for
an extended period of time, the duration of which increases toward lower stellar
masses. This research program will improve rotation-based age-dating techniques
for low-mass stars (40-130% of the Sun's mass) by calibrating “gyrochronology”
with a modern, expanded database of rotation period measurements for benchmark
star clusters. The PI is the founder of the Columbia University Bridge to the
Ph.D. in STEM Program. For twelve years, the Bridge program has increased the
number of underrepresented scholars entering STEM Ph.D. programs and to equip
them to succeed in these programs. A Bridge scholar will play a leading role in
this research program, with careful mentoring from the senior researchers on the
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will determine when stars converge on the
slow sequence by examining nearby and young open clusters and moving groups
observed by TESS (50-500 Myr). Next, Kepler, K2, and PTF data for older clusters
(&gt;1 Gyr) will be analyzed to constrain the stalling timescale and the
subsequent rate of spin-down. This will inform a new empirical model that will
describe all the observed phases of spin-down in stars of different masses.
Finally, the impact of metallicity on rotational evolution will be tested using
sets of coeval but chemically different clusters. For example, rotation period
distributions will be produced for NGC 6866 using Kepler data, and Coma Ber
using TESS data. These sequences will be compared to those for Praesepe and the
Hyades, which are approximately coeval (all ~700 Myr) but are 0.2 dex richer in
metallicity than the target clusters. Determining this sensitivity to
metallicity is critical for inferring accurate rotation-based ages for field
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.