* 2009032
* CIF: Small: Graph Signal Processing Methods for Data-driven System Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Antonio Ortega, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Data-driven design is leading to unprecedented performance improvements in many
widely used systems. Examples of recent successes can be found in speech
recognition, advanced video analysis or imaging-based medical diagnosis, to name
just a few. This project is motivated by the observation that more data does not
always lead to better system design. In fact, extensive use of poorly understood
data can create significant risks once systems are deployed. For example, data
may introduce bias toward specific system outputs (e.g., lead to incorrect
diagnoses) or performance might degrade significantly under even small changes
in data collection (e.g., microphone characteristics, camera resolution). These
risks are a major obstacle to wider adoption of data-driven tools, in particular
in critical applications. This project develops methods to select data for
improved system design, based on new models for large scale datasets. The
ultimate goal of the project is to reduce deployment risk by designing systems
based on the most representative dataset rather simply using the largest
dataset. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many applications, such as sensing,
anomaly detection, classification, recognition or identification, systems are
designed by first collecting significant amounts of data, and then optimizing
system parameters using that data. As task complexity, data size and the number
of system parameters increase, system analysis and characterization tasks become
a major challenge, with estimates often based on end-to-end performance on the
training set. Examples of these tasks include (i) estimating system accuracy,
(ii) characterizing system stability to changes in data, (iii) determining the
correct amounts of data needed for training or (iv) predicting their ability to
generalize to different situations. In this project, graph-based approaches are
developed to characterize large datasets in high dimensional space. This
research is focused on theoretical, algorithmic and practical aspects of system
characterization and design. On the theoretical front, this project tackles the
problem of designing graphs that capture relevant properties of the data space,
developing asymptotic results to link the distribution of the data to properties
of graphs and related graph signals. On the algorithmic front, efficient methods
for graph construction and task complexity estimation are developed, with the
goal of enabling selection of the most representative dataset. As an
application, practical deep learning architectures are considered, methods to
increase their robustness are studied, and new strategies for active and
transfer learning are developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.