* 2009170
* Louis Stokes B2B Alliance: Puget Sound Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ann Murkowski, Seattle Community College District Office
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. The Puget Sound Bridge to the
Baccalaureate Alliance (PS-B2B) focuses on undergraduate research experiences to
develop participants’ STEM identity to prepare underrepresented minority (URM)
community college students for successful transfer to and completion of STEM
baccalaureate degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PS-B2B will use evidence-based
strategies focused on expanding undergraduate research experiences throughout
the Alliance and implementation of evidence based best practices to develop
participants’ STEM identity in support of student success. Activities will
include further developing an Alliance-wide recruitment plan, a diversity of
meeting opportunities for LSAMP scholars to build community, increased and
focused opportunities for undergraduate research experiences including
integration into STEM ‘gateway’ courses, mentoring training for faculty who will
be guiding students in research activities, and guidance in the process for
transferring to a four year program. The Alliance will form a Community of
Practice to develop and disseminate successful approaches to undergraduate
research experiences for community college students. Alliance activities will be
supported by existing partners within the Alliance as well as external community
partners, including the three University of Washington institutions and other
regional institutions including those in the Pacific Northwest LSAMP. Transfer
to four-year programs will be facilitated by statewide transfer articulation
agreements that are already in place among the Washington institutions.
Comprehensive project evaluation with the support and participation of both the
leadership team and an external evaluator will form the basis for achieving
project goals and disseminating successful
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PS-B2B is led by North Seattle College in
partnership with Green River College and Pierce College, with regional four year
institutions as informal partners and points of transfer. PS-B2B builds on
existing statewide articulations between community colleges and four year
institutions to bolster a region-wide effort in STEM degree attainment and
career achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.