* 2009577
* Collaborative Research: Toward a Uniform and Complete Spectroscopic Archive for the COSMOS Legacy Field
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Caitlin Casey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 257,218.00

The Cosmic Evolution Survey (COSMOS) is directed at understanding the evolution
of galaxies and their environments over cosmic time. It occupies a 2 square
degree field in the constellation Sextans that is ideal for peering deep into
the universe. as it is not obscured by objects in our own galaxy. This team will
compile all available spectroscopic data in the COSMOS field into a uniform
database that will provide redshifts for over 168,000 galaxies. These data will
significantly enhance the COSMOS archive, giving it enormous value as a tool for
future studies. Students will be supported at the University of Texas and the
Rochester Institute of Technology. The data will be made available through
Zoouniverse for a Citizen Science program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will
produce an online, interactive database containing all the available
spectroscopy over the COSMOS field, including data from published surveys as
well as previously un-published data available in public archives and data from
telescope archives of multi-object spectrographs. It will contain the available
reduced data and data products but when necessary, raw archival observations
will be reduced. It will have high quality 2D and 1D spectra, measured
redshifts, and a catalog of absorption/emission line fluxes, equivalent widths,
and kinematic properties linked to existing multiwavelength imaging data and
photometric databases. The database will be used to address important
outstanding questions in the fields of cosmology and extragalactic
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.