* 2009121
* Collaborative Research: DeepCMB: New Measurements of the Cosmic Microwave Background with Deep Learning
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Camille Avestruz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,438.00

Studying the cosmic microwave background (CMB) allows us to test models of
inflation in the early universe, the formation of large-scale structures across
cosmic time, and the standard model of particle physics. Although next-
generation telescopes will observe the CMB at new levels of precision, the
primary challenge will be to reduce systematic uncertainties. This project will
develop new analysis techniques that can reap the benefit of these forthcoming
highly sensitive CMB experiments. Existing partnerships in the Chicago area will
be leveraged to train students from underrepresented backgrounds in computation
and data science. Mentoring postdoctoral researchers and graduate students in
cosmology and data science will be used to develop opportunities and skillsets
for underrepresented groups in research environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work involves creating deep neural networks to perform high signal-to-noise
extraction of information, to enable improved limits on r, the tensor-to-scalar
ratio, and to increase the number of detected galaxy clusters at higher
redshifts and lower masses. The study will use both mock data and data from the
South Pole Telescope (SPT) to: 1) produce an extensible framework for the fast
simulation of mock CMB data sets; 2) use neural networks to perform galactic and
extragalactic foreground cleaning and delensing; 3) use deep learning
classfication and regression to complement existing galaxy clusterfinding
algorithms. Tools developed for this CMB application will have cross-cutting
effects on other sciences, and on the science of deep learning
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.