* 2009833
* CNH2-S: Testing the strength of coupling among climate, natural, and human systems using big data
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Virginia Iglesias, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2024
* USD 598,679.00

Climate variations cause economic losses every year, but adaptations built into
resource and supply systems, such as agriculture and food, energy, water
resources, and manufacturing supply chains, buffer these impacts. Although
management strategies and adaptation have been examined in many case studies,
systematic analysis that can add up to fundamental insight has been limited. To
fill this gap, this project undertakes a big-data, hypothesis-driven, assessment
of the sensitivity of a variety of socio-environmental systems to historical
fluctuations in climate across the continental United States. The analytical
challenge is to do this empirically, with evidence from diverse sources, across
multiple sectors, at high resolution, and at the national scale. By contrasting
systems under different management intensities experiencing similar climate
conditions, this research expects to constrain changes in system sensitivity due
to management. The project thus bridges theoretical approaches from the
biophysical, social, and information sciences in ways that can be used to
evaluate the effects of climate variability and change, the effectiveness of
adaptations in the U.S. economy, and strategies for sustainability under
changing conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Streamflow, vegetation, and wildfire
dynamics are interconnected through water and energy limits and demands which
are, in turn, regulated by climate. Management goals for water resources,
agricultural productivity, and hazard mitigation ultimately aim to minimize the
impact of disturbances on water availability, food production, and safety.
Adaptation strategies typically focus on minimizing sensitivity to climate
fluctuations, albeit in ways constrained by cost, technology, and competing
needs across systems. This project will leverage the climatological diversity
and long history of management and adaptation in the contiguous United States to
conduct a big-data, hypothesis-driven analysis for how the strength of coupling
between climate and socio-environmental systems varies as a function of
management intensity. The conceptual framework for analyzing and interpreting
the effects of management is based on complex-systems theory, whereby impact can
be viewed as an emergent property. The degree of coupling between climate and
systems under contrasting styles and intensities of management can be
characterized as the sensitivity of system indicators (streamflow, reservoir
levels, vegetation productivity, wildfire, crop yields, and economic activity)
to changes in the statistical properties of the climate forcing (mean, variance,
entropy, and determinism), and quantify it with dose-response functions. Results
will be used to identify natural experiments where comparisons between heavily-
managed systems adjacent to those that are managed minimally can constrain how
management and adaptation affect system sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.