* 2009003
* CHS: Small: Scaffolding Data-Centered Interactions in Online Civic Discussions
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Steven Dow, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2024
* USD 547,353.00

This project seeks to increase the level of evidence-based discussion at news
websites by creating scaffolding that supports data-literate contributions and
by adopting concepts from crowdsourcing such as micro-task workflows,
incentives, and quality control. The research vision is twofold: (1) to help
individuals form a deeper understanding of a civic issue so that their
contributions are more valuable, and (2) to layer these contributions back into
the original news article so that the narrative and data presentation
continually improve for people just entering the discussion. Communities
everywhere grapple with civic issues, such as housing, mobility, and climate
change. Online discussion systems offer a unique opportunity for diverse
audiences to collaboratively build insights around a civic issue, but these
systems rarely reach their potential. At best, online discussions give people a
chance to express opinions, but all too often they become breeding grounds for
trolling and misinformation. The volume of comments can overwhelm moderators,
making it difficult to highlight well-reasoned insights that can advance a
community. This research aims to advance technologies that scaffold data-
centered contributions in order to help communities interact constructively
around evidence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will (1) characterize the
current state of data-centered discussion by analyzing the past ten years of
online commenting on three popular news websites, (2) develop and compare
scaffolding techniques based on data literacy education that would orient people
to offer data-centered observations, critiques, and improvements, (3) conduct
controlled experiments to evaluate how these scaffolds affect personal outcomes
like comprehension and data literacy, discussion behavior such as reciprocity,
and community outcomes including polarization, and (4) develop and evaluate
novel online discussion technology through real-world deployments in a project-
based classroom focused on climate change and as part of a civic design
competition. All research products - including data sets, analysis methods, and
source code - will be made available to other researchers exploring online
discourse, data science, visualization, and civic
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.