* 2009441
* Advancing the Search for Isolated Pure Dark Matter Halos
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Keith Bechtol, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 420,198.00

Approximately 85% of the matter in the Universe exists in an invisible form
called dark matter that is distinct from atoms and other known particles.
Galaxies are born and grow within regions of higher dark matter density, called
halos. The Standard Cosmological Model predicts that for every dark matter halo
large enough to host a galaxy, there are many smaller dark matter halos
containing no stars and little gas that would be effectively invisible. The
abundance and density profiles of such low-mass dark matter halos are especially
sensitive to the properties of dark matter. This program aims to determine the
minimum dark matter halo mass for galaxy formation by using a population study
of the least luminous galaxies around the Milky Way. Even smaller dark matter
halos could be detected at cosmological distances via gravitational lensing. The
investigator will perform a multiwavelength search for gravitational lenses
suitable for detailed follow-up study. Astronomical survey datasets used in this
work, including images and object catalogs obtained from the Dark Energy Survey,
will be publicly released with data access tools, scientific validation, and
documentation to enable research, education, and outreach activities. Science
results, images, and experiences from the Dark Energy Survey will be shared on
several digital media platforms to connect with broader
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program involves two complementary
observational, theoretical, and data analysis components. First, the
investigator will conduct a census of low-luminosity galaxies orbiting the Milky
Way over the entire high-Galactic-latitude sky using an ensemble of optical
surveys. Search algorithms incorporating precise multi-band photometry and
astrometry will probe the galaxy population in the extremely low surface
brightness regime. The objective is to determine the dark matter halo mass
threshold below which baryons have negligible impact on the structure and
evolution of dark matter halos. Second, the investigator will combine data from
wide-area optical and radio surveys to enlarge the sample of high-redshift
strongly lensed radio-loud active galactic nuclei. The multiwavelength search is
expected to yield several new targets for high-resolution follow-up with very-
long-baseline radio interferometry. With such milliarcsecond- scale angular
resolution observations, it would be possible to identify dark matter halos
below the mass threshold of galaxy formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.