* 2009303
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Design of Responsive Materials and Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Stephen Shipman, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 277,000.00

This project is motivated by the confluence of two technological advances. The
first is 3D printing and other novel manufacturing technologies. The second is
the development of active materials whose properties can be altered by
electrical or magnetic fields and heat. It is now becoming possible to 3D print
active materials like shape-memory alloys and liquid crystal elastomers. This
paves the way for responsive structures whose shape can be controlled by
external stimuli. Further, combining them with structural materials can endow
them with functions that are of use for many applications including soft
robotics, wearable and prosthetic devices, microfluidics, cleanup of hazardous
chemicals, targeted drug delivery, and tissue engineering. However, there is no
known way to systematically design such devices. This project will develop a
methodology for the systematic design of responsive structures and meta-
materials which are complex assemblies of distinct materials and voids,
especially optimal design where one seeks the best function at the least cost.
These optimal design problems lead to substantial mathematical problems.
Conversely, a better mathematical understanding of these problems can lead to
new design approaches. By providing robust methodologies for the design and
synthesis of responsive structures and meta-materials, this research will have a
significant technological impact. It will also provide for the training of two
graduate students and several undergraduate researchers. It will generate new
opportunities for engaging K-12 students in STEM, and for promoting STEM
education amongst underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will study mathematical questions motivated by the vision of
incorporating structural and responsive materials (materials whose response
function depends on external stimuli) into integrated functional materials and
structures which can change shape and can be combined with structural materials
to endow them with function. Such materials include shape-memory alloys, photo-
sensitive elastomers, or liquid crystal elastomers with controlled orientation.
The design of such structures is challenging. In structural materials, topology
optimization combined with additive manufacturing has proven to be an extremely
powerful tool, and mathematical analysis played a very important role in making
it so. Indeed, the most straightforward formulation is an ill-posed problem in
the calculus variations, and this has been addressed using relaxation (for
example, the homogenization method) and regularization (for example, perimeter
penalization). Naive formulations of optimal design problems using responsive
materials are still ill-posed and their relaxation and regularization are open.
For example, while optimal design with structural materials typically leads to
min-max problems, extension to responsive materials requires maximizing a linear
combination of minima. Trajectory optimization, unilateral constraints (due to
limits in response), and issues surrounding manufacturability are also of
interest. The research will provide a robust mathematical foundation that can
form the basis for methodologies for the design and synthesis of integrated
functional materials and structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.