* 2009248
* CNH2-L: Modeling the dynamics of human and estuarine systems with regulatory feedbacks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Raleigh Hood, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,436,438.00

Changing patterns of transportation, land use, water use, and economic activity
impact the environment and, ultimately, the quality of human life. Models allow
us to predict how human behavior affects the environment, but we do not yet have
the ability to predict how changes in the environment affect human behavior and
decision making. As a result, we know much more about how the environment
responds to human decisions than we do about how humans respond to a changing
environment and how these responses drive decision-making. Using the Chesapeake
Bay as an example, this project will develop a model to predict how social,
economic and policy changes impact water quality, and how changes in water
quality influence human behavior and decision-making. These predictions will
include several plausible future development scenarios (e.g., smart growth
versus business as usual) that will allow us to learn how environmental
degradation impacts different communities and how they respond through policies
and actions. The model produced by this project will help state and local
officials make informed decisions to plan for sustainable growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linked socio-economic and environmental models demonstrate
potential for forecasting scenarios of how human behaviors may drive changes in
transportation, land use, water quality, and ultimately living resources (e.g.,
fish habitat and seagrass growth). However, the human responses to changes in
environmental quality have not been sufficiently accounted for in most models.
This project develops a coupled modeling system to study the complex
interrelationships among socio-economic activity, transportation, land use, land
cover, and water quality with feedbacks between the human social-economic system
and the environmental system. Through the development of a model that links
social-economic and environmental models with two-way feedbacks between them, it
will be possible to simulate and forecast how human behavior impacts nutrient
loading and water quality in Chesapeake Bay and how, in turn, the failure to
meet water quality standards feedback to influence human behavior and decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.