* 2009999
* Ultracold Neutral Plasmas as High Energy Density Plasma Simulators
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Scott Bergeson, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 509,425.00

This project will advance fundamental understanding of how ion temperatures
change during violent collisions. Extremely powerful lasers have been built in
the US and elsewhere to create small, controlled nuclear reactions. These lasers
are tightly focused to heat atoms to temperatures of millions of degrees and
force them to collide violently. Understanding exactly how this process works is
critical for optimizing future experiments in laser-driven nuclear reactions.
This project will reproduce violent ion collisions in slow-motion in an
experiment where the ion motion can be measured with extreme precision. In
collaboration with theory specialists, the results will be used to validate
computer simulations. These simulations, in turn, can then be applied to higher
temperature laser-driven experiments with greater confidence. In addition to
this important scientific contribution, this project will allow undergraduate
and graduate students to participate in cutting-edge research in the field of
plasma science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plasma generated in laser-driven high
energy density (HED) experiments changes rapidly. The plasma is formed when a
coated cryogenic solid deuterium-tritium fuel target is heated and compressed by
laser energy. The plasma temperature rises from nearly absolute zero to millions
of degrees and the density rises above solid-state density. Modeling collisions
throughout this process requires many different approximations, complicating
computer simulations of the rapidly changing environment. Experimental
measurements of the electron and ion temperature and density are also
challenging in such HED plasmas, due to both the violent physical conditions and
the intensive modeling required to convert measured quantities into basic plasma
properties. With appropriate temperature- and density-scaling, this research
project will probe collision dynamics in some of these difficult-to-model and
difficult-to-measure circumstances. The project will study energy transfer,
radiative heating, and thermal relaxation in the strongly-coupled-plasma regime,
over a range of initial densities and temperatures and for a few different
geometries. The first task will be to measure momentum transfer and collisional
heating in a dual-species ultracold neutral plasma. The second task will be
aimed at measuring electron-ion energy relaxation in magnetized and unmagnetized
ultracold neutral plasmas. ​Graduate and undergraduate students will be
recruited and trained to work on the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.