* 2009508
* Modeling light echoes from hot dust and the broad line region in Active Galactic Nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Robinson, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 371,287.00

We now know that most galaxies in the universe host a supermassive black hole at
their centers. As interstellar gas falls in towards the black hole, a huge
amount of energy is released, creating an extremely bright light source at the
center of the galaxy. These sources, called Active Galactic Nuclei, can far
outshine the galaxy’s entire population of stars. Because inter-galactic
distances are vast, Active Galactic Nuclei are difficult to resolve even using
the best images obtained with current telescopes. However, by measuring “light
echoes” astronomers can probe the environment around the black hole. In this
project, the PI will develop a computer program to model these light echoes. By
comparing computer generated “echo maps” with data obtained from several
observational surveys, the PI will be able to map the gas and dust structures in
large numbers of Active Galactic Nuclei. A series of Astronomy and Physics Days
for local high school students will be hosted at the RIT campus, which will
include talks and activities specifically designed to address the interests and
concerns of female students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad emission lines
observed in the spectra of Active Galactic Nuclei provide key diagnostics of
various physical properties, including the mass of the black hole. The inner
region (the “central engine”) is surrounded by a torus of dusty molecular gas.
This structure obscures our observations and severely hinders studies of the
black hole growth phase. Due to their distances, Active Galactic Nuclei are
difficult to study by direct imaging with current telescopes. However, an
alternative method, known as reverberation mapping, can be used. The broad
emission lines and the infrared emission from dust embedded in the torus respond
to variations in the central engine’s luminosity with a delay due to light
travel times. This produces a “light echo” that contains information on the
spatial distribution, velocity field and other properties of the emitting gas
and dust. In this project, the PI will develop a computer code to produce
detailed models of the light echoes of both the broad emission lines and the
infrared emission from the torus dust. The PI will use the code to model data
from several current and near future observational reverberation mapping
surveys. By modeling these data sets, the PI aims to map the gas and dust
structures in large samples of Active Galactic Nuclei. This will help
characterize the evolution of the supermassive black hole population over cosmic
time. Upon completion of the project, the computer code and related products,
such as the computed echo maps, will be made available to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.