* 2009453
* Activity of Strongly Magnetized Neutron Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Andrei Beloborodov, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2024
* USD 636,351.00

Extremely dense stellar remnants, known as neutron stars (NS), are not quiet
objects. They are known to have quakes in their crusts, which can produce bright
bursts of radiation. Like earthquakes allow geologists to study the interior of
the Earth, neutron star quakes allow astronomers to probe the star’s interior,
one of the most important questions in high-energy astrophysics. A research
group at Columbia University will use computer simulations to model NS quakes
and their interactions with the NS magnetosphere, to better understand
observational phenomena such as NS timing glitches, bursts from highly
magnetized NS called magnetars, giant NS flares, electromagnetic precursors of
neutron star mergers, and perhaps even solve the production of mysterious fast
radio bursts (FRBs), which may arise from magnetars. More generally, theoretical
astrophysics has a broader impact through promoting knowledge about our universe
and through education. The results of the proposed research will be disseminated
at conferences and taught as part of high-energy astrophysics course at Columbia
University. The research will involve training of graduate and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First-principle simulations of magnetospheric
emission from a quake are novel and will significantly advance the field. The
research group has developed a new code that follows the spreading of shear
waves excited by a quake into the entire crust, the liquid core, and the
magnetosphere. The magnetospheric activity will be examined using an advanced
plasma code developed by the group and designed for global kinetic simulations
of electron-positron discharge around neutron stars. The proposal has two parts.
(1) First-principle simulations of the magnetospheric response to crustal quakes
and calculation of the produced radiation. The simulation method will be used to
investigate two phenomena: (a) The recently discovered choking of the Vela
pulsar during a spin glitch. This observation likely witnessed a powerful
starquake. (b) The emission of X-ray bursts by magnetar quakes, a long-standing
puzzle. (2) Development of an evolutionary model of young, hyper-active
magnetars. These hypothetical objects are plausible engines of cosmological
FRBs. The project focuses on the driver of hyper-activity --- ambipolar
diffusion in the neutron star core --- and its effect on the magnetosphere,
leading to magnetic flares and launching blast waves in the magnetar
wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.