* 2009127
* Enhancing Energy Literacy through Place-based Learning: Using the School Building to Link Energy Use with Earth Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Laura Zangori, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Student understanding of energy concepts about Earth systems and human-built
systems require grappling with current societal issues related to resource use
and management, energy sources, climate impacts, and sustainability. These
relationships are challenging for students and underdeveloped in many science
curriculum frameworks. This exploratory project will design, pilot, and evaluate
a 10-weeek, energy literacy curriculum unit for a program called Energy and Your
Environment (EYE). In the EYE curriculum, students will study energy use and
transfer in their own school buildings. They will explore how Earth systems
supply renewable and nonrenewable energy, and how these energy sources are
transformed and transferred from Earth systems to a school building to meet its
daily energy requirements. Learning about complex ideas in a place that is
common to both students and teachers provides a means for deeper understanding
and application of energy use and exchange. The research team includes
researchers in biology and in architecture with an emphasis on natural resources
and the environment. The researchers will work with four middle school science
teachers to develop a curriculum unit that requires deep understanding of
energy-systems models, but that will also be designed to apply to the school
system and community. This is place-based learning aligned with the Next
Generation Science Standards to foster energy literacy, modeling of energy use
and flow, and systems thinking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions for
this study will ask about students' ability to construct and explain models
about energy use and exchange, as well as about teachers’ use of the newly
developed instructional materials. The research team will collaborate with 4
middle school teachers to design and test the unit in their classrooms. Data
collection includes students' drawn models of the energy systems in use in their
school building, student and teacher interviews, classroom observations, and
teacher questionnaires. Student understanding of the learning goals will be
assessed through a learning performance on energy modeling, and an accompanying
rubric to score student models and explanations. After an initial implementation
of the unit in classrooms, the following summer, researchers and teachers will
meet to revise the curriculum materials. Then, teachers new to the curriculum
unit will participate in the professional development required to teach the EYE
unit. They will introduce the revised unit to their students in the next year,
as researchers collect data and evaluate student learning for the revised
curriculum materials. Overall, the project intends to include about 600 middle
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.