* 2009353
* CNH2-S: Interactive Dynamics of Stream Restoration and Flood Resilience in a Changing Climate
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Rebecca Lave, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 611,446.00

The Upper Mississippi River Basin has seen increasingly frequent flooding in
recent years, a trend that will almost certainly worsen. Wisconsin’s Kickapoo
River and Coon Creek watersheds have experienced at least three 100-year floods
in the last decade, and there is an urgent need to understand how to address and
adapt to this new reality. In response, this CNH2-S project brings together
researchers from the University of Wisconsin-Madison and Indiana University with
cross-disciplinary expertise in biophysical and social approaches to stream
restoration and flooding. Working closely with local partners in the Kickapoo
and Coon Creek watersheds, the research team will use interviews and online
surveys with local decision-makers, land and water managers, and agricultural
landowners to learn about changing attitudes towards stream restoration and to
inform the development of new flood models that work from the level of an
individual section of stream to an entire watershed. Those models will be
refined through a series of interactive workshops, resulting in locally informed
models. The project team’s emphasis on public engagement will allow them to
analyze and promote workable and effective agricultural best management
practices and flood prevention strategies that can contribute to local
resilience planning in these rural and under-resourced communities, and offer a
model for other communities faced with persistent
flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CNH2-S project will ask four nested
questions that interrogate the multi-scalar dynamic feedbacks between in-stream
restoration practices, upland conservation measures, flood peaks, and community-
level impacts of and responses to climate change: (1) How does more frequent and
more intense flooding across the Upper Mississippi River Basin alter stream
restoration practices in the study watersheds, linking or breaking the potential
connection between restoration and resilience? (2) How do stream restoration
practices, particularly changes in channel morphology, impact community-level
climate vulnerability to flooding? (3) How do stream managers, flood decision
makers, and landowners balance socio-environmental tradeoffs related to flood
vulnerability and resilience across the reach and watershed scales? (4) Can
iterative, multi-scalar hydrologic and hydraulic modeling be incorporated with
qualitative and participatory approaches to support stakeholder-based flood
resilience planning to enable social-ecological system (SES) transformations?
The density of stream restoration projects in the Kickapoo and Coon Creek (WI)
watersheds, coupled with long-term impacts and accelerating frequency of flood
events and community interest in flood planning, will allow the research team to
co-create knowledge with local partners that extends existing research in
social-ecological systems (SES) resilience: heeding recent calls to offer
empirical studies of community-level climate vulnerability and responses to
climate change, while focusing on innovative linkages between restoration and
resilience to consider new opportunities for SES transformations. The approach
advances understandings of the complex responses of flood hydrology and
hydraulics to multi-scalar flood management interventions, filling a significant
gap by relating flood hydraulic and watershed hydrologic approaches to
investigate how stream- floodplain restoration interacts and compares with
upland practices to reduce flood peaks. This multi-scalar approach, with its
grounding in stakeholder engagement mechanisms, offers a testable,
methodologically innovative, partner-centered, resilience-focused systems
approach to flood risk management that can advance resilience planning in the
study watersheds and in other socio-environmental systems facing rapid and
uncertain changes related to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.