* 2009288
* CNH2-L: Integrating Cross-scale Socio-Ecological Feedbacks in Freshwater Fisheries
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Eduardo Brondizio, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,599,922.00

Freshwater fisheries provide food, income, and recreation to millions of people.
Conventional management of these systems typically relies on the implementation
of management rules based on assessments of fish populations. Little
consideration is given to the capacity of institutions to enforce management
rules or the social factors that affect the motivations of fishers to comply
with them. Consequently, freshwater fisheries are often poorly managed and
overfished. Working with a community-based management system for freshwater
fish, this project will integrate fish ecology, population dynamics,
institutional analysis, and social psychology to understand the social and
ecological factors affecting the sustainability of freshwater fisheries.
Research results will inform policy on the integrated dynamics of community-
based management of fish resources. In addition to education of graduate
students and peer-reviewed publication of the research, we will build on our
case study to develop an open-access, web-based training program on fisheries as
coupled natural and human systems aimed at senior-level undergraduate students.
This program will use written, video, and project-based materials to contribute
to fill the growing demand in higher education for development and sharing of
teaching materials in coupled human and natural systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study interactions between floodplain
ecosystems, movement of freshwater fish, and their use of lakes on the
ecological side, and culture, community, institutions, and fisher rule
compliance on the social side. The team will use an integrated modeling approach
that incorporates social and ecological components at three scales of analysis
to produce novel and general insights on the integrated dynamics of fisheries.
To do this, they will collect extensive socio-ecological data and use knowledge
co-production with fishers and managers to address four overarching research
questions: how habitat and connectivity affect fish movement among lakes to
identify drivers of fish lake use, and thereby explain their abundance across
the ecosystem; how fishers’ perceptions of fish abundance, and income they
derive from fishing, affect their compliance with institutional rules, given
community culture, leadership, and institutional arrangements; how rule
compliance is affected by regional factors, markets, and government rules; and
finally, because the emergent property of sustainability arises from the
interplay of social and ecological factors, how ecosystem habitat and
connectivity and fishers’ rule compliance affect the dynamics of fish
populations. The approach will push knowledge frontiers by pioneering
contributions to the theory, methods, and applications of coupled natural and
human systems research to freshwater fisheries and other common pool resources
such as marine fisheries or wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.