* 2009613
* Locally Adaptable Instructional Materials and Professional Learning Design for Place-Based Elementary Science
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Ruth Kermish-Allen, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,999,677.00

This project addresses the growing need for high quality elementary science
learning experiences that help students understand their worlds - connecting to
landscapes, phenomena, communities, and cultures with which they are familiar.
Currently, many curricular units designed for widespread use to meet the
expectations of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) do not connect to
local phenomena. Units that do incorporate local phenomena are often developed
from the ground up by community members, requiring extensive time and resources
that are not widely available. To support equitable access to place-based
science learning opportunities, this project, in collaboration with BSCS Science
Learning, will develop and test a model to support 3rd-5th grade teachers in
incorporating locally or culturally relevant place-based phenomena into
rigorously tested curricular units that meet the expectations of the NGSS. The
project team will develop two units that could be used in any region across the
country with built-in opportunities and embedded supports for teachers to
purposefully adapt curriculum to include local phenomena. In-person and virtual
professional learning experiences will further help teachers who have limited
district support for science to incorporate place-based approaches.
Participating teachers will range from rural and urban settings in California,
Colorado, and Maine to ensure the end products of this project are relevant,
scalable, appropriate for a wide range of students across the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how to design instructional
resources that value rigor and standardization while at the same time
incorporating the cultural relevancy of place. The project goals are to: 1)
design, test, revise, and disseminate two locally adaptable instructional
resource packages for grades 3-5 science that include educative curriculum
materials and supporting professional learning; 2) use design-based research to
examine how teachers apply unit resources and professional learning experiences
to incorporate local phenomena into the curriculum and their teaching; and 3)
examine how the process of curriculum adaptation can support teacher
understanding of the science ideas and phenomena within the units, teacher
agency and self-efficacy beliefs in teaching science, and student perceptions of
relevance and interest in science learning. Data from before, during, and after
two rounds of unit enactments will be collected from 50 classrooms per unit
across a range of geographic locations. Data will include weekly instructional
logs, teacher surveys, measures of teacher self-efficacy and teacher agency and
student electronic exit tickets. In addition, six exemplar case study teachers
per unit will inform a deeper understanding of the potential of a curriculum
adaptation model for incorporating local phenomena. Case study data will include
teacher post-enactment interviews, classroom observations, and student focus
groups. The design and research from this project will advance the fieldâ€™s
knowledge about how to design instructional materials and professional learning
experiences that meet the expectations of the NGSS while also empowering
teachers to adapt materials in productive ways, drawing on locally or culturally
relevant phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models, and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.