* 2009776
* CDS&amp;E: AST: Collaborative Research: Computational science in support of space missions: plasma turbulence modeling on geodesic meshes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dinshaw Balsara, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

In situ and remote observations in the solar wind and other astrophysical
environments reveal that the plasma invariably possesses anisotropic
temperatures. This requires non-ideal magnetohydrodynamics (MHD), but so far
there has been no consistent approach to modeling the necessary physics. The
most significant open question in heliophysics is to explain the extraordinarily
high temperature of the solar corona and hence the origin of the solar wind.
Forthcoming observations should provide a wealth of new information, but
interpretation is likely to find current theory considerably wanting. This
project will go beyond the MHD approximation using the most sophisticated
computational algorithms and combining the unique strengths of the research
team. The calculational tools developed to analyze solar activity will yield a
better understanding of how solar storms arise and thus enhance predictive space
weather capabilities. The research team is heavily involved in the teaching and
dissemination of computational physics with significant workforce development
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in plasma theory provide closures
of the fluid hierarchy incorporating anisotropic pressures, reproducing linear
Landau damping to any desired precision, and demonstrating convergence of the
fluid and collisionless kinetic descriptions. This work will integrate an
advanced description of the coronal and inner heliosphere plasma into models of
wave propagation, turbulence transport, and anisotropic heating. It will enable
solution of the Chew-Goldberger-Low (CGL) equations, including a Hall term, on
adaptive, spherical meshes with physics-based turbulent closures. This involves
three highly innovative tasks: 1) a correct treatment of the Hall-CGL equations;
2) development of adaptive mesh refinement for spherical meshes; 3) a weakly
compressible model for turbulence which enables a physics-based estimate of the
transport coefficients for anisotropic thermal conduction in plasmas with
anisotropic pressure distributions. The resulting code will take the
astrophysics and space science communities to the next level of sophistication
in modeling astrophysical plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.