* 2009418
* Interactions between Turbulence and Waves: Kinetic Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Yuri Lvov, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 339,961.00

The dynamics of the ocean is a fascinating and complex subject. There are many
types of waves and flows in the ocean: surface gravity waves are the familiar
waves that can be observed breaking rhythmically near the shore; internal waves
are hidden beneath the surface and take the form of modulations between layers
of different water density; ocean eddies are circular currents of water, and
finally, turbulence includes myriad types of unsteady movements of water. These
different flows span a wide range of length and time scales, ranging from
centimeters to thousands of kilometers, and from a few seconds to several years.
Crucially, all these flows interact with each other, creating a system of
immense complexity whose study remains a major challenge. This project attempts
to build a rigorous mathematical theory to characterize the interactions between
internal waves and large scale, two-dimensional eddies. The motivation is recent
data from physical oceanography, indicating that processes operating on small
scales can significantly affect oceanic energy flows on the large scale. The
project will contribute to the study of this phenomenon by analyzing how energy
is transferred in the reverse direction, from large scale horizontal motions in
eddies to small scale isotropic turbulence where the energy of the eddy is
dissipated. Additionally, the project will provide research opportunities for
postdoctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of waves and
turbulence within a rotating stratified fluid is of crucial importance for the
understanding of the ocean and atmosphere dynamics. The project will examine
this interaction by employing the hydrostatic rotating Boussinesq equations. The
project aims to utilize ideas from the wave turbulence theory on a novel system
of partial differential equations that is equivalent to the hydrostatic rotating
Boussinesq equations but has the advantage of explicitly separating wave motions
from vorticity effects. This PDE system will be used to derive kinetic-like
equations that describe the flow of spectral energy density between large scale
vortices and internal waves. The mathematical predictions will be compared to
oceanographic data of internal waves as well as to high resolution direct
numerical simulations of rotating stratified
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.