* 2009935
* CSEDI: Integrated seismic, geodynamic, and mineral physics studies of multi-scale structures in the lowermost mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2023
* USD 364,000.00

The behavior of materials in the deep Earth constrains the flows that drive
plate tectonics. Voluminous eruptions driven by deep mantle sources are thought
to have caused global environmental changes. At the core-mantle boundary (CMB) –
about 3000 km below the Earth’s surface - dramatic compositional and thermal
changes occur. These changes exert a primary influence on the cooling of the
planet. They also influence the core dynamics (hence Earth’s magnetic field) and
impact mantle thermal convection. Yet, understanding the dynamics of the deep
Earth is not trivial. Indeed, multidisciplinary efforts and state-of-the art
techniques are required to tackle the complexity of the Earth system. Here, the
researchers investigate enigmatic features observed at the core-mantle boundary.
To unveil their origin, the team combine expertise in seismology, geodynamics,
and experimental mineral physics. The researchers carry out experiments at the
extreme pressures prevailing in the mantle. They measure the properties of deep
Earth materials using powerful x rays and infrared light at national synchrotron
facilities. Taking advantage of recent advances in computational facilities,
they simulate the interaction of crustal materials with lower-mantle materials
made of multi-scale structures. These materials are brought together by tectonic
forces through Earth’s complex history. Outputs of the models are compared with
seismic observations, hence gradually unveiling the dynamics of the deep Earth.
The project provides support for graduate students at the California Institute
of Technology. It also fosters international collaboration with Australia and
the UK. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismologists have revealed that the mantle side
of the CMB is extraordinarily heterogeneous, with km-scale fine structure that
could harbor distinct chemical reservoirs. Thermal and chemical heterogeneity,
solid-solid phase transitions, elastic anisotropy, variable viscosity, and
melting are probably all required to explain the observed complexity. With
expertise in seismology, geodynamics and experimental mineral physics, the team
connects the atomic scale (thermoelastic properties of deep Earth phases) to the
tectonic scale (seismically observed structures and their dynamics) and link all
processes to the temporal dimension (reconstruction of tectonic plate history).
The researchers conduct a systematic study of the Pacific large low seismic
velocity province (LLSVP) and proximal surroundings such as ultralow velocity
zones (ULVZs). They use whole seismograms compared against synthetics generated
from enhanced tomographic models and thermo-chemical convection models. The
models integrate plate tectonic reconstructions constrained by observations and
account for materials’ physical properties, including elastic tensors. The
experiments assess the sources of the seismic signatures of candidate deep
hydrous phases in subducted slab. They include: (1) shear wave speed
measurements using inelastic x-ray scattering techniques; and (2) thermal
equation of state and stability constraints using x-ray diffraction and
synchrotron infrared spectroscopy at lower mantle conditions. The study
addresses fundamental questions, such as: can the presence of subducted slabs
deform LLSVPs into seismically resolvable 3D shapes (with distinctive
anisotropy) and affects D" topography and chemically–distinct structures near
the edges of LLSVPs? Are all ULVZs created equally? If hydrous phases can be
transported into the lowermost mantle, are they seismically detectable and can
they contribute to the stability of a thermo-chemical
pile?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.