* 2009096
* DEEP Drilling into the Kuiper Belt: The DECam Ecliptic Exploration Project
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* David Gerdes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 428,215.00

This work will complete the DECam Ecliptic Exploration Project (DEEP). DEEP is
an ongoing ground-based telescopic survey of Trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs).
Observing the faintest objects yet found in the outer solar system, DEEP will
likely discover 6,000 – 10,000 TNOs. As of today, all surveys of the Outer Solar
System have yielded approximately 2,000 TNOs combined. DEEP will observe many of
the faintest TNOs down to diameters of ~50 km. Until now, these faint TNOs have
been under-represented in surveys due to the difficulty in observing them. The
survey will also discover approximately 100,000 asteroids throughout the Solar
System. This unprecedented trove of TNOs will yield new insights into Solar
System evolution and its origins. This work will complete a graduate student’s
PhD and will involve a number of undergraduate students through the University
of Michigan’s REU program. The team is also working with UM’s Natural History
Museum on an exhibit based on this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DECam Ecliptic
Exploration Project (DEEP) has been awarded 46.5 nights on the 4-meter Blanco
Telescope at CTIO. Science operations began in 2019 with 8.5 nights, and will
continue in 2020 and 2021. DEEP will acquire 4-hour exposure sequences of near-
ecliptic fields, reaching a depth of 24.5 mag in single exposures and nearly
27.0 mag in co-added stacks. Using established shift-and-stack techniques, DEEP
will discover thousands of trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs). A proof-of-concept
analysis in early DEEP data yielded 80 TNOs with SNR&gt;15 in a single 4-hour
DEEP exposure sequence, implying an eventual yield of 6,000-10,000 discoveries
with SNR&gt;5-10 even without improvements to the team’s existing tools. The
team will measure the TNO size distribution down to ~50 km, measure colors and
rotation rates of many objects as a function of their dynamical class and
discover distant objects beyond the Kuiper Belt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.