* 2009922
* CNH2-S: Water-mediated coupling of natural-human systems: drought and water allocation across spatial scales
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Cameron Wobus, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 743,315.00

In many parts of the country, rivers are the primary water source for uses such
as irrigation, recreation, cities, and power generation. Each water use has a
different economic value. Also, the withdrawal of water from each river may
follow a different institutional rule-system, for example private ownership of
‘water rights’ versus a public system of water allocation. Differences in the
value of water combined with the local rule-system can lead to more- or less-
productive outcomes, both economically and in terms of environmental
sustainability. The effects of these differences are not well understood across
scales and climate regimes, but it is known that any differences will be
exacerbated during periods of water scarcity, e.g. droughts. To investigate
these interactions, this research plan combines models of hydrology,
infrastructure, and economics for different river systems and evaluates outcomes
following a range of water allocation systems. The investigated water allocation
systems span a spectrum ranging from more rigid systems based on established
water rights, to those in which water goes to the highest-value uses. The
modeling framework permits analyzing systems at different spatial scales and for
rivers that primarily receive water from snowmelt versus rainfall. As
populations grow and climate changes, the rules used to manage water will need
to evolve and adapt, underscoring the importance of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demand for water exceeds supply for many
river systems in the drought-prone western U.S. This shortfall necessitates
enhanced knowledge of the linkages and feedbacks between the natural variations
in water availability and the human decisions that govern water movement in
these stream-supplied systems. In these systems, water is used for agriculture,
recreation, municipal uses, power generation, and other activities—each with a
different valuation of water. Variations in the natural system, in particular
drought, constrain the total amount of water available for human use. Water
allocation rules and available water infrastructure connect the natural and
human components. The proposed effort will advance knowledge of how hydrologic,
climatic and economic processes jointly determine the value and allocation of
water, across a range of drought intensities and spatial scales. Previous
studies have shown that feedbacks and thresholds influence the coupling between
hydrologic and societal systems. Yet, development and evaluation of advanced
modeling approaches is needed to more fully understand the implications of
human-natural interactions for different watersheds. The proposed research will
develop a new system for modeling water-focused coupled human and natural
systems that utilizes an operational water allocation model to link the
hydrologic and economic components. This architecture will enable a direct
evaluation of how two contrasting agent-based models of human behavior
(microeconomic versus institutional-based rules) yield different outcomes across
a range of conditions and scales. The growing demands for water and changing
climate will require new ways of managing water, highlighting the importance of
this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.