* 2009981
* Breaking, Peaking, and Disintegration
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Vera Mikyoung Hur, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 359,353.00

Water waves manifest in a wealth of phenomena, from ripples to tsunamis to rogue
waves, and their study presents profound and subtle mathematical challenges.
This project will combine rigorous and asymptotic analysis, numerical
computation, and modeling to address fundamental issues in the mathematical
aspects of water waves. Emphasis is on genuinely nonlinear phenomena and highly
complex processes, such as breaking and peaking, an acute understanding of which
will rely on the convergence of perspectives and techniques from widely diverse
areas of mathematics and other disciplines. Progress in the project is expected
to deepen our understanding of the mathematics of surface water waves and lead
to applications in physical oceanography to geophysical fluid dynamics. The
project will also provide opportunities for involvement of graduate students in
the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will seek rigorous analysis to explain
recent -- remarkable and unexpected -- numerical results concerning peaking and
touching waves, plunging, and whitecapping processes. She will develop highly
accurate computational methods to reveal novel wave phenomena, stimulating
further investigations. She also aims at rigorous instability analysis for a
Stokes wave: Benjamin-Feir, high-frequency, and nonlinear. This requires
significant modifications of and nontrivial extensions to the existing methods,
as well as development of new ones. The main thrust is the use of the Euler
equations rather than simplified approximate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.