* 2009870
* CMB Polarization Foreground Effects on B-modes and Lensing
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* David Collins, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 533,715.00

Scientists in the 1960s first observed the background of cosmic microwaves left
over from the Big Bang. In the coming decade, new and precise measurements may
let astronomers use the cosmic microwave background to find faint signs of
primordial gravitational waves. Theoretically, these waves should arise from
quantum fluctuations as the Universe expanded rapidly in its first moments, and
finding them would be a revolutionary confirmation of this idea. However, the
signs of these gravitational waves will be obscured by two effects:
gravitational lensing and Milky Way contamination. Lensing is the distortion of
the microwave background's light by the gravitational pull of galaxies and dark
matter throughout the Universe. Gas and dust in our own Milky Way galaxy then
further contaminate our view. In this project researchers will model the gas and
dust and investigate mitigation of the lensing distortions to aid future
attempts at detection of primordial gravitational waves. The project will
sponsor the research and training of students at the undergraduate and graduate
level. To ensure that exciting developments in early-Universe research reach the
broader community, this project focuses on attracting new students to STEM
disciplines with public talks and events, college-level curriculum development,
and high-quality STEM student mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Milky Way
foreground contamination is larger than the possible polarization ("B-mode")
signal of gravitational waves but is too small and too faint to be well
characterized by the Planck satellite. This project builds on the researcherâ€™s
current modeling of these foreground contaminants to characterize and avoid
these problems. The effort will (1) continue development of an analytic
filament-based foreground model and (2) use magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) computer
simulations of the turbulent interstellar medium as a basis for realistic
foreground simulations. These tools will be used to investigate the implications
for B-mode measurements, lensing reconstruction, and delensing, and will enhance
understanding of the physical basis for observed properties of the polarization
foreground and the interstellar medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.