* 2009767
* EoR-Spec: Revealing the reionization of the Universe with CII intensity mapping
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michael Niemack, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2024
* USD 961,382.00

This project will map the formation and evolution of galaxies and the large-
scale structure of the Universe. The team will design, build and use an imaging
spectrometer, which is referred to as EoR-Spec. EoR-Spec will map the far-
infrared spectral line of singly ionized carbon. This carbon line traces where
stars formed and allows mapping of the history of star formation over a large
fraction of the universe’s existence. Such mapping also reveals the underlying
distribution of matter in the universe. This instrument will utilize a new
optimized telescope for this task located on an 18,400 foot mountain in northern
Chile. This program provides a training ground for both graduate and
undergraduate students. The PI and Co-I have trained, or are training, many PhDs
and undergraduates including female and underrepresented minority researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program seeks to develop an instrument to
study the evolution of star formation in galaxies from the Epoch of Reionization
(EoR), when the first galaxies were forming to near “Cosmic Noon”. This is done
by mapping the aggregate 158 micron [CII] line emission over large regions.
Since the [CII] line tracks star formation, and star formation occurs at
gravitational over-densities, this [CII] line intensity mapping traces the
cosmic star formation rate. It also illuminates the underlying and evolving
Cosmic Web. To make such measurements, the team will build EoR-Spec. This
instrument will deploy on the 6 meter aperture Cerro Chajnantor Atcama Telescope
(CCAT-prime), which is located at 5600m elevation in northern Chile and is
expected to see first light in late 2021. The science is enabled by CCAT-prime
and a combination of state-of-the-art technologies: broad-band Fabry–Pérot
interferometer (FPI) etalons based on silicon substrate mirrors with
metamaterial antireflection coatings and large format Kinetic Inductance
Detector (KID) arrays. The proposers have trained, or are training &gt;20 PhDs
and &gt;80 undergraduates. About half of these are female and about 10 are
underrepresented minority (URM) researchers. Students from local K-12 schools
will visit team laboratories, and local K-12 schools will be visited by team
scientists. The team also plans Virtual Lab Visits and summer student workshops
on instrumentation and science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.