* 2009748
* Cellular Response to Viscoelastic Substrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Christopher Lemmon, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 474,709.00

Many studies over the past decade have demonstrated that cells respond to the
stiffness of the surrounding tissue by pulling on it and sensing the stiffness,
a process known as mechanotransduction. Cells use these mechanotransduction
signals to make a host of decisions regarding survival, migration, and
differentiation into different cell types. Increased tissue stiffness often
accompanies various diseases including fibrotic diseases and cancer. Previous
studies suggest that these diseases may be driven by altered stiffness. However,
there is another mechanical aspect of tissues that has not been studied to the
same degree. Tissues in the human body are “viscoelastic”, meaning that they
behave like both a thick liquid and a stretchable spring. While many studies
have investigated how changing the stiffness of the “spring” component affects
cells, there have been far fewer studies of the effects of the viscous
“thickness” component of the tissue. In this research, the use of novel polymers
to separately change the viscosity and the stiffness of the surface under cells
and determine the cellular responses to each component will be explored. This
work will improve our understanding of how cells respond to their surroundings,
which could lead to significant advances in our understanding of human health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies from the past two decades have convincingly
convincingly that cells are able to sense the mechanical properties of their
surroundings and make major decisions in response to this mechanosensation,
including decisions regarding cell migration, proliferation, survival, and
differentiation. The vast majority of these studies have focused on the cellular
mechanoresponse to changing substrate stiffness (or elastic modulus) and have
been conducted on purely elastic substrates. In contrast, most soft tissues in
the human body exhibit viscoelastic behavior; that is, they generate responsive
force proportional to both the magnitude and rate of strain. What role does the
viscous component of viscoelastic tissue play in driving the cellular
mechanoresponse? To answer this question, pairs of polymer substrates that have
similar storage moduli (elastic component) but significantly different loss
moduli (viscous component) are investigated. The storage moduli for these pairs
spans the range of healthy to diseased soft tissue. The hypothesis is that
increasing loss modulus produces similar effects to increasing storage modulus;
in other words, cells on an increasingly viscous substrate respond as if they
are on a stiffer substrate. Cell morphology, traction force generation,
proliferation, migration, and differentiation to isolate the effects of viscous
and elastic components of the substrate on cellular responses will be
quantified. Based on that step, an existing computational model of cell-
substrate mechanical interactions will be modified to develop a potential
mechanism to explain this response mechanistically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.