* 2009765
* Louis Stokes Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Pathways and Research Alliances: Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LS-LAMP)2020-25
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Carrie Robison, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2025
* USD 3,200,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations to successfully complete high quality degree programs in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern University and A&amp;M College, lead
institution for the Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation
(LS-LAMP), consists of a consortium of 12 two-and four-year institutions and one
research organization in the state. Louisiana State University-Alexandria and
Louisiana Tech University join the existing members of the alliance over the
next five years. The&lt;br/&gt;alliance, located in a NSF Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) jurisdiction, will expand its research
and education capabilities through this project by producing up to 1,060 new
STEM baccalaureate degrees and retaining 25% of these students for STEM graduate
studies by 2025. This goal will be accomplished by expanding partnerships to
provide student and faculty research experiences and other support and
addressing sustainability and institutionalization of successful practices in
engagement and retention of STEM students. Specifically, the alliance will
collaborate with Department of Energy (DoE) national laboratories and two Louis
Stokes Regional Centers of Excellence projects, among other public and private
sector organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of the Ten Strand
Systemic Mentoring Model (Ecosystem) and best practices in teaching, mentoring
and learning for STEM minority undergraduate students will continue. The
broadening participation research component of the project will (1) investigate
the relationship that low socio-economic status and/or minority status has on
retention and graduation rates and (2) will quantify the impact that the Ten-
Strand Systemic Mentoring Model has on student retention and on-time graduation.
Project results will be disseminated via the alliance and partner institution
websites to the STEM community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.