* 2009412
* Lifting the veil on Wolf-Rayet rotation using wind structure: Multi-wavelength and Spectropolarimetric Approaches
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Richard Ignace, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 302,768.00

When a Wolf-Rayet (WR) star goes supernova, its core collapses to form either a
black hole or a neutron star. The outcome depends on how fast the WR star was
spinning, but this is difficult to measure for WR stars, which are shrouded by
their own wind. However, distortions in the wind can form corotating interaction
regions (CIRs), which act as clocks and enable the spin period to be determined.
Ignace and his team will monitor WR stars to look for CIRs. They will determine
the spin period and further interpret these observations using their theoretical
models to help us understand how wind features are formed. Undergraduate
students will be recruited for a summer research program. Ignace and his team
will develop a planetarium show for the general public and local high schools.
The show on “space weather” will include a segment on how CIR’s in the Solar
wind can enhance geomagnetic storms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will enhance
an existing Monte Carlo radiative transfer code to characterize how rotational
effects can modulate the wind and form CIRs. The comparison of the models to
observations with the Echelle SpectroPolarimetric Device for the Observation of
Stars on the Canada France Hawaii Telescope will result in a robust picture of
the complex structures in WR winds. For the first time, the team will be able to
relate electron scattering polarization in thick winds with a model for
axisymmetric WR winds, as a function of stellar rotation relative to critical
break-up. Modeling both varying and non-varying contributions to polarization is
important for measuring periods and constraining mass-loss rates. To complete
the picture, the team will model the influence of CIRs on variable IR/radio
continuum flux. Polarization probes structures in the inner wind; the long-
wavelength continuum probes the asymptotic flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.