* 2009219
* Collaborative Research: GOALI - Nonlinear Coupling in Pulsed Electronegative Plasmas: Multiple-sources, Multiple-frequencies, Multiple-time scales
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mark Kushner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 267,048.00

Society critically depends on computers, cell phones and a myriad of specialized
electrical circuits in nearly every technological product we use, from cars to
door openers. What is not widely known is that these electrical circuits are
largely contained in small semiconductor chips, that the dimensions of
components of those circuits are approaching the size of atoms, and that the
circuits are produced in machines containing the fourth state of matter –
plasma. Plasmas are ionized gases that can produce chemically reactive
environments, and are composed of a mix of positive ions, negative ions,
electrons and neutral atoms and molecules. Low pressure plasmas are essential to
the fabrication of microelectronics devices by delivering fluxes of radicals and
ions to a semiconductor wafer. These radicals and ions then etch (remove
material), deposit (add material) and passivate (change surface composition) the
wafer surface through many fabrication steps to create the devices. A voltage is
also applied to the substrate holding the wafer to accelerate ions to high
energies in order to activate these on-wafer processes. An important type of
plasma used in microelectronics fabrication is an electronegative plasma in
which the density of negative ions is much larger than electrons. These plasmas
are very sensitive to operating conditions (such as power, pressure and gas
mixture), with instabilities often. The quality of the devices being fabricated
are sensitive to these instabilities and so tighter control of the plasma
process is becoming more important. Pulsing the plasma (turning the power on-
and-off) and pulsing the acceleration voltage results in higher precision
components with smaller dimensions, whiich translates into more powerful
electronics devices. Although pulsing provides many advantages, pulsing also
produces instabilities. In order to optimize the plasma processes that are used
to manufacture microelectronics devices, these instabilities in electronegative
plasmas must be understood, controlled and, if possible,
prevented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, experimental and computational
investigations of pulsed electronegative plasmas are being conducted for the
type of inductively coupled plasmas (ICPs) that are used for microelectronics
fabrication. The goal is to quantify the interactions between the pulsed sources
that produce the plasma and the pulsed biases that accelerate ions into the
wafer, the onset of instabilities, and methods to control those instabilities.
This investigation is being conducted in collaboration with our GOALI partner
Lam Research Corp. We are making 3-dimensional, time dependent measurements of
electron density, temperature, plasma potential, current density, magnetic
fields and ion energy distributions using laser and electrical probe
diagnostics. First principles modeling is being used to investigate fundamental
plasma transport during pulsed transients, electrostatic-to-electromagnetic
(E-H) transitions and interactions of pulsed sources and biases. The end result
will be a greatly improved understanding of pulsed electronegative plasmas of
the type used for materials processing, with this understanding being rapidly
translated to practice by our GOALI partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.