* 2009679
* Collaborative Research: Stars from Clouds - Turbulence, Magnetic Fields and Dynamics of Forming Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Blakesley Burkhart, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,643.00

Stars are formed in molecular clouds of gas in galaxies. Astronomers seek to
understand what causes a particular region of a molecular cloud to form a star.
This seemingly simple question is at the heart of several basic research
frontiers of modern astrophysics, including galaxy formation and the origin of
stellar clusters. The investigators plan numerical simulations of magnetized
molecular clouds that include important physical processes and a variety of
initial conditions. The investigators will compare their models to radio
wavelength observations of Giant Molecular Clouds (GMCs) from NSF’s Atacama
Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA). In their studies of the structure
and kinematics of GMCs, they will focus on long, filamentary clouds that have
been found in the Galactic plane. The investigators will test models of dynamics
of young stellar systems using data from ongoing optical surveys of thousands of
young stars. The investigators will train undergraduate and graduate students in
advanced research methods, which will be of general benefit in their future
careers in either science or industry. The investigators plan a new “Stars from
the Clouds” presentation for public outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team plans numerical simulations of the dynamics of magnetized molecular clouds,
including clouds extracted from larger scale shearing galactic disk simulations,
giant molecular cloud collisions and idealized periodic box turbulence. A focus
of the simulations is inclusion of non-ideal magneto-hydrodynamic processes of
ambipolar and reconnection diffusion in adaptive mesh refinement simulations,
which also model astrochemistry and predict metrics to be compared to
observations. For the stellar cores, the priority will be study of spatial
distributions and populations of pre-stellar and proto-stellar
cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.