* 2009947
* Collaborative Research: Reverberation Mapping with Multi-Object Spectroscopy - from Sloan Digital Sky Survey Reverberation Mapping to the Black Hole Mapper
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Yue Shen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 06/30/2025
* USD 264,024.00

This project will study the flicker of light from supermassive black holes that
linger at the center of most of the big galaxies in the universe. These
supermassive black holes weigh more than a million (up to about ten billion)
times the mass of the Sun, and the glowing radiation from materials being “fed”
into these black holes can outshine the star light from the entire galaxy,
allowing these black holes to be observed in the very distant regions of the
universe. In this project, astronomers will measure the variations of radiation
from these supermassive black holes and how the materials immediately
surrounding the black hole “echo” this variability. This measured echo allows
astronomers to infer the mass of these monster black holes that are actively
growing, and, in turn, help them understand how supermassive black holes form
and evolve across cosmic history. In the area of Broader Impacts, the PIs plan
to incorporate their research into strong educational and outreach programs at
each of their institutions. In particular, these programs include a summer camp
for high school girls, centered on data analysis, a black-hole workshop for
middle schools, and a new summer bridge program for physics undergraduates from
non-traditional backgrounds. These programs will encourage the participation of
groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supermassive black holes are ubiquitous at the
center of massive galaxies in the universe. When they are actively accreting
matter to build up their mass, they can produce immense radiation that often
outshines the entire galaxy in which these massive black holes reside. This
radiation from active supermassive black holes is not constant, but flickers at
levels that are measurable with modern astronomical facilities. This project
will measure the flicker from thousands of such active supermassive black holes
over a five-year period, and the “echoes” from gas clouds immediately
surrounding the black hole. These echo measurements will infer the spatial
extent of these gas clouds in the vicinity of the black hole, and enable the
measurement of the black hole mass. This project will use this technique to
measure the masses of active supermassive black holes on an unprecedented
industrial scale, most of which are billions of light years away, to understand
the cosmic evolution of supermassive black holes and their relationships with
their host galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.