* 2009884
* WoU-MMA: Luminous Supermassive Black Hole Accretion Systems as High-Energy Neutrino Factories
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Alexander Chekhovskoy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 448,578.00

For the past decade, NSF's Ice Cube observatory located in Antarctica has been
on the hunt for energetic neutrinos. To make neutrinos, you need to smash small,
subatomic particles together at near light speeds. While scientists have known
this for a while, where nature hides its neutrino factories has remained a
mystery. Recently, the decade-long pursuit led scientists to the galaxy TXS
0506+056. This galaxy emitted high-energy neutrinos alongside a pulse of light.
Despite finding the galaxy, the scientists still do not understand what makes it
into a neutrino factory. Using a computer code the researchers plan to develop,
they will recreate the central regions of this galaxy inside of the world's
largest supercomputers. They will then look inside of the cyber-galaxy for any
places where particles accelerate and smash together. They will catalog all such
places and identify those that emit both neutrinos and light, matching the
observations of the real galaxy. This will help us to reveal the secrets of how
and where nature makes energetic neutrinos and light, enabling the scientists
around the world to better understand nature's neutrino factories. The PI will
bring experiments into a local high-school and will involve high-school students
in real-world data analysis and visualization. Students will gain experience
working with Big Data, and they will set up in-class physical experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutrino production sites and their physical conditions
are poorly understood. The fact that one high-energy neutrino was detected
simultaneously with a gamma-ray flare suggested that both messengers originate
in the same region, likely inside the relativistic jet. The discovery of roughly
a dozen of high-energy neutrinos from the direction of TXS 0506+056 within ~6
months without any accompanying gamma-ray flare complicates the picture, as it
implies that neutrinos and gamma-rays are not produced co-spatially.  Some
questions to be answered include: What is the structure of radiative tilted thin
disks around black holes? Where are the dissipation regions in such flows? What
are the production sites of high-energy neutrinos? Are they produced via photo-
hadronic or hadro-nuclear interactions? Why do most of the neutrinos coming from
the direction of TXS 0506+056 have no bright electromagnetic counterpart? How do
luminous accretion flows manage to produce powerful radio jets, defying the
standard expectation that such disks are jet-phobic? What is the spectrum and
variability of such flows? Understanding these issues will allow the scientific
community to meaningfully and quantitatively interpret multi-messenger
observations of black hole accretion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
addresses/advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.