* 2009369
* Pre-Alliance Planning: Working Together ? Adelante!
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2021
* David Ribble, St Mary's University San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 12/31/2021
* USD 124,199.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM. The need for
cultivating STEM talent has been well established. For the United States (U.S.)
to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all
its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas
that underpin the knowledge-based economy. American students from diverse ethnic
groups are underrepresented in STEM fields,and represent an untapped resource
for the STEM workforce in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;St. Mary’s University,
Our Lady of the Lake University, Trinity University, and the University of the
Incarnate Word, all Primarily Undergraduate Universities (PUIs) in San Antonio,
aim to form a new Louis Stokes STEM Pathways Implementation-Only (SPIO) Alliance
to increase the number of STEM baccalaureate and graduate degrees awarded to
students that are underrepresented minority (URM) in the STEM workforce. Three
institutions participating in the pre-alliance planning project are Hispanic-
Serving Institutions (HSIs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
identifying the causes of “leaks” in the STEM pipeline by first designing a
collaborative and normalized metric to track student cohorts, identifying data
gaps, and conducting a needs assessment among the Alliance students to identify
barriers to URM student retention in STEM. Planning activities will include
several workshops over the 18-month period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pre-
Alliance Planning project seeks to ultimately increase the preparedness of URM
students in STEM fields and increase their retention, through the evaluation of
potential interventions and identification of student perceived barriers to
retention. With regards to analyzing retention data, the Alliance will develop a
plan, which will be disseminated through the higher education landscape, to
document student retention in STEM majors beyond the first year and to track URM
STEM majors who enter graduate/professional school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major outcome from this project will be the development of metrics, an
evaluation design, and assessment methods to aid in development of the full
alliance proposal. Dissemination of project results have the potential for
customization and application to other PUI and MSI institutions in the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for this project is jointly provided by the
Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation and the Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Programs in the Division of Human Resource Development (HRD)
and the Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.