* 2009592
* Collaborative Research:  A Fresh Look at M Dwarf Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Fortney, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 358,639.00

Over 70% of all stars are “M dwarfs”, which are much smaller, cooler, and less
luminous than the Sun. A better understanding of their physical properties
touches on galactic chemical evolution, the dynamics of the galaxy, stellar
atmospheres, molecular astrophysics, star formation, planet formation, and
exoplanet characterization. This group will advance our understanding by uniting
the best physical models of stellar interiors and atmospheres and testing them
with high-quality observations. These projects have an important training
component, as much of the work will be done by graduate students at UC Santa
Cruz, Arizona State University, and Boston University. Undergraduate students
will also be involved in the research, and the team will create a new curriculum
and training materials, including a webinar for students to learn about future
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will carry out a thorough modeling study
of M dwarf atmospheres, interiors, and evolution. Previous work on M dwarf
physics has used methods and codes devised for more massive stars, with workers
moving down in mass to M dwarfs. This group will use modeling tools developed
for brown dwarfs, just lower in mass than the M stars, and then move up in mass
to model these objects. M dwarfs and brown dwarfs share many properties, like
molecule-dominated atmospheres and partially degenerate interiors. This team
will use spectral "retrieval" models for M stars, a fully Bayesian data-driven
method, to yield best-fit temperature structures and abundances that are not
bound to pre-computed atmosphere grids. They will focus on benchmark, well-
studied M stars in orbit around Sun-like primaries. Based on the outcomes of
this work, they will then compute a large grid of radiative-convective model
atmospheres to yield trends in temperature, gravity, and metallicity, which will
be of use to the entire astronomical community. Such models will also serve as
the upper boundary conditions for new self-consistent M dwarf evolution models
with MESA, which will include a new hydrogen equation of state. This will allow
them to pursue detailed comparisons with previous theoretical and observational
work on M dwarf atmospheres, their locations on the H-R diagram, and observed
mass-radius relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.