* 2009268
* WoU-MMA: Collaborative Research: Gravitational wave cosmology with tidal Love numbers
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Nicolas Yunes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

The recent detection of gravitational waves (GWs) with the LIGO detector has
heralded a new era of GW astrophysics. A research collaboration between the
University of Illinois and the University of Chicago will investigate whether
careful measurement of the properties of GW events, when combined with
traditional astronomical observations can help astronomers to better determine
the Hubble constant, H0, which is related to the age and expansion rate of the
universe. This research will be integrated with activities aimed at changing the
attitudes of middle-school students and the general public toward physics and
science, through a newly-developed planetarium show and accompanying standards-
aligned lesson plans for middle school teachers, along with public talks by the
lead scientists. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research is aimed at studying
whether the use of more sophisticated models for the GWs emitted in the
coalescence of neutron stars can be used to better measure the Hubble constant.
The GW waveform models used today depend on the tidal Love numbers of each star
in the binary, dimensionless parameters that measure the rigidity of a body in
response to tides. It is known that these constants are related to each other
and to the mass ratio of the binary through certain equation-of-state
insensitive relations. The use of the latter allows for the extraction of the
individual tidal parameters, which can then be used to extract the source masses
of the binary components. The waveform, on the other hand, also depends on the
redshifted chirp mass of the binary, which can be extracted as an independent
parameter. Therefore, the combination of the measurement of the individual
source masses through the tidal parameters and the measurement of the redshifted
chirp mass should yield a measurement of the redshift, independently from any
electromagnetic counterpart. The research will study how well the redshift can
be measured through this technique, and whether the accuracy to which H0 can be
estimated may be improved by combining this redshift measurement with
information from an electromagnetic counterpart or through the stacking of
information from multiple GW events. The principal investigator of the project
has developed a planetarium show called Einsteinâ€™s Gravity Playlist, which is
designed to explain general relativity, black holes, and gravitational waves to
young audiences. This show will be deployed in the Midwest, starting at the
Staerkel Planetarium in Champaign, Illinois, and later at the Adler Planetarium
in Chicago. The show will be paired with "eXtreme Gravity for Middle School," a
set of fully formed, standards-aligned lesson plans for middle school teachers
aimed at supporting them in learning how to deliver content on topics including
gravitational lensing, neutron stars, black holes and gravitational waves to
middle school students. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on
the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.