* 2009820
* Migration and Survival of Exoplanets near Magnetized Young Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Richard Lovelace, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2024
* USD 315,766.00

A research investigation conducted by a team from Cornell University will
simulate the orbital migration of planets under the influence of a host star's
magnetic field. Observations present an important problem: large, gaseous
planets that are thought to form far from their host stars are often found to
orbit very close to their host stars. It is thought that after forming, gas
planets migrate towards their host stars by losing angular momentum to friction
within a disk of gas and dust. However, it is not understood why these planets
do not fall into the star. An important problem in the science of planets today
is understanding how they survive in such close proximity to their host stars.
This team will investigate through supercomputer simulations what role the
stellar magnetic field plays in the survival and orbital distribution of
planets. They will also develop a new tabletop astronomy exhibit at the local
Sciencenter. The Exhibit will educate the public about the properties of magnets
and the magnetic fields of the Earth and Sun, and it will prepare them for the
total Solar eclipse of 2024, which will be visible near Ithaca, NY. One graduate
student will be actively involved in the modeling of planetary orbits and in
explaining science to the public at the Sciencenter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Migration of planets in the vicinity of rotating
magnetized stars will be studied in global numerical simulations. The
investigation will advance understanding of the role that young magnetized stars
play in the migration and survival of exoplanets. Specifically, they will (1)
investigate the migration and survival of planets inside magnetospheric
cavities, taking into account their interaction with the inner disk; (2)
investigate migration and trapping of low-mass planets at disk-cavity boundaries
due to corotation torque, and (3) study whether interactions of exoplanets with
waves in their inner disks can change eccentricities and inclinations of their
orbits. The investigation will use three-dimensional magneto-hydrodynamic codes:
the first a code in cylindrical coordinates, which incorporates mesh refinement,
and secondly the Cubed Sphere code, which has been used extensively in the past
for modeling accretion onto magnetized stars. Both codes include a planetary
module that calculates the orbits of planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.