* 2009020
* Program Optimization with Data-Specific Compilation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Louis-Noel Pouchet, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 449,929.00

Irregular data structures, as exemplified with sparse matrices, are essential in
modern computing: they are central in numerous scientific applications, ranging
from physics simulation to graph processing. A key challenge is to deliver high-
performance implementations for computations on irregular structures, which
typically use additional arrays to store explicitly the coordinates of non-zero
elements in the structure. The project's novelties address the next opportunity
for code customization by developing a new kind of data-specific compilation
approach that is customized to the unique sparsity pattern in the input data
structures. This project designs and fully automates data-specific compilation
techniques that can discover and exploit hidden regularity in sparse structures,
reducing the development cost to produce high-performance implementations. The
project's impacts also include novel theoretical results and practical
algorithms to model irregular data structures as a union of (piecewise-)regular
structures, exploiting this representation for increased application
performance. In machine learning, sparsely connected neural networks can
directly benefit from this data-specific compilation approach, enabling the
development of improved inference implementations for deep
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project develops new
theory and algorithms to represent sparse data structures using unions of
hierarchical polyhedra: the list of non-zero coordinates can be compressed into
specialized and more compact affine functions that, when evaluated, would
generate exactly the input list of coordinates. The investigators target a range
of different hardware accelerators based on SIMD engine principles, and
facilitate performance portability by using cost-driven yet machine-independent
algorithms to search for optimized implementations. Tools produced are made
publicly available as open-source BSD-licensed
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.