* 2009045
* SHF: Small: Detecting and Repairing Accessibility Failures in Web Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* William Halfond, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 495,774.00

Companies create web applications to reach a broad audience and enable customers
to access services and information. For many Americans, particularly the 26%
with some type of disability, access to web applications is particularly
important and can represent a critical lifeline for them, providing access to
resources that would otherwise be inaccessible. However, a recent study found
that 70% of internet sites have “accessibility blockers” that make critical
functionality inaccessible to disabled users. These kinds of accessibility
problems negatively affect the ability of disabled web users to successfully
navigate a web application’s user interface and can cause a web site to become
almost completely unusable to users who are physically unable to use the
standard point-and-click mouse-based interfaces. This project will lead to the
development of techniques for automatically finding these kinds of accessibility
problems in web applications. These techniques will enable software developers
to efficiently and accurately search through large web applications to find
potential accessibility problems and provide the developers with useful
information that will make the process of repairing the problems faster and more
accurate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will encompass four technical
research thrusts. The first thrust will define a key abstraction, the Keyboard
Navigation Flow Graph (KNFG), which will represent the ways a keyboard-based
user can navigate a web application, and develop automated techniques that can
analyze a web page and automatically extract the KNFG. The second thrust will
design graph-based algorithms for analyzing the KNFG that, with high accuracy,
can detect a range of accessibility problems present in a web page. The third
thrust will lead to the development of localization techniques that can identify
the specific HTML or JavaScript elements in a web page that are responsible for
the accessibility problems. The fourth and final thrust will explore the design
of techniques for automatically repairing accessibility
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.