* 2009287
* Collaborative Proposal: Resolving Physical Conditions of Diffuse Ionized Gas throughout the Milky Way-Magellanic System
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Kathleen Barger-Seim, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2024
* USD 98,332.00

Clouds of gas, where stars are born, show us the spectacular impact of stars on
their immediate surroundings. The stars’ ultraviolet light strips electrons from
atoms, ionizing them. These free electrons eventually combine again with atoms
and emit telltale colors. Over the last few decades, the Wisconsin H-Alpha
Mapper (WHAM) discovered that the entire sky is glowing faintly in red light
emitted by ionized hydrogen atoms that pervade the Milky Way. The WHAM group has
been exploring this "diffuse ionized gas" throughout the Milky Way and its
neighboring satellite galaxies, the Magellanic Clouds. WHAM can reveal emission
nearly a 100-million times fainter than the Orion Nebula. WHAM remains one of
the most sensitive instruments in the world for studying faint, diffuse light in
our sky. The Team is developing a new exhibit and educational activities that
will help show how scientists use spectroscopy to identify elements and explore
the properties of distant objects. The exhibit will engage the public and
student groups with the same Fabry-Perot technology used by WHAM. The
investigators will continue to provide excellent opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During previous NSF-funded studies,
WHAM investigators produced the first surveys that traced diffuse ionized gas in
the Milky Way and the Magellanic Clouds. These efforts complement radio surveys
of hydrogen that trace its cooler, neutral phase. Neutral and ionized hydrogen
emission are now detected in every direction from our location inside the
Galaxy. With this award, the investigators use WHAM to embark on a diverse
observational program. Capturing emission from other elements, they are tracing
the temperature and degree of ionization throughout the diffuse gas. This new
study advances our understanding of interstellar matter, the processes that
shape it, and how stars affect our Galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.