* 2009669
* CNH2-L: Using Sound to Advance Conceptual Frameworks of Resilience of Integrated Grassland-Pastoralist Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Bryan Pijanowski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 07/31/2024
* USD 749,953.00

Grassland biomes are rapidly being lost around the world as they are converted
to croplands, mined, and grazed by domesticated livestock. In a few grassland
areas, thousands of years of use by native herders has resulted in management
systems that are sustainable over time. These systems have become examples of
resilient integrated socio-environmental systems. This study investigates
features of a human-pastoral system that may demonstrate resiliency, thereby
promoting sustainability. Sounds of wind, thunder, ice breaking, deer, and
birds, among others, can be used by herders to determine when to move to summer
landscapes, or if damaging weather may threaten herds or homes. Herders pass on
this knowledge through calls and songs that codify information about the
environment through multiple generations. This traditional ecological knowledge
has helped herders balance the use of grasslands and its productivity. As
herders abandon their historical way of life and lose these traditional forms of
knowledge, what does this loss of knowledge mean for the future of how
grasslands are managed sustainably? This study will answer this and other
questions by evaluating critical aspects of the soundscape-pastoralist-grassland
system in a large intact grassland system. The information gained from the
research will provide insight that is valuable to grassland managers. The
investigators plan to disseminate findings widely, including to students and the
general public, on how human-grassland systems can be managed sustainably.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project co-engages researchers and herders as co-
discoverers of knowledge that provides critical information to help understand
the coupling, decoupling and potential for recoupling of the pastoral-grassland
system. Unique aspects of this work include the use of sound as a "universal
variable" across natural, social, and cultural components, the use of
soundscapes to monitor the status of the grassland system using passive acoustic
sensors and acoustic content analysis, and the use of ethnomusicological
approaches to understand the role that sonic practices have on this integrated
system and the traditional ecological knowledge of herders. The merit of the
work results from the use of sound to measure the dynamics across human and
natural systems, the transdisciplinary nature of the team members and approaches
and the co-production of knowledge with local grassland stewards. It holds the
potential to clarify the role of complex social and environmental interactions
in sustainable living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.