* 2009713
* Brief But Spectacular: New Windows into the Physics of Common Envelope Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Philip Muirhead, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 341,225.00

A variety of exotic compact objects can be formed only by the merger of two
stars that start out in a close binary orbit. During a very short lived “common
envelope phase” (CE), the star with the most mass swells and engulfs its
companion, resulting in friction that reduces the distance between the stars.
Very few observations of post-CE systems exist, so this team will conduct a
large-scale systematic search to discover post-CE systems. With these results,
researchers in this field will be able to match their computer simulations to
the actual orbital and physical properties of systems that have undergone this
CE phase. PI Nordhaus is fluent in American Sign Language and students from the
Rochester Institute of Technology's National Technical Institute for the Deaf
will be recruited for a summer research experience with the
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging newly available wide-field and time-domain
surveys such as Gaia, TESS, and ZTF, the team will use a novel method to
observationally determine the mapping between the initial and final conditions
of common envelope evolution. Membership in a cluster yields a tight constraint
on the pre-CE primary star’s mass under the following conditions: (i.) the
cluster’s age is known, (ii.) the white dwarf is a confirmed cluster member,
(iii.) the white dwarf cooling age is well determined and shorter than the
cluster age, and (iv.) the cluster turn-off mass is above 1.5 solar masses.
Under these conditions, the system is most likely to have entered the common
envelope phase as an Asymptotic Giant Branch (AGB) star. Clusters have the
additional benefit that the metallicity and turn-off masses are known thereby
further reducing modeling uncertainty. Identifying and characterizing a set of
benchmarks for detached post-CE binaries located in stellar clusters could be
transformative to the development of theory and to establishing reliable
predictions for production rates of exotic objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.