* 2009977
* Using Passive Sensing to Assess the Impact of Real-Time Discrimination against Women and Underrepresented Minorities in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Anind Dey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 06/30/2024
* USD 761,563.00

Increasing diversity in engineering and computer science has been a goal that
remains elusive. Despite significant efforts, underrepresented minorities
received only 16.1% and women received only 21.9% of engineering degrees in
2018. The reasons for these low numbers are complex and multifaceted and
discrimination is an important factor in why students from these groups leave
engineering. The goal of this research is to develop a holistic understanding of
the impact of discrimination on historically underrepresented engineering
students. In this era of big data and readily available technology such as
mobile phones and wearables, a comprehensive change in how data about the
college student experience are collected and assessed is possible. One can now
move from lab to field, connect action to behavior, and collect longitudinal
data. This, in turn, makes it possible to understand bias and its impact on
engineering education in new ways: By complementing self-reports with passive
data collection, big data can be used to create an image of behavior while
learning about specific challenges underrepresented minority and female
engineering students face. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a
uniquely powerful longitudinal data set, which captures real-time changes in
student experiences and allows study of the impact of discrimination at scale
across a variety of contexts. The project will quantify the scope, direction,
and longitudinal impact on behavior and link this to long-term outcomes such as
GPA and retention. This ability to connect behavior to experience in the field
was lacking in past studies of discrimination. Analytic techniques capable of
capturing both individual variance and looking at unequal numbers of
observations, such as hierarchical linear modeling, are required due to the
large sample (N=200/year) and number of variables. The data are collected at a
large public university and will be most applicable to similar programs at
similar institutions. The research will support policy making and intervention
design in engineering programs. The ultimate goal is to diversify the pool of
engineering students, which will be of direct benefit to society by increasing
representation and the range of perspectives engaged in the engineering and
computer science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.