* 2009103
* CNH2-S: Species conservation and collaborative governance in an era of global change
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Bistra Dilkina, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 766,072.00

Plants and animals present moving targets for natural resource managers. Species
ranges are constantly changing, but this is expected to accelerate in the future
with ongoing climate and land use changes. Some species may decline in status in
the future presenting emerging management priorities while others, which are
currently priorities, may improve. These dynamic conditions present challenges
for federal and state agencies and other actors like non-governmental
organizations, charged with managing species. Often these organizations operate
according to very place-based management strategies. They also often are
pursuing overlapping but distinct management goals. Outcomes for species will be
determined by interactions among management agencies and other actors and how
effectively they are able to coordinate with one another. This project examines
future changes that will affect species and how organizations tasked with
managing species can best respond. When considering responses by natural
resource management agencies and other actors, the project will focus in
particular on collaborative governance – that is, the steps organizations can
take to work together more effectively, to complement one another’s efforts and
to reduce redundancies. The project will develop these methods through an
examination of biodiversity in the central and southern Appalachian Mountains, a
key climate refuge and corridor for species and one that spans the jurisdictions
of many different management agencies. Project results will have direct societal
benefit by guiding policy decisions to manage biodiversity in the region. In
addition, the project will contribute to the interdisciplinary training of post-
doctoral scholars, graduate and undergraduate students, preparing the next
generation of scientists and decision makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutional
arrangements to safeguard biodiversity involve many actors working over
different scales with overlapping responsibilities. Institutional change can be
slow due to the complexity of governance arrangements, inhibiting flexibility in
policy making and management in practice. Yet rates of change in ecological
systems are increasing. Suitable climatic conditions for species are shifting
and species must navigate mosaics of dynamic land use to follow. Moving forward,
governance systems have to adapt with a newfound speed and dexterity to protect
biodiversity in an era where global change is upending existing management
responsibilities. New collaborations must be forged, responsibilities for
particular species traded, limited resources reallocated, and management actions
future-proofed against uncertainty. This project will predict future
biodiversity change, evaluate how governance systems can most effectively
respond, and provide new methodologies to help do so. The project will combine
models of the &lt;br/&gt;biophysical system, including climate change, land use
change and species responses, with workshops and semi-structured interviews with
stakeholders involved in biodiversity governance to evaluate how they currently
integrate future change into planning and to explore opportunities for promoting
more collaborative approaches. The project will result in the development of
optimization approaches to help guide management decision making that examines
biodiversity conservation as a multi-actor problem, one that internalizes
dynamics within the relevant multi-level governance
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.