* 2009955
* Collaborative Research: An Agile Electro-Optic Frequency Comb for Precision Near-Infrared Radial Velocity Spectroscopy with the Habitable Zone Planet Finder
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ryan Terrien, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 68,529.00

This research project will focus on improving tools for finding and studying
planets around nearby stars, referred to as exoplanets. Such a search is driven
by questions about origins, the uniqueness of Earth, and the potential for other
life in the galaxy. A method to find planets around other stars involves looking
for periodic changes in the spectrum (color) of the light emitted by a star as
the planet circles it. These color changes are far too small to be discerned by
a human eye; detecting them requires special tools. For this purpose, an
advanced laser frequency comb, which is like an ultra-precise ruler for light
waves, will be built and used with an instrument on a telescope called the
Habitable Zone Planet Finder. Together, these tools will measure the very small
changes in the color of starlight needed to discover exoplanets. This project
will push the limits of technology as it applies advances from the 2005 and 2019
Nobel Prizes in Physics to the goal of finding planets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This cross-disciplinary and collaborative
research project looks to advance a broad range of photonic and astronomical
instrumentation tools that are critical for exoplanet science. This includes the
introduction of new modalities for laser frequency combs, and there use to push
the precision of radial velocity spectroscopy in the near-infrared to below 1
m/s. Improved overall instrument precision will in turn open avenues to address
other barriers to precise radial velocities, such as stellar activity and
telluric contamination. The result of this work will address such challenges in
the much-less-developed NIR and will provide the tools required to discover
habitable zone planets around cooler M-dwarfs. The potential of laser frequency
combs for enabling in-situ detector characterization and precise radial
velocities is substantial and wide-ranging. The proposed collaborative research
brings together astronomers, instrument builders, and laser physicists to
demonstrate new functionality for a laser frequency comb that will advance the
technology beyond a static ‘picket fence’ calibrator to a user-defined comb with
dynamically-tunable frequencies and amplitudes that will enable study of the
properties of the HxRG infrared detector arrays that are used across
astronomical disciplines. These gains will significantly enhance the
capabilities of an existing telescope and facility, and will also demonstrate
technology for the future generation of precision RV spectrometers and other
astronomical instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.