* 2009342
* Cooperative Platooning in Mixed Traffic of Connected, Automated, and Human-Driven Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* B. Brian Park, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 381,518.00

This research project will develop cooperative platooning algorithms for mixed
traffic of connected automated vehicles and conventional human-driven vehicles.
Recent development of connected and automated vehicle technology allows a group
of such vehicles to travel closely one after another in a safe manner (known as,
cooperative platooning), which greatly improves mobility and energy efficiency.
However, when a human-driven vehicle exists within the group, the cohesion of
vehicle platoon is not possible, due to uncertain human driver behavior. The
novel cooperative platooning algorithms to be developed in this project will
enable connected and automated vehicles to safely follow human-driven vehicles
at shorter headway while mitigating traffic disturbances. These algorithms will
also be able to assist a human driver in connected-but-not-automated vehicle by
complementing human’s imperfect behaviors. As such, the cooperative platooning
can be efficiently operated at low market penetration of connected automated
vehicles. This research will benefit national economic welfare and public health
with improved surface transportation mobility and reduced greenhouse gas
emissions. This research will enable multi-disciplinary education and
collaboration in transportation engineering, cyber-physical systems, control
theory, and mechanical engineering. The research team will encourage
participation from diverse and underrepresented groups in the education and
research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Connected automated vehicle (CAV) has been
enabled to stably travel as a platoon with short headway, which leads to
improvements in mobility and energy efficiency. However, it fails to work
effectively in mixed traffic where CAVs are interacting with non-CAVs. The goal
of this research is to develop and validate Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control
in mixed traffic (CACC-MT) that can safely and efficiently stabilize the mixed
traffic including CAV, traditional vehicles and connected human-driven vehicles.
CACC-MT makes the CAV capable of performing feed-forward control or model
predictive control using the received information from a further preceding
vehicle, when the immediately preceding vehicle is unconnected. This allows CAV
to closely follow an unconnected vehicle. CACC-MT also includes a human-in-the-
loop CACC algorithm that enables co-piloting the human driver based on received
information from preceding connected vehicle and help the vehicle behave more
smoothly and safely in the traffic turbulence. As CACC-MT adopts robust control
strategies to handle uncertainties of human driver’s behavior, it ensures
cooperative platooning for mixed traffic safely and efficiently without
requiring any prior knowledge of the human drivers, even at the early stage of
CAV deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.