* 2009253
* A SUBLIME 3D Model for Non-LTE Emission from Cometary and Icy Moon Atmospheres
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Martin Cordiner, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 366,628.00

In its early history, the Sun was embedded in a debris disk of dust and gas that
extended beyond the orbit of Pluto. Comets formed in the outer regions of this
disk, where they remain unchanged until a gravitational encounter with another
object sends them in towards the Sun in a highly eccentric orbit. Cometary
nuclei thus provide a crucial window back in time to the earliest stages of
planet formation. This team will investigate the physical processes and chemical
makeup of comets and planetary icy moons. They will use new computational tools
to interpret high-resolution radio/submillimeter images of a significant sample
of comets to gain new insights into the chemistry of cometary nuclei, and they
will study the atmospheres of the icy moons of Jupiter and Saturn. Atmospheric
plumes from these icy moons can reveal the compositions of hidden, sub- surface
oceans, which might provide potential habitats for life. The PI will mentor
undergraduate students from minority-serving university institutions through a
summer research internship program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will produce
a new spectral line modeling suite (SUBLIME), based on the open source Line
Modeling Engine, adapted for low-density atmospheres/exospheres of comets and
icy moons. This code will accurately solve the molecular excitation and
radiation transfer in three dimensions. The model will combine a 3D Monte Carlo
radiative transfer and excitation code with a parameterized optimal estimation
(retrieval) engine. New collisional rates for CO-CO, HCN-H2O and CH3-OH-H2O
systems will be generated via quantum chemical calculations, including the
construction of detailed potential energy surfaces and subsequent solving of the
molecular dynamics. The model will be applied to ALMA observations of cometary
and icy moon atmospheres to gain understanding of their physical processes and
chemical abundances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.