* 2009260
* WoU-MMA: Collaborative Research: Supermassive Binary Black Holes: Accretion Dynamics and Electromagnetic Output
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Julian Krolik, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 483,881.00

Supermassive black hole (SMBH) mergers are one of the most dramatic phenomena in
the Universe. For a few hours, they can emit as much power in gravitational
waves as all the stars in the Universe produce in light. However, none has yet
been caught in the act, partly because no one knows what sort of light they
should emit along with the gravitational waves. This project combines
astrophysical knowledge of SMBH binaries with detailed physical simulation of
gas flows and explicit computation of time-dependent spacetimes, to predict the
light observers should search for. Junior researchers will learn about this new
field and about very large-scale computation, strengthening the technical
workforce. Ancillary efforts by the PIs enhance the teaching program at each of
their universities and contribute to public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
group has built the knowledge base and computational methods needed to make
these predictions, including building a multi-patch simulation infrastructure to
compute the changing spacetime and permit separate treatment of subregions. The
code base includes post-processing tools that transform fluid simulation data
into predictions of photon radiation, accounting for the principal radiation
mechanisms, opacities, and photon propagation through dynamical spacetimes. This
study starts at the immediate pre-merger state, to understand its physical
mechanisms and to prepare realistic initial data. The second step will compute
how matter behaves during the merger proper and the subsequent relaxation phase.
The post-processing machinery then predicts EM spectra and light curves. This
project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.