* 2009425
* Collaborative research: Completing the most sensitive low-frequency survey for radio pulsars and transients
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Maura McLaughlin, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 289,288.00

Scientists at two universities will work together to study the sky with a radio
telescope in Puerto Rico. Their project will look to find rapid radio wavelength
variations on timescales that would indicate the discovery of millisecond
pulsars. Such pulsars can then be precisely timed to allow the detection of
gravitational waves. Additionally, other newly discovered radio variable sources
will reveal other interesting astronomical objects. Puerto Rican high school
students will be involved in analyzing the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A research
team at George Mason University and West Virginia University will observe the
entire night sky visible from the Arecibo Observatory at high time cadence. The
primary science goal is to discover millisecond pulsars that will add to the
NANOGrav pulsar timing array for nanohertz gravitational wave detection and the
resultant probing of black hole binaries with much higher masses. Simulations
using suitable search parameters estimate that the full survey will discover
20-30 millisecond pulsars and 150-200 normal pulsars. A well-tested software
pipeline, and candidate classification tools that utilize modern inductive
machine learning algorithms, will ensure that the data processing analysis will
proceed swiftly. The survey will also allow exploration of fast radio bursts,
and high brightness millisecond-duration radio bursts coming from cosmological
distances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.