* 2009001
* CIF: Small: Robust Signal Recovery and Grant-Free Access for Massive IoT Connectivity
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 431,020.00

Recent advances in information technologies, computers, and microelectronics
have led to transformative innovations and broad deployment of smart devices
with data computation and communication capabilities. Internet of things (IoT)
products and services are playing increasingly important roles in many fields
such as smart city, e-health, agriculture, safety, security, and environmental
protection. In particular, low-power massive IoT applications already account
for over 60% of the IoT market which continues to expand at a relentless pace.
Low-power wireless IoT devices are primarily deployed for sensing and data
collection with uplink dominated traffic. Given the massive number of such
devices, traditional channel access based on coordinated scheduling between
base-station and the multitude of end-user devices consumes too much bandwidth
and device energy. Uncoordinated uplink access can overcome both obstacles but
at the risk of multi-device signal collisions. This research project develops
novel technologies for reliable and efficient reception of simultaneous multi-
device wireless transmissions in networks that support massive number of low
power IoT terminals. This work contributes to vital technological advancement
that can significantly impact the current and future applications of wireless
IoT services. The research outcomes shall contribute substantially to the
theoretical foundation of signal processing and optimization, as well as to the
design of network protocols to support massive connectivity in practical 5G and
Beyond wireless systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project
activities focus on the design, analysis, and optimization of advanced wireless
network receivers to effectively decode and recover data packets that are often
in collision when multiple devices spontaneously transmit over their shared
wireless channel spectrum. Effective recovery of data packets under collision
improves both spectral efficiency and energy efficiency for a large population
of low power devices. Specifically, the researchers shall investigate novel
solutions for simultaneous signal recovery from multiple device transmissions in
both local area and wide area network environments. Subject to unknown channel
distortions and mutual interference, wireless receivers must recover co-channel
user packets from simultaneous uplink transmissions via blind demixing. The
research team will tackle the challenging and difficult problem of blind
demixing by advancing the theory, algorithm, and hardware for low-rank and
sparse matrix completion. The researchers shall develop novel algorithms that
are faster and more effective with desired global
convergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.