* 2009431
* Development of Random Dynamical Systems Techniques in the Pursuit of a Predictive Theory of Turbulence and Related Questions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Alex Blumenthal, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 186,784.00

Turbulence refers to the unordered, seemingly random motion of fluids or gases
in the wake of a moving body, e.g., the wake produced by a ship moving through
water. Some basic laws governing turbulence were established by Andrei
Kolmogorov in his now-famous series of theoretical works published in the 1940s
(collectively known as K41 theory). Although highly influential, this theory is
not complete: even though some predictions of K41 are remarkably accurate, some
are not, pointing to problems in the assumptions underpinning K41. These defects
(often referred to as "intermittency") are an active subject of study in the
physics and engineering communities. Moreover, K41 theory was derived based on
empirical observations regarding how turbulent fluids behave. It remains a grand
challenge to substantiate any of the K41 predictions directly from the
fundamental equations (the Navier-Stokes equations) governing how fluids evolve
in time. The far-reaching goal of this project is to address these shortcomings
by providing a mathematically rigorous theory that bridges the gap between the
fundamental equations governing fluids and the most accurate of the K41
predictions. This will be done by importing and improving on recent advances in
random dynamical systems theory. Providing such a mathematical bridge could also
potentially shed light on less well-understood aspects of turbulence theory,
such as intermittency. The PI will train graduate students specializing in
dynamical systems in preparation for this cross-disciplinary research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, the aim of this work is to develop
mathematical tools with the long-term goal of obtaining a mathematical proof,
directly from the Navier-Stokes equations, of the following two empirically
observed properties of turbulent fluids: (a) sensitivity with respect to initial
conditions (i.e., a positive Lyapunov exponent) and (b) weak anomalous
dissipation (i.e., energy in the fluid is dissipated at a constant positive rate
even as viscosity is taken to 0 with all other parameters of the fluid
experiment held constant). Properties (a) and (b) are interrelated but not
exactly the same: property (a) has to do with the separation of nearby
trajectories in phase space, while (b) has to do with the so-called energy
cascade, a nonlinear "conveyor-belt"-type effect which transmits kinetic energy
in the fluid from low to high Fourier modes until dissipation effects due to
viscosity take over. However, progress on one could lead to a better
understanding of the other, e.g., property (b) is likely related to the presence
of a high-dimensional chaotic SRB attractor for the Navier-Stokes equations,
which is only possible if property (a) is true. Towards goal (a), a major
mathematical challenge is that it is typically intractably hard to prove that a
given dynamical system is chaoticâ€” this is true even for two-dimensional toy
models such as the Chirikov-Taylor standard map, which features fundamental
coexistence of ordered elliptic-type and chaotic behavior. On the other hand,
advances by the PI and others have made considerable progress towards verifying
chaotic behavior for systems subjected to stochastic driving, as is typically
assumed in models relevant to turbulence. The work in this proposal will extend
and enhance these theoretical tools with the ultimate aim of establishing
property (a) for realistic fluids models such as the GOY and SABRA shell models
as well as for the hyperviscous 3D Navier-Stokes equations in the limit as
Reynolds number is taken to infinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.