* 2009176
* Evolving Minds: Promoting Causal-Explanatory Teaching and Learning of Biological Evolution in Elementary School
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Gillian Puttick, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,994,263.00

Natural selection is a fundamental mechanism of evolution, the unifying
principle of biology. It is central to understanding the functional
specialization of living things, the origin of species diversity and the
inherent unity of biological life. Despite the early emergence of tendencies
that can make evolution increasingly challenging to learn over time, natural
selection is currently not taught until middle or high school. This is long
after patterns of misunderstanding are likely to have become more entrenched.
The current research responds to this situation. It targets elementary school as
the time to initiate comprehensive instruction on biological evolution. Adopting
a teaching and curricular approach that will be novel in its integration of
custom explanatory storybook materials with hands-on investigations, it seeks to
promote third grade students’ understanding of small- and large-scale evolution
by natural selection. By studying students across multiple school districts,
this research will shed light on the benefits to diverse students of instruction
that focuses on supporting children’s capacities to cogently explain aspects of
the biological world rather than learn disparate facts about it. It will also
illuminate the value of simple tools, like explanatory storybooks, for
elementary school teachers who are often expected to teach counterintuitive
topics such as natural selection while not feeling confident in their own
understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate changes in
Grade 3 students’ learning and reasoning about living things during
implementation of a guided inquiry curriculum unit on evolution by natural
selection that emphasizes causal-mechanistic explanation. Classroom inquiry
activities and investigations into a range of real-world phenomena will be
framed by engagement with a sequence of innovative custom causal-explanatory
storybook, animation and writing prompt materials that were developed under
prior NSF support to promote transferable, scientifically accurate theory- and
evidence-based reasoning about natural selection. In response to the distinctive
challenges of life science and evolution learning, the project will integrate
and thematically unify currently disparate Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS) content and practice standards to create a comprehensive unit that
addresses all three NGSS dimensions and is accompanied by evidence-based
approaches to teacher professional development (PD). Using a design based
research approach, and informed by cognitive developmental findings, this 4-year
project will engage at least 700 students and their teachers and include
partners from at least four school districts, Boston University, and TERC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.