* 2009985
* RAPID: Simultaneous Remote Measurement of Skin and Sub-skin Temperature for Ships, USVs, &amp; Buoys
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Andrew Jessup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 117,007.00

This RAPID project is to develop IRISS (InfraRed In situ Skin and Subskin), an
innovative infrared-based sensor system to measure skin and sub-skin sea surface
temperatures from ships, Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USV), and buoys. Two cruises
of opportunity will be used to validate this approach against other air-sea
interaction measurements for a proof of concept. This unique system could be
transformative because it has the potential to greatly increase the number and
coverage of skin and subskin temperature measurements, which will enhance
satellite validation, since these quantities correspond to the IR and microwave
retrievals of sea surface temperatures, respectively. IRISS will also provide
the first routine measurements of SSTsubskin. The resulting improvements to
models for the cool skin and near surface temperature stratification will
enhance topical oceanographic research, address current operational priorities,
and improve satellite SST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant strength of this
approach is that SSTskin and SSTsubskin will be measured simultaneously with the
same sensor. Furthermore, the system will provide the first radiometric
measurement of SSTsubskin, which should be a more accurate representation than
can be obtained by contact measurements. The availability of accurate skin and
subskin temperature from USVs and buoy will provide new data with which to
improve models for near-surface stratification. The team will participate in in
two cruises of opportunity to validate the method and demonstrate that this new
measurement technique can significantly improve models for the cool skin and
warm layer effect. The cruises are the NSF-funded Breaking Bubbles (BB) on the
R/V Sikuliaq in Dec 2019 and the NOAA-funded Atomic on the R/V Brown in Jan
2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.