* 2009384
* Rapid and Inexpensive Thermoforming Technology for Precision Radio Telescope Reflector Panels
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* J. Roger P. Angel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 952,350.00

Radio telescopes use large dish antennas. More antennas in an array allow
fainter objects at higher spatial resolution to be observed. New radio astronomy
facilities are being planned for locations around the world and there is need
for mass-production manufacturing of the needed dishes. Current fabrication
methods are slow and expensive. This project will develop a fast, low cost
process called thermoforming. The process curves metal sheets using a mold that
can change its shape. This mold can make a wide range of shapes without
expensive machining. The project will also develop an infrared 3D scanner to
measure the shape of each panel. The use of these technologies will bring many
benefits including the ability to manufacture dishes that are not symmetrical
and a reduction in the cost of dishes. The team will design a rooftop radio
telescope for students. It will also make ten dishes for telescopes at other
educational institutions. This distribution of dishes will involve hundreds of
non-scientists in radio astronomy every year.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a process of quickly shaping curved metal panels using
thermoforming. Preliminary tests show that this concept is feasible. Panels will
be manufactured of a size suitable for research telescopes and an investigation
of how well the input designed shapes are implemented in manufacturing will be
made. In support of this work infrared deflectometry technology for 3D scanning
of curved metal sheets will be developed. This will be part of efforts to
optimize a mass-production process of manufacturing. The developed technology
will be utilized in a rooftop radio telescope for students and public outreach.
Further, ten additional dishes will be manufactured that are compatible with
MITâ€™s Small Radio Telescope kit for distribution to educational
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.