* 2009828
* Collaborative Research: Expanding the Dynamical Map of the Milky Way with Asteroseismic Distances
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Daniel Huber, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 295,777.00

The investigators will explore the structure of our Milky Way galaxy by
measuring the distances to stars using a novel technique called
Asteroseismology, which is the study of oscillations in stars. Oscillations are
measured by rapid observations of the changes in the brightness and motions of
the star’s surface. The investigators will use ground-based telescopes to
measure brightness variations in hundreds of thousands of distant stars to infer
their distances. These will then be used to create the largest 3D map ever
constructed of the outer regions of the Milky Way, enabling insights into how
our galaxy has formed and changed over time. The results will help place the
Milky Way in the context of other galaxies, leading to a more complete
understanding of the origin of our Universe. The investigators will also host a
summer research experience for native Hawaiian college students, with the goal
of increasing their representation in STEM at the graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galactic astronomy has entered a golden era, driven
by the combination of large-scale multi-object spectroscopic surveys and the
exquisite all-sky view provided by the European Space Agency’s Gaia Mission.
However, the range of Gaia distances alone—and hence that of many of the major
discoveries so far—is limited to a relatively nearby region (&lt;3 kpc from the
Sun). A solution to this problem is the use of ground-based transient surveys,
such as the NSF supported Zwicky Transient Factory (ZTF), which have expanded
into all-sky networks hunting for rapid explosive phenomena such as supernovae
and electromagnetic counterparts to compact binary mergers. The investigators
will use asteroseismology to measure distances to a special type of star, M red
giant stars, in the outer Galaxy using stellar light curves from these ongoing
surveys. The investigators will exploit the synergy of Gaia with time-domain
surveys and spectroscopic surveys to expand the dynamical map of our Galaxy by
more than an order of magnitude over Gaia alone. By combining the star distance
measurements with synthetic observations of their simulations, the investigators
will use the new dynamical map to unveil the structure, dynamics, and formation
history of the outer Galactic disk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.