* 2009507
* Collaborative Research: Adding a Magnetic Dimension to M-dwarf Stars Observed by APOGEE
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Verne Smith, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 277,415.00

M-dwarf stars are, by far, the most numerous type of star in the Milky Way, and
they represent an important family of exoplanet hosts. In addition, their
lifetimes exceed the age of the Galaxy itself, so detailed chemical abundance
studies of large samples of M-dwarfs will yield important insights into Galactic
history. This team will measure magnetic field strengths in a sample of ~30,000
M-dwarfs that have been observed as part of the APOGEE (Apache Point Observatory
Galactic Evolution Experiment) survey. They will participate as mentors in the
Sloan Foundation's Faculty and Student Team (FaST) initiative, which targets
faculty and students at U.S. institutions with strong histories in serving
underrepresented minority students. Faculty/student teams from these
institutions are matched to established Sloan Digital Sky Survey partners or
collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The APOGEE spectral region, between 1.5 -
1.7 microns, observed at high resolution, contains significant diagnostic
information for M-dwarfs, such as detailed chemical abundance patterns, as well
as the possibility to detect stellar magnetic fields via Zeeman split or Zeeman
enhanced lines. This team will develop the techniques necessary to derive
accurate stellar parameters (effective temperatures and surface gravities), as
well as detailed chemical abundances, while including magnetic Zeeman splitting
in the analysis. This will result in the addition of a magnetic activity
dimension for the M-dwarfs in the APOGEE survey, sampling a population of
M-dwarfs covering a broad range in effective temperatures, metallicities and
ages, and including a large number of exoplanet-hosting M-dwarfs. This more
encompassing view of the M-dwarf population will advance knowledge and
understanding across the broad field of cool-star astrophysics, in general,
while also providing knowledge about stellar magnetic fields in a sample of
exoplanet-hosting M-dwarfs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.