* 2009400
* Collaborative Research: Reconciling the interaction patterns of highly functional and resistant ecological communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Shalene Jha, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 493,661.00

Ecological communities consist of species that interact with each other in many
ways. An interaction in which both species benefit is called a "mutualistic"
interaction. For example, in pollination plants receive pollen to produce seeds
and the pollinators receive food. Some pollination partnerships may be unique
and specialized, with each species depending on services that can be provided
only by a single partner. Other pollination partnerships may be general and
interchangeable, with many species providing the same services. If all
partnerships are interchangeable, then communities may remain stable if their
species change due to environmental stress. But if partnerships are unique and
specialized, then communities may be very sensitive to stress. Thus,
understanding how species interact in the way they do is a central question in
ecology. This research will explore how different types of interactions (unique
and specialized vs. interchangeable and generalized) affect how well plants and
pollinators reproduce and how long their populations can persist in the face of
environmental change. The study will focus on the plants and pollinators of the
Madrean "sky islands", mountaintop meadows separated by lowland deserts in the
southwestern United States. The study will help guide conservation and
management of these unusual habitats and provide mentoring of students
interested in ecological field work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network theory
predicts that highly redundant and generalized networks of interactions maximize
resistant to disturbance, whereas specialized, complementary networks maximize
function. While such tradeoffs are assumed to be an inherent part of biological
network organization, it is not known what ecological and evolutionary processes
mediate them, preserving populations and maintaining network structure. Further,
though interactions may be heterogeneous across both organismal (individual to
species) and temporal scales (single interactions to multiple interactions
across generations), the potential for this variability to drive both network
structure and ecological function has not been systematically explored. This
research will forge new ground by testing how mechanisms at different levels of
biological organization simultaneously confer function and resistance within
networks. By quantifying individual- and species-level networks, along with
short- and long-term fitness outcomes, the researchers will examine the
relationship between network structure, function and resistance, and their
impact on plant and animal population dynamics across a biogeographic
gradient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.