* 2009415
* Exoplanet System Ages from Galactic Kinematics and their Impact on Planet Formation and Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kevin Schlaufman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2024
* USD 367,859.00

A research group of faculty and students from Johns Hopkins University will
measure the ages of planets orbiting nearby stars. Many questions related to
planet formation and evolution cannot be answered without a better understanding
of planet ages. It is understood that both stars and their planets have the same
age, however most of the usual ways to infer stellar ages fail for stars that
host planets, so new approaches must be taken. The awarded investigation will
apply a new method to derive ages for populations of stars. This new technique
will then be used to identify why some planetary systems are different from our
own. This research program will provide internships for STEM undergraduates from
Morgan State University as well as Johns Hopkins University, and it will form
the basis for a PhD thesis. In addition, this group will start a program of
portable planetarium visits to several Baltimore City Enoch Pratt Public Library
branches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The difficulty of estimating exoplanet host star
ages is a major problem preventing progress in understanding planet formation
and evolution. Traditional isochrone, asteroseismic, gyrochronological, stellar
activity-based, or lithium-based age estimates are unreliable or unavailable for
most planet host stars, so new approaches must be taken to solve the problem of
exoplanet host star ages. As a thin disk stellar population ages, its
constituent stars experience random kicks due to interactions with molecular
clouds, transient disk features, and the Galactic bar. The investigation will
make use of the Galactic velocity dispersion of a thin disk stellar population
as a proxy for exoplanet age. The investigation will use this Galactic velocity
dispersion technique to calculate relative ages for exoplanet host stars with
different characteristic, as well as stars without planets, to explore planet
formation and evolution. The application of the Galactic velocity dispersion
technique for exoplanets could reveal the origin of significant stellar
obliquities in exoplanet systems, the origin and fate of ultra-short orbital
period planets, and the reason that multiple-planet systems are often observed
just wide of mean-motion resonances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.