* 2009193
* Dynamics of Multiple Stellar Populations in Globular Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Enrico Vesperini, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 518,877.00

Globular clusters contain hundreds of thousands of stars confined in a region
with a radius of only a few tens of light-years, much more densely packed than
the region around our Sun. These clusters are among the oldest objects in the
Universe, so they provide important clues to the formation of our Milky Way
Galaxy. New observations have shown that stars within these clusters are not all
formed at once, as previously thought, and they exhibit a range of chemical
compositions. This group will conduct a theoretical study based on computer
simulations of the formation and evolution of globular clusters. Students
involved in this program will learn valuable computational and data
visualization techniques that are broadly applicable beyond
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many observational studies have now provided
strong evidence that most globular clusters host multiple stellar populations
characterized by different chemical properties. This discovery represents a
major shift in the common view of globular clusters as systems composed of stars
with the same chemical composition. The investigators will model the cluster’s
dynamical history, so they can trace motions of the stars back to the formation
of the stars. They will model of the formation and dynamical changes with time
of multiple populations of stars in these globular clusters. This program will
carry out extensive simulations to address: 1) the formation of multiple-
population clusters and the characterization of the initial structural and
kinematical properties of first- and second-generation stars, 2) the early and
long-term evolution of the dynamical properties of first- and second-generation
stars, 3) the role of internal dynamical processes and the external tidal field
of the host galaxy in the evolution of multiple-population clusters, 4) the
evolution of the fundamental properties of the cluster's stellar content and how
they are affected by the different initial structural properties of multiple
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.