* 2009658
* CNH2-L: Spoiling fish as food: feedbacks between ecosystem and human responses to harmful algal blooms
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Christopher Barrett, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

Around the world, increases in the number, duration, and intensity of
cyanobacteria-producing harmful algal blooms (cyanoHABs) threaten both people
and ecosystems. Toxins produced by these blooms are likely to impact communities
that rely on fisheries for nutrition and livelihoods, particularly through
poorly-understood feedbacks between human well-being and aquatic ecosystem
dynamics. The investigators will conduct integrated socioenvironmental research
with local collaborators to will fill this knowledge gap by analyzing how
cyanoHABs affect fish, fishers, and fish consumers. The project will generate
insights that will be relevant to many food systems facing environmental change.
The project is led by an early career investigator and will be conducted in
close collaboration with local partners. It will develop socio-environmental
research capacity by supporting trainee opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as a postdoctoral researcher, and developing
interactive museum exhibits for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex
feedbacks arising from human behavioral responses to environmental degradation
will play an increasingly pivotal role in shaping socio-environmental systems.
This project focuses on such feedbacks using the socio-environmental system of a
large lake where cyanoHABs are besetting the worldâ€™s largest lake fishery and
the 30 million people it supports. Anthropogenic nutrient loading is driving
cyanoHABs, which produce a toxin that accumulates in fish at levels far
exceeding guidelines for safe consumption. By altering the base of the food web,
cyanoHABs may also reduce the nutritional quality of fish. Fishers, consumers,
and markets are expected to respond to growing awareness of cyanoHABs and may
also show complex responses to differences among fish species in the balance
between beneficial and harmful compounds. In turn, consumer and market responses
are likely to feed back upon the aquatic food web, spatiotemporal dynamics of
cyanoHABs, and disparities in human health and wellbeing. This project will
analyze how cyanoHABs affect toxins and omega-3 fatty acids in fish from across
the food web; evaluate market, fisher, and consumer responses to cyanoHABs; and
assess how human activities drive spatiotemporal variation in cyanoHABs. By
integrating these findings within a dynamic model, the investigators will test
how cyanoHABs alter the distribution of human health risks across resource-
dependent populations and provide a framework for evaluating plausible policy
levers. By connecting cyanoHAB dynamics with human nutrition and socioeconomic
disparities in health risks, they will expand socio-environmental systems theory
to address outcomes of natural resource exploitation for human health and
equity. Documenting both the accumulation of cyanoHAB toxins in fish and human
responses to this emerging threat will guide development of tools for
environmental and public health agencies to manage risks to human health and
wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.