* 2009684
* Collaborative Research: Exploiting Nanoscale Interfaces to Enhance Bulk Mechanical Response of Additively Manufactured Boron Nitride Nanotube-Metal Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Huck Beng Chew, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 335,546.00

Although additive manufacturing of metals is revolutionizing design of materials
and the parts made from them, the measured mechanical properties, such as
strength and toughness, exhibit significant scatter, leading to unpredictable
and potentially catastrophic failure behaviors. This award supports fundamental
research to elucidate how small percentages of nanofillers in additively
manufactured metals enhance the mechanical properties, thus improving
reliability and enabling widespread engineering use. This progress could
transform 3D printing technologies and invigorate the manufacturing
competitiveness of the United States. Additionally, this research will train a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students in the multidisciplinary
areas of materials design, mechanics of materials, as well as multiscale
experiments and computations. The research results will also form the basis of a
new lecture series on 3D-printed nanocomposites as future aerospace materials
for K-12 summer camp students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence of voiding
defects, which degrades material performance and introduces property variations
within the material, is an inherent weakness of additively manufactured metals.
To overcome this limitation, this research aims to investigate the reinforcement
of additively manufactured aluminum matrices with boron nitride nanotubes
because of the multiscale strengthening and toughening mechanisms emanating at
the nanotube-metal interface. The interfacial strength under different
processing conditions will be directly quantified by nanomechanical pull-out of
individual nanotubes embedded within additively manufactured metal films, with
the help of in situ electron microscopy. The finer nanotube-metal interfacial
details that are not accessible by experiments, such as the complex reaction
products formed at the nanotube-metal interface, will be characterized by
density functional theory calculations. The nanotube-matrix interfacial
properties together with matrix porosity measurements arising from processing,
will then be incorporated into finite element models of representative volume
element to further elucidate the failure mechanisms of the additively
manufactured nanocomposite specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.