* 2009759
* RUI: How Porous is the Warm Ionized ISM? Drilling in with Pulsars
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Dan Stinebring, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 114,000.00

Our own Milky Way galaxy consists of stars but also a substantial amount of
material in between the stars. Astronomers call this material the interstellar
medium or ISM for short. Much of the ISM consists of neutral atoms that have the
same number of protons as electrons. However, about 3% of the gas has had one or
more electrons knocked free by photons from nearby stars. The investigators seek
to know how porous this ionized gas is. In other words, is it like a thick,
dense fog and the same density in all directions. Alternatively, their
measurements may show the gas is more like group of fluffy clouds drifting
overhead on a summer’s day. These questions are important for understanding the
entire star-forming ecosystem of the Milky Way. This project will also support
undergraduate student researchers, both during their academic year and during
the summer. They will learn research, organizational, and communication skills
applicable the national science and technology effort. The project leader will
actively work to recruit a diverse group of students to work on this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator seeks to improve understanding of the
warm ionized gas in the Milky Way. Referred to as the WIM, it is an important
part of the pressure support of the Milky Way. Pulsars, which are rotating
neutron stars, are excellent probes of the WIM since the radio waves they
generate are delayed and scattered by passage through the WIM. When the radio
pulses pass through discrete ionized structures (lens-like in character), these
otherwise invisible features are revealed. The investigator and students will
search for subtle, but easy-to-detect, features in the radio waves to determine
the location and physical conditions of the material that scatters the radio
waves. Major US radio telescopes such as the Arecibo Observatory and the Green
Bank Telescope will be used for this work. One portion of the work will be
pursued using a telescope in the Netherlands called LOFAR, which observes at
much lower radio frequency than the two other
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.