* 2009959
* NSF-BSF: A Coordinated Study of the Isotope effect in the Vacuum Ultraviolet Photodissociation of Astronomically Important Molecules: Implications for the Early Solar System
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Mark Thiemens, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 09/30/2024
* USD 478,202.00

Understanding the isotopic composition of meteorites and planetary atmospheres
is important to understanding the early evolutionary stages of the Solar Nebula
and gaining insight into planet formation and evolution. This research project
is a coordinated experimental and theoretical study of how the dissociation of
molecular nitrogen and its isotopically substituted forms containing the heavy
atom nitrogen-15 by ultraviolet (UV) light influences the nitrogen-15 content of
compounds in space. Results from the study will allow astronomers to accurately
interpret the observed range in isotopic composition of nitrogen-bearing
molecules in the atmospheres of planetary bodies and surfaces of meteorites in
the Solar System. Supported jointly by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and
the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF), this project will foster a
collaboration between an experimental research group in the US and a
computational research group in Israel, train students and postdoctoral
researchers, and conduct science outreach to a diverse population in the San
Diego area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the Advanced Light Source of the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, the US group will perform experiments on the
vacuum-UV photodissociation of molecular nitrogen and its nitrogen-15
isotopologues. High-level theoretical calculations from the Israeli group will
guide the experiments and will be refined by the experimental results. The
investigations will show how molecular nitrogen undergoes photodissociation as a
function of wavelength and establish the fraction of nitrogen-15 that is
incorporated into molecules. Data from this project will be of immediate
applicability to physico-chemical models of a variety of astronomical
environments. A fundamental mechanistic understanding of isotopic fractionation
driven by vacuum-UV photodissociation will also inform similar studies of other
astronomically important molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.