* 2009537
* Digital Instrumentation for the Research Community: The Next Generation of CASPER
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* David DeBoer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,017,682.00

This project, led by astronomers at the University of California â€“ Berkeley,
involves an international community of astronomers, physicists, engineers, and
computer scientists working together to develop high performance digital
instrumentation for radio astronomy research. The collaboration develops open
source hardware, software, libraries, tools, and instrument designs, enabling
researchers to implement the instrumentation needed to achieve their science
goals in a cost effective and timely manner. These products provide support for
developments in radio astronomy ranging from small experiments in undergraduate
teaching labs to telescopes at the frontier of astronomy research such as the
Event Horizon Telescope. The instrumentation provided by this collaboration is
also used in brain research, genomics, radar applications, and neutron and
magnetic field imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research from the Collaboration for
Astronomy Signal Processing and Electronics Research (CASPER) has revolutionized
the cost and time scale for development of radio astronomy signal processing
instrumentation. Over a thousand CASPER-designed Field Programmable Gate Array
(FPGA) platforms have been deployed in roughly one hundred instruments around
the world. CASPER infrastructure has supported a range of cutting edge radio
astronomy programs such as; detecting the Epoch of Reionization (learning how
the first stars and galaxies formed), NANOGrav (utilizing pulsars as
gravitational wave detectors), and the Event Horizon Telescope (imaging the
black hole at the center of our galaxy). CASPER owes its success to its software
tools and libraries, which were designed with the goal of streamlining
instrument development, and lowering the barriers of entry to new instrument
designers. This proposal will leverage this past work of the CASPER community,
in tandem with the current developments in the super-computing industry, to
provide the infrastructure to cost effectively build the next generation of
astronomical instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.