* 2009064
* FET: SHF: Small: Collaborative: Advanced Circuits, Architectures and Design Automation Technologies for Energy-efficient Single Flux Quantum Logic
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Massoud Pedram, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,994.00

The critical dependence of the world economy on energy-efficient operations in
computing are now almost universally recognized. To this end, advances in
“beyond-CMOS” device technologies and corresponding logic families are now seen
as a key step towards achieving the next major leap in high-performance
computing. The challenges and opportunities described in this research provide
directions for developing many aspects of a very promising “beyond-CMOS”
technology, which can result in extremely high-performance, yet energy-
efficient, computing systems, and thereby ensure sustainability of the
information-technology ecosystem. SuperConductive Electronics (SCE) based on the
Josephson junction (JJ) Single Flux Quantum (SFQ) logic cells have evolved into
a within-reach “beyond-CMOS” technology, with switching speeds in the hundreds
of GHz and energy dissipation of 10^-19 or less Joules per transition. The
project will enhance business and societal opportunities by producing ultra-high
performance and energy-efficient electronics for a wide range of computing
fabrics, and in the process will also contribute to enhancing the technological
capabilities of the US by providing education and research opportunities to
undergraduate, graduate, and underrepresented students by including them in the
planned research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to achieve
major strides in the development of advanced circuits, architectures and design-
automation technologies in support of large-scale superconductive SFQ digital
electronics to meet the needs of future energy-efficient, high-performance exa-
scale computing systems. Research on design automation will enable large-scale
SCE systems integration. Targeting both DC-powered energy-efficient Rapid SFQ
and AC-powered Adiabatic Quantum-Flux-Parametron circuit families, this research
aims to solve four key problems associated with the design automation and
optimization of SFQ logic circuits, namely: minimization of SFQ circuit retiming
to the number of buffers for operating frequency improvement and/or clock-phase
consistency; path-balancing technology mapping for sequential SFQ circuits with
loops; timing-driven global placement using unique features of SFQ logic
families and a powerful mathematical optimization tool; and circuit partitioning
to enable effective current recycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.