* 2009520
* Solving the Supernova Type Ia Progenitor Puzzle:  Building Bridges between Theory and Observation
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Rosanne Di Stefano, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 09/30/2023
* USD 482,890.00

Supernovae (SNe), or the explosions of massive stars, are a critical component
in measuring and understanding the accelerated expansion of the universe. This
is possible because astronomers are able to standardize a certain type of SNe
(Type Ia) observed across the universe, due to similarities in their
brightnesses. However, there remain uncertainties in the standardization
process, some of which stem from an incomplete understanding of the progenitors
of Type Ia supernovae. A research team led by the Smithsonian Institution
Astrophysical Observatory will carry out a project to study the astrophysical
systems within which the white dwarf stars that become Type Ia SNe are primed to
explode. The work will focus on the contribution of triple-star systems relative
to binaries as SNe progenitors. The results of this research will be of great
interest to the general public, not only because of the fascination of Type Ia
supernovae, but also because the work on three-star systems will produce eye-
catching animations. The researchers will work with science education experts to
create planetarium shows whose subjects will be derived from the SNe research.
Research done through this program will become part of the narrative thread of a
high school summer course the principal investigator teaches, and high school
students, together with undergraduate students, will participate in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are twofold. The
researchers will (1) determine the contribution of triple-star systems relative
to binaries, and (2) produce a cutting edge population synthesis code for public
use, which employs state-of-the-art linkages between observations and
evolutionary states, allowing diverse research groups to make meaningful
comparisons of their results. To accomplish this, the scientists will conduct a
systematic study of hierarchical triples in which the outer star contributes
mass to an inner binary within a system that has the potential to form a Type Ia
supernova. They will also include three-body dynamics and will thoroughly
explore the parameter space, focusing on detectable signatures. The dynamics
will provide crucial input in the development of a new type of population
synthesis code that includes binaries and triples, and will have the distinctive
feature of built-in expandable links to existing and developing data sets from a
variety of sources. Better understanding SNe progenitors is especially important
because wide-field surveys, including the NSF-sponsored Vera Rubin Observatory,
are set to discover so many SNe per year that systematic uncertainties must be
explored. Other areas that benefit are the study of cosmic enrichment, necessary
for the development of life, and improved predictions of gravity wave signals.
Furthermore, the three-body problem is itself of great intellectual interest,
and the work on mass transfer in triples will open new avenues of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.