* 2009057
* CNS Core: Small: AccelRITE: Accelerating ReInforcemenT Learning based  AI at the Edge Using FPGAs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,179.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) has led to significant progress in several domains
such as self-driving cars and robotics. Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a class
of AI that includes algorithms that enable machines to teach themselves optimal
decision making. However, RL algorithms are complex and time-consuming, which
render them unsuitable for applications that require fast response.
Heterogeneous platforms, which couple a Central Processing Unit (CPU) with an
integrated circuit that can be configured - Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGA) are promising candidates for implementing fast algorithms due to their
capabilities. The project will develop fast implementations of RL algorithms
targeting such platforms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the
project include the research and development of innovative optimizations that
exploit the heterogeneity of the emerging class of FPGA devices and address
challenges such as conflicts in parallel accesses to shared objects, irregular
memory accesses, and overheads in fine grained acceleration. The project will
develop parameterized performance models for key AI kernels – Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD), conjugate gradient, parallel hash tables, and neural
networks, to enable energy-performance trade-off analysis. The proposed project
will develop a novel spatiotemporal constraint graph-based design space
exploration technique to accelerate RL algorithms by taking a holistic view of
the algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project is in
efficient use of heterogeneous architectures consisting of CPUs and FPGAs
coupled with cache coherent memory for accelerating AI for edge computing.
Successful completion of this project will lead to significant increase in the
complexity of AI applications that can be deployed in real world environments.
This will lead to a dramatic improvement in the capabilities of AI enabled
devices such as self-driving cars, robotics, and wearable healthcare devices.
The project will also constitute materials appropriate for inclusion in graduate
and undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All software developed in the
project will be posted on github at: https://github.com/pgroupATusc. Software
releases will be maintained for a period of not less than 3 years after the
conclusion of the grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.