* 2009234
* Dust in the Wind: Dynamics of Dusty Fluids on Interstellar, Stellar, and Planetary Scales
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Philip Hopkins, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 433,007.00

Dust grains are tiny particles, ranging from smog-like soots and microscopic
sand-like grains to crystals, are of fundamental importance to almost all
astrophysics. These grains contain a huge fraction of all the heavy elements in
the Universe, and as such represent the "building blocks" that ultimately make
up the planets and us. Astronomers have long known that dust is mixed with
Hydrogen and Helium gas in the space between the planets, stars, and galaxies,
but the dynamics of "dusty fluids" remain poorly understood. Understanding the
interactions of dust grains is important models of "recycling" of material
between stars and the gas between stars. To address these issues, the
investigator will produce new, massively parallel, public computational codes.
This software will also be applicable to more general engineering and
turbulence/aerodynamic applications. The investigator plans summer research
opportunities for undergraduates, high school students, and high school
teachers. This work will also generate animations and visualizations for
outreach programs, public talks, and planetarium shows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigatorâ€™s group has recently discovered
previously unknown instabilities that can re-write much of the conventional
wisdom about how dust grains change with time and alter the formation of planets
and stars. Students will run computer simulations incorporating all the relevant
processes to model these problems self-consistently and capture the behaviors of
these instabilities. This is enabled by a new generation of massive computer
codes the investigators have developed. These codes numerically solve the
equations of fluid dynamics interacting with dust and magnetic fields and
radiation. They will develop novel testable predictions for planetary disks,
planet properties, variations of stars, and structure of the gas around stars
This work should contribute fundamentally to our understanding how planets form,
how stars change with time, and where stars and planets -- and our chemical
building blocks -- come from.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.