* 2009197
* Collaborative Research: Observing Exoplanet Atmospheres at High Resolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Christopher Johns-Krull, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 161,924.00

The team will conduct direct spectroscopic observations of large, nearby
exoplanets with a high-resolution spectrometer. They will characterize the
composition of the atmospheres of young “hot Jupiters” by direct observation.
They will focus on abundances of common molecules such as carbon monoxide,
methane and water. Their plan is to conduct the first-ever survey of the
youngest massive exoplanets, still in the formation process. Their observations
will constrain models of planet formation, helping to understand how solar
systems form, including our own. This work will support a graduate student and
will form the basis of that student’s PhD thesis at Rice University. The team
will purchase and use a commercial spectrograph for nightly public outreach at
Lowell Observatory. They will also develop educational experiences for high
school students using the instrument as well as a graduate-level observation
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to characterize the
atmospheres of exoplanets through direct spectroscopic observations. In order to
do this, they need bright targets. For this reason, they will focus on planets
called “hot Jupiters:” planets of Jovian mass or greater that closely (within
0.1 AU) orbit their parent stars. They will be gathering light directly from the
planet, following the planet through its orbit, and observing in a variety of
molecular lines. As a planet moves through its orbit, those lines will be
doppler shifted. The planetary features are identified through their larger
doppler shifts relative to the shifts of the parent star (because the planet
moves a great deal more and is subject to a higher degree of shifting). The team
will use the IGRINS instrument, which has been mated with a variety of large
telescopes including the Lowell 4.3 meter and Gemini North. As a backup
instrument, they will also use the iSHELL instrument on IRTF or other
instruments as needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.