* 2009212
* Supporting Elementary Teacher Learning for Effective School-Based Citizen Science (TL4CS)
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Patrick Smith, Horizon Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,995,538.00

Citizen science involves individuals, who are not professional scientists, in
authentic scientific research, typically in collaboration with professional
scientists. When implemented well in elementary schools, citizen science
projects immerse students in science content and engage them with scientific
practices. These projects can also create opportunities for students to connect
with their local natural surroundings, which is needed, as some research has
suggested that children are becoming increasingly detached from nature. The
classroom teacher plays a critical role in ensuring that school-based citizen
science projects are implemented in a way that maximizes the benefits. However,
these projects typically do not include substantial guidance for teachers who
want to implement the projects for instructional purposes. This project will
develop two forms of support for teachers: (1) guidance embedded in citizen
science project materials and (2) teacher professional development. It will
develop materials and professional development experiences to support teacher
learning for 80 5th grade teachers impacting students in 40 diverse elementary
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
generate knowledge about teacher learning that enables elementary school citizen
science to support studentsâ€™ engagement with authentic science content and
practices through data collection and sense making. Specifically, the study is
designed to address the following research questions: (1) What kinds of support
foster teacher learning for enacting effective school-based citizen science? (2)
How do supports for teacher learning shape the way teachers enact school-based
citizen science? and (3) What is the potential of school-based citizen science
for positively influencing student learning and student attitudes toward nature
and science? Data collected during project implementation will include teacher
surveys, student surveys and assessments, and case study protocols.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.