* 2009836
* RUI: The BRAVA-RR Survey: uncovering an ancient Spheroidal Bulge in the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Andrea Kunder, Saint Martin's University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 187,394.00

The investigator will observe a special class of old stars, called RR Lyrae
stars, located toward the center of the Galaxy. Studying these stars provides a
glimpse to how the Milky Way changed with time. The investigator will observe a
large sample of these stars in order to reconstruct their motion through space.
The reconstructed motions will then allow the investigator to distinguish which
RR Lyrae stars are part of the halo, the disk, or the “Spheroidal Bulge”
surrounding the center of the Milky Way. These measurements will lead to a
better understand the early stages of the Milky Way formation. The investigator
will recruit qualified students, targeting first generation and other
underrepresented students within the science, technology, engineering and math
(STEM) disciplines. These student researchers will collect data from telescopes,
analyze the data, and present at conferences. The investigator will continue to
lead the popular public science café series, organize star parties and work with
the local Boys and Girls club to engage the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will use RR Lyrae stars as test
probes to study the formation of the inner Galaxy. Using such ancient and metal-
poor stars is important, as most of the stellar populations that have been used
to understand the inner Galaxy have been younger and more metal-rich. The oldest
stars in the Bulge, like the RR Lyrae stars, were present in the earliest
episodes of star formation and assembly of our Galaxy. These observations will
be combined with complementary optical surveys to provide the foundation of
studies on the structure, dynamics and metallicity of the bulge. This proposal
will provide both radial velocities and [Fe/H] metallicities for approximately
5,000 RR Lyrae stars and provide a full orbital analysis of the RR Lyrae stars
toward the inner galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.