* 2009841
* Angle resolved light scattering through a multimode fiber for measuring cell nuclei morphology
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Adam Wax, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 03/31/2023
* USD 610,596.00

This project will create new methods of using optical fibers for examining
tissue for early signs of cancer. Although optical detection of early cancer has
been shown, there has yet to be a technology that can be readily used by
clinicians. This new method will be simpler and less costly to build than
previous approaches and thus will provide a societal benefit by enabling greater
use of optical methods for detecting early cancer in the
clinic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a novel approach
for detecting early cancer based on angle resolved light scattering. The unique
aspect of this new approach is that rather than measuring scattering at
different angles at the tissue surface, instead a single, multimode fiber will
be used to collect all of the angular scattering and then computational methods
will be used to reconstruct the angular distribution. The approach will permit
simplified measurements and analysis by using knowledgeof the distribution of
scattering from cell nuclei, specifically that it forms ringed patterns. A key
proposed advance of this work will be to enable use of the fiber even when it is
moved, for example during an endoscopy procedure, by leveraging the simplified
measurements and introducing a real time calibration method. The approach will
be demonstrated by measuring enlarged nuclei in cultured cancer
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.