* 2009645
* Fast Transients, Superflares and Exoplanet Habitability: Exploring the Minute-Cadence Sky with the Evryscope Fast Transient Engine
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicholas Law, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 606,442.00

This project will observe the entire night sky to search for short time scale
changes (less than two minutes) in the brightness of objects using small
telescopes located in the northern and southern hemispheres. The researchers
will develop software to detect these changes in real time and send alerts to
other astronomers to enable them to follow up with their own observations. The
project will study giant flares on stars that could impact planets in orbit
about them, and also to study the rate of flashes that are the result of
materials being burnt up in the earth's atmosphere. Other astronomers will be
helped by receiving alerts to such changes in the sky. The scientists involved
in this project are also developing a planetarium exhibit to provide the public
with information on the evolving field of time resolved
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill will conduct a systematic investigation of the entire rapid
transient sky using Evryscopes that will be coordinated with spectroscopic
observations using the SOAR Telescope. The Evryscope telescopes, coupled with
the Evryscope Fast Transit Engine (EFTE), a newly-developed low-latency
transient-detection pipeline, are capable of searching for rapid transient
events over 16,500 square degrees of the sky every two minutes. This will be
coupled with a machine-learning vetting system that will reduce false positives
to low levels. This new capability will enable the high-speed detection and
follow-up for events such as superflares. These are giant stellar flares that
have serious, but as-yet poorly-constrained, effects on the habitability of
planets around cool stars. Additionally, the researchers will perform the first
detailed characterization of transient orbital-debris fast-flashes, which form
an important foreground for high cadence sky surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.