* 2009313
* Collaborative Research: Addressing the Burning Questions in the Baryon Cycle at z~2
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Alice Shapley, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 353,145.00

Astronomers want to understand how galaxies grow. In particular they want to
know why the rate of star formation was highest when the Universe was young.
Shapley, Reddy, and Steidel will analyze observations of thousands of distant
galaxies obtained with the Keck Telescopes. They will investigate how material
flowing into and out of a galaxy can affect the rate of star formation and other
key galaxy properties. In partnership with the WorldWide Telescope Ambassadors
Program the PIs will develop interactive tours across the night sky. One tour
will demonstrate how telescopes act as time machines. Local high school students
and their teachers will be invited to participate in a Summer Research
Connection program at Caltech. The PI and her team will train the students to be
future scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shapley, Reddy, and Steidel have
identified a representative sample of galaxies at the epoch of peak star
formation in the universe (z~1.5-3.5) in the Keck Baryonic Structure Survey
(KBSS) and the MOSFIRE Deep Evolution Field (MOSDEF) Survey. A subset of ~20%
also have deep Keck/LRIS rest-UV spectra, and ~100 galaxies have integral- field
unit maps from the Keck KCWI instrument. The co-PIs will establish robust
metallicity measurements of gas and stars within galaxies at this epoch; they
will determine the kinematics and geometry of gas outflow and inflow based on
"down the barrel" galaxy spectroscopy; they will map the gas distribution and
kinematics in the more extended circumgalactic medium (CGM), connecting the CGM-
scale properties with those on the galaxy scale. Collectively, these results
will test and inform forefront models of baryonic cycling in galaxy evolution. A
legacy dataset consisting of the reduced Keck MOSFIRE, LRIS, and KCWI
spectroscopic data will be available in a public
archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.