* 2009430
* Enabling precision calibration of massively multiplexed spectroscopic surveys
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Marshall, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 654,246.00

Modern astronomy has taught us much about the physics that governs the Universe.
Recently, many discoveries have been made by inspecting images produced by
surveys that collect images of large areas of the nighttime sky. The next step
is to study many of the objects discovered in those images in more detail using
spectroscopy. Several such facilities are currently being planned, each able to
collect thousands of such spectra of astrophysical objects simultaneously. A key
challenge for such work is to ensure that the spectra are well calibrated so
that this data can be interpreted accurately. In this project the proposed next-
generation Maunakea Spectroscopic Explorer (MSE) facility is used as a baseline
to develop the required calibration and measurement techniques. This work will
enable precision scientific spectroscopic measurements to be made using MSE and
other similar facilities. The work will engage one graduate student and many
undergraduates, providing them with significant STEM educational
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massively multiplexed spectroscopic
facilities on large aperture telescopes represent the future of ground-based
optical astronomy. In the era of the Vera Rubin Observatory and other wide-field
imaging surveys, the follow-up spectroscopic study of vast numbers of objects
with brightness comparable to or fainter than the sky background is required. In
order for these studies to be executed efficiently, thousands of spectra per
pointing must be acquired, a feat that can be accomplished using fiber-fed
spectroscopic instruments. Careful calibration will be needed to disentangle the
signal generated by the target of interest from the background noise that is the
result of sky signal and scattered light induced by the instrumentation. This
project plans to fully assess these noise sources and develop a procedure to
minimize the limitations they induce through careful measurement of the relevant
properties of the fibers. Results of the proposed study will be applicable to
all future massively multiplexed spectroscopic instruments, thus enabling the
science programs of multiple next-generation facilities. The Maunakea
Spectroscopic Explorer is a direct application for this work. The project will
support one graduate student and many undergraduates thus providing significant
training in instrumentation development and engineering
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.