* 2009942
* Semi-automated discovery of synthetic polymers with protein features
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Adam Gormley, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 570,037.00

The ability of cells to care out complex functions arises from the flexibility
of proteins, which assemble into organized structures and carry out various
functions in a highly dynamic way. The investigators will attempt to discover
new design rules to reproduce the activity of proteins using synthetic polymers.
Machine learning will be coupled to automated polymer synthesis techniques to
accomplish this goal. This approach will provide the necessary building blocks
for synthetic cells while uncovering unsolved questions in the origins of life.
The project will also engage high school and students at a nearby minority-
serving institution, providing research and learning opportunities that will
encourage students to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins should
be reproducible using engineering techniques and materials. In practice, it is
not yet possible to control the 3-D structure of synthetic polymers with such
precision. Doing so would enable the de novo design of synthetic macromolecules
that can be used for the bottom-up assembly of synthetic cells and cell
components. The goal of this work is to discover synthetic polymers with
protein-like features. Design criteria will be identified by implementing
intelligent and data-driven Design-Build-Test-Learn cycles of experimentation.
We will 1) develop quantitative models for data handling and reinforced machine
learning, 2) implement intelligent ‘Design-Build-Test-Learn’ routines for
polymer-DNA architectures, and 3) build programmable assemblies. Until recently,
these objectives were not possible. Robust methods for making large libraries of
well-defined polymers were not available. The recent discovery of oxygen
tolerant and automated living polymer chemistry makes it possible to reliably
and routinely Design-Build complex polymer architectures with features similar
to proteins. In this project, the automation will be upgraded with high
throughput analytics and machine learning to establish quantitative structure-
activity relationship models for the de novo design of compact and organized
structures. Such semi-automatic and reinforced exploration of the highly diverse
landscape of macromolecular assembly will lead to the design of protein-like
polymers and their use as molecular building blocks for the assembly of
synthetic cells and cell components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
funding jointly between the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in
ENG/CBET and the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in
MPS/CHE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.