* 2009093
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Building quantitative models for plant transcription using convolutional neural networks for de novo promoter design
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Andy Zhou, Zhou, Andy
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 01/31/2023
* USD 135,995.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Andy Zhou is "Building quantitative models for plant
transcription using convolutional neural networks for de novo promoter design
for crop plant engineering". The host institutions for the fellowship are the
Joint Bioenergy Institute, the Joint Genome Institute, and the University of
California, Davis. The sponsoring scientists are Dr. Patrick M. Shih and Dr.
Ronan C. O’Malley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncovering the inner workings of plants
through DNA and RNA sequencing can provide valuable insight on how to better
engineer crop plants and is essential in meeting the increasing societal demand
for renewable energy and environmental sustainability. However, these sequencing
datasets provide a myriad of analyzable patterns and are often difficult to
decipher without sophisticated computational analysis. The project will develop
machine-learning models for plant biology and apply these models directly to
develop agricultural biotechnology. These technologies will assist in enhancing
the economic value of crop plants and benefitting society through innovating
food, fuel, or chemical production using plants. The project emphasizes training
of the fellow in scientific communication of findings to the general public by
creating an interactive website to explore the project findings. The fellow will
engage in mentorship roles to garner interest in scientific careers for local
high school and college students of diverse and underrepresented backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop state-of-the-art machine
learning models for transcription initiation and chromatin accessibility in both
model and crop plant systems in order to redefine core mechanisms of plant gene
expression and circumvent the challenges facing engineering plant systems. The
project leverages Assay for Transposase Accessible Chromatin (ATAC) and Capped
Analysis of Gene Expression (CAGE) sequencing data to train deep convolutional
neural networks to predict features important to gene expression in Arabidopsis
and tomato. These machine learning models will be utilized for finding open
chromatin to facilitate transgenic crop transformation, tunable promoters for
transgene expression, and guide the design of de novo DNA parts for synthetic
biology in model and crop plant systems. All sequencing data generated will be
hosted on publicly-available repositories such as NCBI. Analysis code and
machine learning models will be uploaded to GitHub and Kipoi model zoo for
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.