* 2009377
* RUI: Looking beyond LCDM-- observational consequences of models that ease the Hubble tension
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tristan Smith, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 224,882.00

Over the past twenty years, greater precision in cosmological measurements have
revealed intriguing tensions that challenge the standard cosmological model. The
most pressing of these is a disagreement between two distinct ways scientists
estimate the current expansion rate of the universe (known as the Hubble
constant). One estimate is based on direct measurement that uses observations of
supernovae; the other is based on indirect measurement that uses observations of
the afterglow of the big bang. Whereas the data from these two estimates used to
agree, advances in measurement precision now yield values for the Hubble
constant that are statistically different. This ‘Hubble tension’ may be pointing
scientists to new and unexpected physics not included in the standard
cosmological model. The proposed research will advance the field of cosmology by
refining what this tension may signify about new and unanticipated physical
processes and in doing so has the potential to enhance our understanding of the
origin and evolution of the universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As cosmological
observations have become more precise, tensions in the data have appeared. The
most significant of these is the “Hubble tension”, a 4-6 sigma disagreement
between several independent methods to measure the current expansion rate of the
universe (known as the Hubble constant). These methods can be grouped based on
whether their measurements are indirect (involving the cosmic microwave
background or baryon acoustic oscillations) or direct (involving calibrated type
Ia supernovae or strong lens time delays). Intriguingly, the indirect methods
find a common value that is lower than those found using direct probes. It has
been difficult to explain this tension in the context of the standard
cosmological model, but recent work has interpreted this tension as evidence for
either additional material in the early universe (with a particular set of
properties), for non-standard neutrino interactions, or for modifications to the
way in which the electrons recombined with protons during the process that
formed the cosmic microwave background. The proposed research will explore the
essential observational consequences of these models, articulate the basic
dynamics required to resolve the Hubble tension, create new tools with which to
characterize their predicted features, and articulate their novel and unexpected
dynamics. The outcome of this research will advance the field of cosmology by
providing the necessary tools to establish if the Hubble tension is pointing us
towards a significant revision of our standard cosmological
model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.