* 2009549
* Interacting Particle Systems and Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Natasa Pavlovic, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 309,408.00

Analysis of large systems of interacting particles is key for predicting and
understanding various phenomena arising in different contexts, from physics (in
understanding e.g. boson stars) to social studies (when modeling social
networks). Since the number of particles is usually very large one would like to
understand qualitative and quantitative properties of such systems of particles
through some macroscopic, averaged characteristics. In order to identify
macroscopic behavior of multi-particle systems, it is helpful to study the
asymptotic behavior when the number of particles approaches infinity, with the
assumption that the limit will approximate properties observed in the systems
with a large finite number of particles. An example of an important phenomenon
that describes such macroscopic behavior of a large system of particles is the
Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC), which is a state of the matter of a dilute
Bose gas at very low temperatures when the gas moves as a single particle.
Although the BEC was predicted in early days of quantum mechanics by Bose and
Einstein, the first experimental realization came in 1995 (subsequently
recognized by a Nobel Prize in physics in 2001). Mathematical models have been
developed to understand such phenomena. Those models connect large quantum
systems of interacting particles and nonlinear partial differential equations
(PDE) that are derived from such systems in the limit of the number of particles
going to infinity. However there are still many challenging problems on both
ends, that could benefit from an interdisciplinary perspective, and the
Principal Investigator will work on these. The PI will continue to explore
diverse ways to disseminate the knowledge obtained from the proposed projects
via designing and teaching new courses (e.g. the PI designed and taught multiple
courses for graduate students at summer schools), training and mentoring
graduate students and postdocs, and via organizing as well as attending seminars
and research meetings.problems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With fundamental works on
derivation of effective equations from quantum many body systems (e.g. nonlinear
Schrodinger equation) and effective equations from classical many particle
systems (e.g. Boltzmann equation) a new channel of communication between
mathematical physics and nonlinear PDE communities has opened, contributing to
advances in both areas. In particular, recently remarkable progress has been
achieved in the rigorous derivation of nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS) equations
from quantum systems of interacting bosons. Motivated by that progress, about a
decade ago, the PI and her colleague Chen started studying connections between
quantum many particle systems and NLS equation, and consequently together with
their collaborators (including 11 PhD students and 3 postdocs) they developed
the program of studying quantum many particle systems via ideas and techniques
that originated in the context of 1 particle nonlinear PDE, namely the NLS. In
the current project, the PI and collaborators will significantly expand the span
of the above program to include: derivation of qualitative aspects of nonlinear
PDE, such as being Hamiltonian or integrable, and Analysis of classical systems
of particles that lead to new kinetic equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.