* 2009811
* Fulfilling the Atomic Physics Needs for Spectral Diagnostics of Cosmic Chemical Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Varsha Kulkarni, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 415,391.00

Understanding the evolution of chemical elements in the Universe is crucial for
understanding the evolution of galaxies. Optical spectra of atoms and ions known
as damped Lyman-alpha (DLA) absorbers observed against background quasars and
gamma-ray burst (GRB) afterglows represent the most sensitive tools to measure
elemental abundances in distant galaxies. This project will generate accurate
and reliable data required to derive elemental abundances from DLA absorbers,
allowing astronomers to interpret observations of distant galaxies and test
models of chemical evolution. The project will train graduate and undergraduate
students in astrophysical research, provide research experience to high school
students, as well as engage a diverse population through astronomy outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using high-level theoretical atomic physics
methods, the research team will calculate oscillator strengths for optical
transitions of key DLA and sub-DLA absorbers. The team will then test the
reliability of the calculated data by benchmarking them against high-quality
astronomical spectra in conjunction with photoionization modeling. By enabling
accurate interpretation of large-scale spectroscopic observations of high-
redshift quasars, GRBs, and star-forming galaxies, this project will help
advance our understanding of the chemical evolution of
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.