* 2009122
* Raising the bar for black hole mass measurements in lower mass galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Monica Valluri, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 410,481.00

It is now known that supermassive black holes live at the centers of all
galaxies. Over the past decade scientists have found that the masses of these
monster black holes depend strongly on the properties of their host galaxies.
Supermassive black holes, some of the most intriguing objects in the universe,
also play a transformative role in how their parent galaxies evolve. While they
are gigantic (between a million and a ten billion times the mass of the sun),
supermassive black holes are only a fraction of a percent of the total mass of
the galaxy they live in. Much is still not understood about how these black
holes grew or how they were able to so dramatically influence galaxy evolution.
To understand how black holes grow, it is first necessary to measure their
masses, both in nearby galaxies and in distant galaxies. The ‘gold standard’
method for measuring black hole masses in nearby galaxies uses the motions of
stars that orbit close to the black hole. In the nearby Universe most of the
black holes that are still growing today (the so-called Active Galactic Nuclei)
live in disk galaxies like our own Milky Way. The black holes in disk galaxies
are less massive, and therefore are harder to study since they have weaker
effects on the motion of stars around them. The team will develop training tools
to allow other scientists to use their new modeling software. Several
undergraduate research students will participate in this research adding to
their scientific and technical training and better equipping them for future
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accurate determination of supermassive black
hole masses in galaxies, both at low and high redshifts, underpins almost all
efforts to understand galaxy evolution. Black hole mass measurements that use
the dynamics of stars in galactic nuclei are the current ‘gold standard’. Black
hole masses are found to be tightly correlated with the properties of their host
galaxies over a very wide range of black hole masses (from 100 million to 10
billion times the mass of the sun). At lower black holes masses, found in
predominantly disk-like galaxies, the correlations are weaker. Spiral galaxies
like our Milky Way, that contain a stellar bar (a rapidly rotating cigar-like
central feature) show the most scatter. The team recently found that black hole
mass measurements in barred galaxies can be overestimated when the bar is
ignored, especially as the galaxy is viewed more face-on. Since 65% of disk
galaxies have stellar bars, this bias primarily affects black hole masses in
galaxies at the low-end of the mass function. It also impacts the black hole
mass scaling relations - the correlations between the host galaxy properties and
black hole masses. The new black hole mass measurements resulting from this
project will better constrain the statistical uncertainties on the black hole
masses at the low end of the black hole mass range, where it is most uncertain.
They will also aid in determining the “reverberation mapping” mass scale a
relationship that is crucial for future measurements of black hole masses at
high redshift. The modeling will yield detailed three-dimensional distributions
of the orbits of stars in the host galactic nuclei. The open source software
that will be developed during this project will have broad applicability beyond
black hole mass determination. The team will also make available tutorials for
using the software for modeling galaxies and involve several undergraduates in
the research allowing them to apply state-of- the-art galactic dynamics modeling
tools to real data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.