* 2009022
* SHF: Small: Omega-Regular Objectives for Model-Free Reinforcement Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Fabio Somenzi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents rely on rewards that promote the
achievement of given objectives. Widespread use of RL-enabled systems, such as
swarm robots, autonomous vehicles, Internet-of-Things, and social networks, will
dramatically improve the quality of modern life. However, their applications in
safety-critical settings imply that methods to ensure their correctness are of
paramount importance. This project develops a rigorous approach to the design
and verification of RL-enabled systems that addresses issues of safety,
efficiency, and scalability. Logic provides a foundation for the rigorous
specification of learning objectives. Model-free RL, which is the type of
learning supported by neural networks, promises scalability. Hence this project
is about translating logic-based requirements into the scalar reward form that
is needed in model-free RL. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridging the gap between logic
specifications and model-free RL requires a translation that is faithful
(greater reward means higher probability of satisfying the objective) and
effective (the reward should help RL algorithms to learn quickly and reliably).
This project develops foundations for faithful and effective translations of
omega-regular specifications and explores their applications to synthesis of RL-
enabled systems. The transition from theory to practice will be measured by the
success of an open-source tool for the synthesis of interpreters that translate
environment observations into rewards for state-of-the-art, off-the-shelf RL
algorithms. Both the formal-methods and the RL communities will benefit from
this project. The PIs will extend their record of technology transfer with the
release of software and educational materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.