* 2009816
* RUI: Directly Observing the Assembly of Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Katherine Follette, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,968.00

The principal investigator and her students at Amherst College will develop the
techniques required to detect and characterize planets forming around young,
nearby stars. Thousands of planets have been discovered around other stars, yet
there are still many mysteries about how planets form. One powerful way to begin
solving these mysteries is to observe planets as they are being born. These
“protoplanets” are extremely dim relative to the stars they orbit, and therefore
extremely difficult to detect. This investigation will improve techniques for
separating tiny glimmers of protoplanet light from the bright glare of their
stars. Materials will be developed to help students master important research
skills not typically taught in science courses. These skills include how to
decipher scientific results and how to manage time when working on big open-
ended projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protoplanet direct imaging is a new and a
hotly debated topic in the field of high-contrast imaging. Novel hardware and
software techniques are required to isolate the light of forming planets and
disentangle it from morphologically complex co-located circumstellar disk
features. A two-pronged approach will be conducted to advance the state of the
art in validation and interpretation of potential protoplanet detections. (1) A
fully developed and tested algorithm will be applied to rigorous, data-driven
optimization of tunable parameters for point-spread function subtraction. (2)
Multiwavelength observations of low mass accreting objects will be utilized to
develop and calibrate accretion diagnostics appropriate for the substellar mass
regime. This foundational work will inform planet formation processes, planetary
accretion processes, and accretion variability timescales. The research team
will also address an important issue in undergraduate research mentoring – the
lack of rigorously developed and validated mentoring materials. Beginning
undergraduate researchers must learn not only the scientific context and data
analysis skills necessary to complete a research project, but also how to
efficiently digest and rigorously analyze published scientific results, oral and
written scientific communication, time and task management, and leadership and
group work skills, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.