* 2009487
* Nonlinear evolution equations, asymptotics and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Gino Biondini, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 290,100.00

The most familiar manifestation of nonlinear dispersive waves is perhaps that of
a breaking ocean wave. However, nonlinear dispersive waves are ubiquitous in
nature, appearing in many fields ranging from water waves to optics, acoustics,
ferromagnetics, condensed matter, cosmology and beyond. When dissipation and
nonlinearity are the dominant physical effects in a system, the regime of small
dissipation often gives rise to shock waves (the most familiar manifestation
being a sonic boom). The analogous phenomenon when dissipation is replaced by
dispersion is that of dispersive shock waves. These are non-stationary coherent,
multiscale oscillatory structures. Physical media giving rise to dispersive
shock waves range from water waves to superfluids, nonlinear photonics, and
magnetic spin systems. For example, in fluid dynamics, dispersive shocks are
known as undular bores. Even though much work has been done over the past fifty
years to understand these phenomena, many fundamental questions remain. A first
component of this project involves the development of mathematical tools for
studying the behavior of solutions of certain nonlinear evolution equations
describing nonlinear wave phenomena in more than one spatial dimension. The
second component of the project involves the application of these tools to study
a variety of areas of interest, ranging from water waves to optics, networks,
and statistical physics. Finally, the project will also serve as a vehicle for
training several Ph.D. students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical study of
nonlinear media giving rise to dispersive shocks often leads to certain systems
of hyperbolic conservation laws. Over the last fifty years, various methods have
been applied with success to study these kinds of systems. However, the behavior
of solutions of dispersive nonlinear wave equations in more than one spatial
dimension is not as well understood. In particular, a mathematical
characterization of formation and propagation of dispersive shocks in two
spatial dimensions is still largely an open problem. Recent work by the PI has
opened up new avenues to study some long-standing open problems in this regard.
Specifically, this project comprises four classes of problems: (i) Use of the
Whitham modulation equations for the Kadomtsev-Petviashvili equation (the so-
called KP-Whitham equations, which were recently derived by the PI) to study the
temporal evolution of piecewise-constant soliton initial data and the formation
and dynamics of dispersive shock waves in 2+1 dimensions. (ii) Study of the
integrability structure of the above-mentioned KP-Whitham equations and their
exact solutions. (iii) Derivation and application of Whitham modulation
equations for various (2+1)-dimensional evolution equations of nonlinear
Schrodinger type. (iv) Application of small dispersion limits and Whitham
modulation theory to characterize phase state diagrams of p-star networks and
certain random matrix models. The overarching theme of the project is to advance
our understanding of dispersive wave phenomena in more than one spatial
dimension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.