* 2009960
* Production Pathways and Yields of Excited O2 Important for Mesospheric Nightglow
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Konstantinos Kalogerakis, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 566,367.00

This award would support the laboratory studies of the reactions that lead to
molecular oxygen electronically excited states that are observed in the Earth's
mesospheric and lower thermosphere (MLT) nightglow (70 to 110 km). The award
would investigate the role of collisional relaxation within the dominant energy
flow pathways and would measure the O2 excited-state yields resulting from the
process of termolecular association of oxygen atoms. These measurements would
provide a quantitative understanding necessary to support the reliable modeling
of the atmosphere MLT airglow emissions removing the significant gaps and
reducing uncertainties that currently exist in the understanding of these
processes. Laser-based laboratory methodologies would be used to investigate MLT
nightglow emissions that have recently led to major breakthroughs in the
understanding of these nightglow phenomena. Finally, the proposed research will
contribute to the development of research experiences for undergraduate students
while also providing training for one or more postdoctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These laboratory studies will provide insight at
the atomic and molecular level into the underlying production mechanisms, energy
flow pathways, and yields of the excited O2 states produced following
termolecular O-atom association. These investigations will also supply basic
physical measurements currently needed to interpret and model important O-atom
processes that generate electronically excited O2 in the Earthâ€™s mesosphere.
These measurements will quantify the O2 airglow mechanisms allowing the
subsequent probe of atmospheric composition and dynamics by remote sensing.
Application of basic chemistry and physics to the study of collisional and
molecular energy transfer processes on a fundamental level is also critical for
understanding combustion, astrophysical environments, as well as the operation
of lasers, especially high-power chemical lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.