* 2009185
* RUI: CNH2-L: An integrative analysis of perceptions, policy, and land use impact on coastal agricultural watershed resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2025
* David Griffith, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,499,904.00

Intensive agricultural production contributes to nutrient pollution in many of
the world’s most economically and ecologically valuable watersheds. While these
agricultural practices pollute and threaten downstream waters, they also provide
significant economic benefits to landowners, although not necessarily to
farmers. Federal, state and local governments have turned to a variety of
policies to reduce nutrient pollution but at the same time keep the economic
benefits. The merits of these policies are a combination of 1) the program cost,
2) the behavioral responses of farmers and landowners to the policy, and 3) the
environmental impacts of land use and management changes that result from each
policy. As watersheds experience environmental changes, management strategies
and policies that work to reduce nutrient pollution today may not be as
effective in the future. This study will advance knowledge on the dynamics of
socio-environmental systems by 1) describing how environmental and human systems
function and interact, 2) developing behavioral models of farmer responses to
agricultural policy, and 3) assessing agricultural management impacts on
ecosystem services (for example, clean water and flood protection) under current
conditions and future sea level scenarios. The models to be developed will
simulate how field-level changes in land use and management could translate to
watershed-level changes in nutrient pollution. We will use environmental
laboratory experiments to measure whether the intrusion of saltwater predicted
with sea level rise alters the effectiveness of biological processes at reducing
nutrient pollution. The human systems approach, through the use of surveys and
economics laboratory experiments, will quantify how different policies alter
land use (for example, switching from agriculture to fallow land), how incentive
programs can reduce voluntary best management practices, and how highly visible
changes to environmental quality (for example, algal blooms) change perceptions
about land management decisions and ecosystem health (for the farmer, community,
or general public). This study addresses how environmental change (that is,
salinization and sea level rise) modifies nutrient pollution in ways that shape
human decisions on managing agricultural systems. This work also examines how
decisions that support sustainable agriculture will ensure that rural regional
economies support a diverse population and promote healthy ecosystems. This work
seeks to benefit society through classroom content that focus on integrated
socio-environmental systems across K12, undergraduate and graduate school
levels. This work also supports “Community Learning Exchanges”, a program in
which students, teachers, families, and community members engage in educational
activities and conversations surrounding the project. This project will enhance
diversity and training of a workforce to participate in team science across
disciplinary boundaries, which can address challenging socio-environmental
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nutrient pollution associated with agricultural
production is a persistent issue in many of the world’s most economically and
ecologically valuable watersheds. Many agricultural practices that threaten
ecosystem health persist because they deliver economic benefits to landowners.
Recognizing this, governments have considered or implemented diverse policies to
preserve ecosystem health. However, the relative merits of these policies depend
upon 1) program cost, 2) the behavioral responses of farmers to the policy, and
3) the ecological impacts of land use and management changes that result from
the policy. Furthermore, human behavioral responses are not static, but can
change as a changing watershed influences both their economic opportunities and
their perceptions of these issues. A changing environment means that what works
to reduce nutrient pollution today may not be as effective in the future. An
approach that links both environmental and social sciences in a way that
emphasizes the strengths of each is needed. The proposed environmental system
model will simulate how field-level changes in land use and management will
translate to watershed-level changes in water quality. The environmental
laboratory experiments will indicate whether the intrusion of saltwater
predicted with sea level rise will alter the effectiveness of biological
processes at reducing nutrient pollution. The human systems approach, through
the analysis of surveys and economics laboratory experiments, will model how
different policies alter land use, how incentive programs can crowd out
voluntary best management practices, and how highly visible changes to ecosystem
quality (e.g., harmful algal blooms) change perceptions of ecosystem health (for
the farmer, community, general public) and land management decisions. This
proposal addresses how environmental change (i.e., salinization and sea level
rise) modifies nutrient cycling in ways that could shape human decisions on
managing the food-water nexus. The proposed work will advance understanding of
(i) how external drivers (e.g. policies and environmental change) influence land
use decisions; (ii) which land use decisions will mitigate negative ecosystem
impacts now and in the future; and (iii) how management and policy decisions
influence socio-environmental outcomes. This examination will result in a deeper
understanding of how ecosystem outcomes can be sustainably improved in the face
of changing markets, environment, and policies. The development of an integrated
socio-environmental model will inform the policies that promote best management
practice adoption, both today and in the face of future sea-level rise
scenarios. This proposal examines how decisions that support sustainable
agriculture will ensure that rural regional economies continue to support a
diverse population. This work will provide evidence in support of policies that
promote healthy ecosystems and benefit individuals across every socio-economic
status. The human system model will allow for heterogeneity in preferences and
decision making based on demographics, which will make the model easier to adapt
to other watersheds and thus lead to more generalizable findings. This project
will also provide students with real data to interpret the impact of land use
and management on coastal watershed health. Data analysis problems will be
developed for public school students in grades 3-8 and teacher training will be
provided to enhance adoption of classroom materials. Project results will be
used as teaching material in lectures and problem sets to teach the dynamics of
integrated socio-environmental systems in existing disciplinary and new
interdisciplinary courses at undergraduate and graduate levels. Last, the team
will conduct Community Learning Exchanges in which students, teachers, families,
and community members engage in educational activities and conversations
surrounding the project findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.