* 2009501
* Collaborative Research: EXPRES Search for Low Mass Planets
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Joe Llama, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2024
* USD 155,260.00

A collaborative team from Yale University, Lowell Observatory, and San Francisco
State University will conduct a survey for small, temperate planets orbiting
nearby stars. Virtually every star forms with planets. However, none of the
planets so far detected are like the Earth. Many are gas giants, similar to
Jupiter or Neptune. The only small rocky planets that have been detected orbit
very close to their host stars, where inhospitable temperatures reach thousands
of degrees. The discovery of other worlds that are similar to the Earth could
help astronomers to find life on other planets. Unfortunately, the tiny signals
from Earth-like planets are difficult to detect. This investigation will employ
a new detector with the precision needed to detect potentially habitable worlds.
The investigation will carry out a survey of bright, nearby stars with the goal
of detecting planets that are similar to the Earth. This program places
undergraduates and masters students from an officially recognized minority
serving institution, with almost 41% of students having Chicano/Mexican or
Latino background, at the forefront of exoplanet research. SFSU students will be
collaborating with their peers at Yale and Lowell Observatory in observing,
improving RV and planet atmosphere analysis tools, and improving understanding
of planet formation. Students will also be learning to communicate these results
with the Spanish speaking public and developing materials that can be shared
outside of their community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this project
is to detect low mass planets in both compact and Solar System like
architectures. These planets have been missed by previous radial velocity
surveys. This will allow the reconciliation of different planet populations seen
by transit and radial velocity surveys and to better understand planet formation
and evolution. The EXPRES spectrograph is calibrated with a stable laser
frequency comb and has sufficient precision to find analogs of the small radius
planets seen by Kepler transits. Following a carefully vetted set of 50 stars at
high cadence over the next three years will allow the project find planets
missed by transit surveys: these are small planets with orbital periods longer
than 100 days. In addition, flexible scheduling of nearly 200 partial nights per
year coupled with a remarkably stable instrumental profile enable Rossiter-
McLaughlin measurements to determine orbital obliquity and detection of planet
atmosphere constituents with high dispersion spectroscopy. The observational
limitations of prior RV surveys and the unfavorable probability for detection of
long period transits have left the occurrence rate of low-mass planets with
periods longer than 10 days poorly constrained. At first glance the exoplanet
populations appear to disagree for RV and transit surveys. The leap in radial
velocity precision opens up an entirely new parameter space, allowing for
detection of low mass planets in orbits longer than 40 days. It is likely that
there are no other ways to detect these planets - this parameter space will be
unexplored by current transit surveys. The investigation will reach the
parameter space where Earth-like planets at habitable zone distances orbit
around G and K stars. The highly stable measurements will also enable planet
atmosphere studies and provide new insights into the behavior of stellar
photospheres. The proposed survey will advance understanding of rocky planet
occurrence rates and detect Earth-like planets in habitable orbits around Sun-
like stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.