* 2009329
* DMS-EPSRC: Collaborative Research: Stochastic Dynamics of Vibro-Impact Systems with Applications in Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Igor Belykh, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 142,613.00

The rapid development of electronic devices, such as wearable and wireless
sensors networks integrated into the Internet of Things, has created the need
for efficient, environmentally-friendly energy generators capable of recharging
batteries to prolong their lifespan. Vibrational energy harvesting, a process
for scavenging energy from natural or forced vibrations such as structural
movement or human activity, provides a promising means for this energy
generation. This grant leverages a synergy between mathematical innovation and
data-driven modeling, yielding transformative tools for advancing highly
promising yet surprisingly complex systems for energy harvesting and targeted
energy transfer. The research contributes to future economic and environmental
impacts by supporting the widespread use of self-recharging wireless sensors,
such as on bridges, buildings, and off-shore renewable energy generators.
Powering wireless devices in health and structural safety monitoring systems
will significantly reduce operation and maintenance costs associated with the
wired technologies. The environmental contributions are therefore two-fold:
direct, as a green energy device, and indirect through enabling effective
diagnostics and prognostics in the renewable energy
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this grant address gaps and
opportunities in mathematical developments and in practical applications for
impact-based engineering devices and systems with non-smooth dynamics, critical
for understanding the harvesting of vibrational energy. The main research
objective of this grant is to develop a universal suite of mathematical
methodologies for the analysis and optimized performance of deterministic and
stochastic non-smooth engineering systems. These approaches are pursued with a
focus on practical engineering models of vibro-impacting energy harvesting
systems and nonlinear dynamic dampers, within the broad area of targeted energy
transfer. Integrating novel nonlinear, stochastic, and computational approaches
with experimental and real-world data both for energy harvesting and for devices
that mitigate vibration will pave new pathways for analysis-based design and
model validation. Synergistic connections between analysis, computations and
data-driven mathematical innovation are pursued both to drive new mathematical
approaches and to obtain practical predictions for device design. This grant
will also serve as an excellent cross-disciplinary training ground for the
involved postdocs and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.