* 2009230
* Direct Comparisons of Black Hole Mass Measurements
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Misty Bentz, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 451,061.00

Black holes often appear in science fiction, but they are now also science fact.
These invisible objects are some of the most extreme in the universe. The black
holes that live in the centers of galaxies contain as much material as millions
or billions of Suns, but they are collapsed down into incredibly small sizes.
This means that they have enormous amounts of gravity. While black holes are
invisible because they do not give off any light, they can be detected by their
effects on objects around them. Just as the wind is invisible but it clearly
shakes leaves, black holes are invisible but their gravity whips around stars
and glowing gas. Astronomers have developed a few different ways to use
telescopes to measure the motions of stars and gas around invisible black holes.
Faster motions indicate more gravity from a black hole. Black holes with more
gravity contain more material that has collapsed down, and so the visible
motions of stars and gas allow astronomers to “weigh” invisible black holes. The
researchers have collected a small sample where they can weigh all of the black
holes with both of the most widely-used methods. In Broader Impacts, the PI will
work with the Girl Scouts of Greater Atlanta to develop and offer astronomy
workshops that target girls in grades 4-5 and high school. The PI will engage
the broader community through her ongoing commitments to facilitate and
participate in a wide variety of public outreach events, with the goal of
bringing science literacy and appreciation to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Black holes are some of the most extreme objects
in the universe. The black holes that are found in the centers of galaxies
contain the mass of millions or billions of Suns, but they are collapsed down
into infinitesimal sizes. While black holes are invisible because they do not
emit any light, they can be detected by their gravitational effects on nearby
stars or gas. Astronomers have thus developed a few different techniques to
measure the motions of stars and gas to constrain black hole masses. But it is
difficult to compare how well the different techniques agree with each other
because each one requires a specific set of conditions. Nevertheless, this is an
important point to check, because nearby black holes are mostly studied with one
method but a completely different method is used for distant black holes.
Distant celestial objects are seen as they were in the past, so large samples of
nearby and distant black holes are used to understand how they were born and
grow over time. Thus it is important to be sure that both techniques are
calibrated to the same mass scale. The researchers have collected a small number
of black holes where they can determine their masses using both of the most
widely-used methods. In this program, they will apply both methods and carefully
compare their results. This will allow them to determine for the first time if
both techniques are giving similar answers, or if there may be previously
unknown biases affecting our understanding of black holes and their
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.