* 2009716
* I-Corps: A more efficient, more effective, portable oxygen concentrator
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Soumyadipta Acharya, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
the quality of life for patients on long term oxygen therapy (LTOT) as a result
of chronic lung diseases through improved oxygen technology. Over 1 million
Americans require LTOT to manage symptoms of hypoxemia and shortness of breath
due to chronic lung disease. Although portable oxygen equipment exists, such as
oxygen tanks or portable oxygen concentrators (POCs), many patients are faced
with limitations with their equipment (oxygen duration, size and weight of
devices, quantity of oxygen). More than a quarter of all oxygen users experience
such challenges, severely affecting mobility, the ability to work and travel,
and ultimately affecting quality of life. Improved technology in portable oxygen
equipment can drastically improve the everyday lives of patients with the
opportunity to rethink the current standards in managing oxygen delivery and
improve patient care and quality of life.

This I-Corps project proposes novel oxygen delivery and management technology to
improve the efficiency and efficacy of current POC technology. The proposed
system incorporates a new delivery modality of mixed high-flow air with oxygen
to increase the treatable range of oxygen flow rates while providing additional
dyspnea relief. The proposed system also automatically titrates oxygen delivery
based on patient needs (SpO2) to limit oxygen waste and increase efficiency of
current POCs. Current research is investigating the safety and efficacy of the
novel flow modality and automatic titration in patients through multiple in-
human studies. Preliminary results suggest a potential increase in exercise
capacity over standard LTOT and a decrease in shortness of breath with the novel
flow modality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.