* 2009256
* CNH2-L: Wild Rice: A Flagship for Co-Creating Socio-Ecological Knowledge of Indigenous Resource Management
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Mae Davenport, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,499,906.00

Northern wild rice (manoomin) grows in the lakes and rivers of the North
American Great Lakes region and is a culturally important food for indigenous
and non-native people, while also serving as an indicator of ecosystem health. A
decline in ecosystem health has been observed across the region, a result of a
mix of environmental stressors, cultural values, public policies, and human
practices. This project seeks to understand the social and environmental causes
of manoomin decline using an interdisciplinary approach and by co-producing
knowledge. The investigators plan to use an integration of science and
indigenous knowledge to overcome obstacles to understanding the complex
interactions. The study will specifically target the influence of interactions
among the environment and diverse cultural values, policies, and practices. The
project is a partnership between tribes and university scientists and includes
an indigenous worldview in social ecosystems by incorporating indigenous
knowledge in the research. Ultimately this project will produce scientific
understanding needed to restore these culturally and economically important
ecosystems while incorporating native voices in ecosystem management.
Understanding manoomin as a social-environmental system will generate broader
impacts that include restoration of this important resource in the Great Lakes
region and a framework for collaborative research and management applicable to
Indigenous resource issues globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary collaborative research project has three interdependent
components: environmental, social, and integrative. The goal of the social
component is to understand the influences of human values, policies, and
practices on manoomin ecosystems through surveys, in-depth interviews, oral
histories, and focus groups with tribal and non-tribal harvesters, natural
resource managers, and manoomin processors in the region. The goal of the
environmental component is to develop integrative ecosystem models using a
synthesis of regional data and new data collected through fieldwork at four
study sites spanning from impaired to productive manoomin waters. These
ecosystem models will show how feedback among water levels, nutrients,
sediments, and vegetation influence manoomin growth. The goal of the integrative
component is to establish theories and methods for integrating indigenous
knowledge and science into natural resource management. The project team will
work iteratively with tribal community members to co-develop social-ecological
models that examine the influence of land-use, water, and vegetation management
practices on manoomin health. They will also conduct interviews and focus groups
within their own research partnership, comprising tribal and non-tribal
researchers and natural resource managers. This will provide insight to other
researchers and tribal communities seeking to develop their own collaborative
research partnerships. It will further generate insights into whole-ecosystem
function and multi-jurisdictional/cultural interactions that will advance
knowledge across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.