* 2009309
* Modeling the Abundance and Distribution of the First Stars and Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Eli Visbal, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 227,367.00

The formation of the first stars in the universe influence the growth of
galaxies and galaxy clusters throughout the age of the universe. It is very
difficult to make computer models of the birth of the first stars and growth of
galaxies because the models must cover sizes as small as stars and as large as
galaxy clusters. This project will use an approach which blends two modeling
techniques to better cover the range of sizes. It will then provide predictions
about the early universe that can be tested with modern telescopes. It will also
develop planetarium shows using these models. These shows will be used at public
planetariums and in outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a hybrid approach to modeling the birth of the first Pop III stars in
the universe. Starting with a semi-analytic approach at small scales and using
AI to develop a rapid emulation of star formation to incorporate in large scale
hydrodynamic cosmological simulations. The simulations will be used to make
predictions for upcoming observations with a focus on the redshifted 21-cm line
of neutral hydrogen and growing black hole remnants from the first stars. The
project will also restart "Girls in Science", an annual event where local junior
high school girls interested in science participate in science activities and
attend a panel discussion with successful women
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.