* 2009417
* Integral Field Spectroscopic Constraints on the Physics of Galactic Winds and Gas Accretion
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Kate Rubin, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 351,382.00

Astronomers want to understand why some regions in a galaxy form stars and other
regions do not. In-flowing gas delivers star-building material, but exploding
stars create outflowing winds, removing material, and preventing further star
formation. Rubin and her collaborators will study the inflow and outflow of gas
in star forming regions in order to understand how gas flows shape galaxies. To
promote diversity in astronomy local high school and community college students
and beginning undergraduates will be recruited for an annual summer school. The
students will participate in research projects and learn about computer
programming. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Empirical constraints on the kinematics and
morphology of cool (T &lt; 1000 K) gas flows around galaxies are crucial to
building a complete theory of galaxy formation. Archival observations taken with
the Multi Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE) on the Very Large Telescope of ~45
nearby star-forming galaxies will be analyzed to conduct a kinematic study of
interstellar NaI absorption. This will constrain the cool wind velocity and the
incidence of cool gas accretion on ~50 â€“ 100 pc scales, and establish the
relationship between these processes and local star formation activity. A
comparative analysis of absorption from cool galactic gas flows predicted in the
FIRE-2 suite of cosmological galaxy formation simulations will be made. This
project will produce a novel set of empirical constraints on the energetics of
galactic winds and on the morphology of galactic gas
accretion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.