* 2009258
* CNH2-S: Convergence Research: Bridging Knowledge Systems and Expertise for Understanding the Dynamics of a Contaminated Tribal Landscape System
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Noel Urban, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 749,801.00

Restoring ecosystem health is a challenging priority for communities worldwide.
This project brings natural and social sciences researchers together with tribal
community partners to better understand human-environment relationships in the
Upper Peninsula (U.P.) of Michigan. Specifically, this work is focused on toxic
contamination and climate-related changes across the water-rich landscape. The
team is developing new tools and approaches to map the extent of the region’s
contamination in inland lakes, and concurrently, to map tribal harvesting
practices, valued resources, and climate-related changes across the landscape.
These maps will illustrate U.P. water bodies’ levels of mercury and PCB
contamination coupled with tribal harvesting practices and climate observations
to categorize lakes as low, moderate or high risk. This research also aims to
explore specific management and outreach decisions to minimize contamination
risk and support human-environment relationships that promote the health and
wellbeing of the U.P. environment and its communities. Results from this project
have the potential to be applied in other regions burdened with contamination
and climate-related changes. The research team prioritizes diverse and equitable
knowledge exchange between Michigan Tech, Keweenaw Bay Indian Community, Great
Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission, Keweenaw Bay Ojibwa Community
College, and other government and higher education institutions, and promotes
higher education and career opportunities in STEM for underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compromised ecosystems present profound challenges for
communities worldwide. This study examines socio-ecological dynamics within a
tribal landscape system (TLS) impacted by anthropogenic toxic contamination and
climate-related changes. Interdisciplinary scientists and tribal community
partners are focused within the Keweenaw Bay Indian Community (KBIC) homeland
where 11 Lake Superior Bands of Ojibwa retain treaty rights, and depend on local
resources and landscape knowledge for subsistence and cultural needs. Our long-
term goals are to better understand socio-ecological interactions within
impaired landscapes, elucidate Ojibwa environmental ethics underpinning these
dynamic interactions, and identify and develop appropriate responses to address
impairments. Ecological system components include area watersheds, lakes and
food webs, and humans, with a focus on contamination and climate-related
changes. The social system components include dynamics such as knowledge,
expertise, and practices of the KBIC, and of the research team. Research
questions and approaches are: 1) How do contamination and climate-related
changes impact TLS dynamics? The objective is to map spatial and temporal
variation of TLS contamination, social relationships, and impacts. The team is
developing statistical models to extrapolate contamination across the TLS by
exploring contaminant loadings to lakes and food web biomagnification, and, is
examining existing KBIC social survey data sets to elucidate key TLS
relationships and impacts. 2) How do ethical considerations affect perceptions
of TLS impairments and community decision-making? The team is analyzing fish-
contaminant relationships with lake characteristics, evaluating potential
stocking and harvesting effects on fish populations, and analyzing various
community decision-making scenarios. Ethnographic methods are being used to
determine ethical principles and best practices in community decision-making. 3)
Does deep integration of knowledges, theories, and methods of the TLS capture
complex interactions and dynamics of an impaired CNH system? To evaluate the
TLS, the team is collecting system baseline data, and conducting ethnographic
research to understand how knowledge of the TLS is co-
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.