* 2009624
* Collaborative Research: The Magellanic Clouds as a Laboratory for Star Formation at Low Metallicity
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Remy Indebetouw, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 278,402.00

These astronomers seek to understand what causes clouds of gas in space to
collapse to form stars. The immediate cause is the force of gravity, but why
gravity acts quickly on some clouds and slowly in others remains a puzzle. The
investigators have a plan to solve this puzzle by using detailed observations of
gas clouds located in two nearby satellite galaxies, the Magellanic Clouds. The
observations, taken with NSF’s Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array’s
(ALMA) observatory, will have the quality and detail needed to measure the
properties of the gas. The investigators will compare measurements of the
stellar environment with the locations and ages of young stars. The
investigators are from three different universities, and each will contribute to
training of next generation scientists. The students will get hands-on
experience in the techniques of scientific data analysis and instrumentation.
The team will develop of new virtual reality tools for improving the public
understanding of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the ALMA’s unprecedented
sensitivity and access to the southern sky, astronomers are beginning to resolve
the clumpy, filamentary structure of molecular clouds in the Magellanic Clouds.
Analysis has shown that the velocity dispersion of the molecular gas at a given
scale increases with the overall star formation activity of the cloud,
suggesting that energetic feedback from young stars plays a significant role in
maintaining turbulent motions within the cloud. However, other lines of
evidence, including our finding that clumps and filaments are typically
marginally unstable to collapse, support the view that increased velocity
dispersion and star formation can both be driven by gravitational instability.
The investigators plan observations to reveal the conditions for star formation.
They will use a broad, survey-based, approach which can identify regions
deficient in one of the key ingredients (e.g., young stars or dense gas) and
thus more accurately distinguish cause and effect. Combining ALMA imaging of the
molecular gas on sub-parsec scales with infrared surveys of the young stellar
populations in these galaxies will provide new insights into the roles of
triggering, feedback, and cloud conditions in the star formation
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.