* 2009255
* NSF-BSF: Stellar Collisions in Extreme Environments
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Brian Metzger, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 428,635.00

In the center of the Milky Way, stellar populations are orders of magnitude
denser than in the Solar neighborhood, leading to high-velocity stellar
collisions. The same violent events occur in the centers of other galaxies.
Metzger and Stone will study these collisions using computer simulations. They
will study: (1) tidal disruption event (TDE) impostors, where a star-star
collision mimics a true TDE event (where a star passes close to a supermassive
black hole (SMBH) and is pulled apart by tidal forces); (2) collisions in an
accretion disk around a SMBH, and resulting flares in the disk, and (3) how to
use the rate of collisions to predict how many gravitational wave sources are
likely to be detected by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory
(LIGO). This project is supported by both the National Science Foundation and
the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation to further collaborations between
the astrophysical communities in the two countries. Metzger and Stone will
recruit graduate students and postdoctoral scholars to attend a week-long
international summer school on time-domain gravitational wave
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simulations will be used to precisely
quantify the hydrodynamic outcomes and electromagnetic signatures of 1) grazing,
hypersonic star-star collisions: a new type of transient first proposed by
Metzger and Stone; 2) hypersonic star – AGN disk collisions, which holds
significant promise for explaining the extreme tail of variability, i.e.,
changing-look AGN. The predictions made from this work will directly inform
cutting-edge time-domain surveys, e.g., ASASSN, ZTF, and eROSITA. Related
analytic work will simulate and quantify a wide range of “collision” scenarios
to further our understanding of the formation of gravitational wave sources in
dense star clusters. Modifications to continuum-limit, “n-sigma-v” collision
rate prescriptions could strongly affect the plausibility of globular and
nuclear star clusters for LIGO/Virgo source
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.