* 2009775
* Exploring the Effects of Impacts onto Phaethon and Other Near Earth Asteroids
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* William Bottke, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 373,560.00

The Geminid Meteor Shower is rare in that its parent body, 3200 Phaethon, is an
asteroid, not a comet. Most meteor showers are generated by particles expelled
from comets by solar heating and evaporation. In Phaethon’s case, the mechanism
is less obvious. The team previously explained mass loss at 101955 Bennu as
arising due to micrometeoroid impacts from comet particles. The team will now
model this idea for Phaethon using NASA’s Meteoriod Engineering Model (MEM).
Their hypothesis is that the Geminids are formed through micrometeorite impacts,
causing Phaethon to leave a trail of particles, much like a comet. The team will
also model mass loss and evolution for weakly-bound primitive bodies that pass
close to the Sun. The team will also participate in SwRI’s Summer Science
Program (SSP) and conduct a two-day computational session for high-school
students in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use NASA’s Meteoroid
Engineering Model to model micrometeoroid impact on a weak primitive surface as
is thought to represent 3200 Phaethon in a region at 0.14 AU from the Sun. In
prior work with MEM, the team found mm-sized meteoroids strike Bennu frequently
enough at &gt; 40 km/s to explain all particle ejection event constraints. Using
the Bennu study to guide their work, the team will (i) use the MEM model to
determine the mass/direction of ejected debris from Phaethon per perihelion
passage, (ii) use dynamical models to determine whether Phaethon debris can
reproduce the Geminids over the last ~1000 years, and (iii) use dynamical models
to explore Phaethon’s origin, which they argue is probably not from the Pallas
asteroid family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.