* 2009352
* Cross Fields and Thin Filaments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Daniel Spirn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 331,719.00

In scientific computing and computer graphics it is typically important to
subdivide complicated objects into small pieces, a process known as mesh
generation. Often, it is useful to have these small pieces composed of small
cubes, as cubic elements can often prevent jagged boundaries and can often
provide better assurances of the accuracy of scientific calculations. This
research on n-cross fields has applications to the generation of high quality
cubic meshes and to the modelling of crystalline lattice structures in advanced
materials design. The project on thin filaments is important to the modeling of
microscopic swimmers and microfluidic devices, where numerical methods for these
problems typically break down as the filaments get very thin. Such methods can
be applied to the modeling of nano-scale swimmers, with potential in biomedical
applications. This project includes opportunities for training and human
resource development and aims to integrate these research topics with
educational components. The overarching goals are to increase the profile of the
topics, to make progress on central issues in the field, and to train students
at many levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal structures underlying the
project are n-cross fields, which are locally defined orthonormal coordinate
systems that are invariant with respect to the reordering and inversions. This
project will study methods that connect notions from algebraic geometry,
geometric measure theory and the calculus of variations to develop and analyze
efficient methods for computing n-cross fields. Variational methods provide for
the construction of smooth n-cross fields, outside of conjectured co-dimension
two rectifiable sets. The second part of the project studies problems focused on
immersed membranes in viscous fluids. While prior work focused on theoretical
methods that help provide an understanding of well-posedness and qualitative
behavior of elastic filaments, this project aims to extend the prior work to
even more physically important situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.