* 2009011
* AF: SMALL: Provable Algorithms for Nonhermitian Matrices
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Nikhil Srivastava, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2023
* USD 497,293.00

Finding the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a matrix is among the
most&lt;br/&gt;fundamental computational tasks. These quantities correspond to
resonant&lt;br/&gt;frequencies and modes of physical, statistical, and
mathematical systems and&lt;br/&gt;appear in essentially every area of science
and engineering. First year&lt;br/&gt;college students are taught how to compute
them on small examples, and two of&lt;br/&gt;the ``top 10 algorithms of the
twentieth century'' --- the QR Algorithm and&lt;br/&gt;the Arnoldi algorithm ---
were designed to do so on large instances. When the&lt;br/&gt;matrices involved
are symmetric, these methods come with provable guarantees&lt;br/&gt;showing
that they are accurate, fast, and correct. However, the general&lt;br/&gt;non-
symmetric case remains poorly understood, and rigorously analyzing
these&lt;br/&gt;algorithms in general has been a decades-old mystery in
numerical analysis,&lt;br/&gt;despite their being implemented in standard
software packages. The main goal&lt;br/&gt;of this project is to solve these and
related mysteries using modern tools of&lt;br/&gt;random-matrix theory and
theoretical computer science. Doing so will put a&lt;br/&gt;large branch of
computational practice on solid theoretical footing, and&lt;br/&gt;ideally
foster deeper interaction between the numerical analysis,
mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;and theoretical computer science research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will aim to analyze
the two (currently heuristic)&lt;br/&gt;algorithms mentioned above, with the
following concrete major goals: (1) find&lt;br/&gt;a shifting strategy for the
shifted QR method which provably converges rapidly&lt;br/&gt;for every matrix;
(2) formalize a widely held belief precisely relating the&lt;br/&gt;output of
the Arnoldi algorithm to the pseudospectrum of the input
matrix.&lt;br/&gt;Secondarily, the award will study the adjacent problem of
efficiently&lt;br/&gt;computing an approximation of the Jordan normal form of a
given rational&lt;br/&gt;matrix in the variable precision model of computation,
for which good&lt;br/&gt;complexity bounds are not known. The project will
likely use techniques from&lt;br/&gt;random-matrix theory, dynamical systems,
algebra, and numerical analysis,&lt;br/&gt;building on recent progress of the
investigator and collaborators in some of&lt;br/&gt;these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.