* 2009687
* The Interscale Galactic Nuclei Simulations (IGNIS):  Hyper-refined black hole growth and feedback in cosmological environments
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Daniel Angles-Alcazar, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 309,680.00

This project will create simulations of the growth of galaxies and supermassive
black holes over cosmic time. The simulations produced as part of this project
will use techniques that provide much higher resolution of the inner regions of
galaxies where gas is falling into the central supermassive black hole and
emitting radiation that influences the rate at which gas can continue to fall
in. The increased resolution allows for more accurate modeling of the physics
involved in the interaction between gas in the galaxy and the growth of the
supermassive black hole. The project will also use these simulations to train
undergraduate students in developing visualizations from large data sets. These
students will be drawn from populations that are underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will perform high resolution
cosmological hydrodynamic simulations of the growth of galaxies. It will
incorporate better multi-phase gas physics from the interstellar medium of
galaxies along with explicit treatments of black hole growth and feedback on
sub-parsec scales comparable to the size of the accretion disk. The simulations
will be done using a novel hyper-Lagrangian refinement technique that increases
the resolution dramatically near the black hole. The simulations will help to
identify the mechanisms responsible for gas transport across large scales and
eventually fueling AGN. They will improve our understanding of the impact of
accretion-disk winds and radiative AGN feedback prescriptions for larger scale
cosmological simulations, and will help to interpret galaxy and massive black
hole observables across redshifts. The project will involve undergraduates and
graduates directly in the research and will support undergraduates in a program
that will recruit underrepresented groups to work on developing Python-based
visualizations of the results of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.