* 2009358
* Conference: US-North Africa Conference: Nanotechnology Convergence for Sustainable Energy, Environment and Health
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ahmed El-Gendy, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2024
* USD 118,729.00

The 1st US-North Africa conference on Nanotechnology Convergence for Sustainable
Energy, Health, and Environment will take place in Cairo, Egypt from August 9th
through August 14th, 2020 at the Grand Nile Tower Hotel. The main goal of this
conference is to advance the interdisciplinary research in science and
engineering by showcasing and highlighting new ideas to improve, and
revolutionize, science, engineering and technology in the United States. Areas
of focus include quantum information technology, nanomedicine, energy
harvesting, and environmental science. The result of this conference will be the
stimulation of international research collaborations between US and North Africa
which will advance scientific research and education. Through this conference,
U.S. students will learn about opportunities to engage in international research
projects, which will be established through the networking events of researchers
at the conference. In addition, the conference will promote cultural diversity
and broaden participation within science and engineering fields. The conference
will provide a great opportunity for discussion between researchers (including
undergrad-graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and faculty from the US and
North Africa, setting up a concrete foundation on which to initiate research
collaborations. Egypt is one of the major North African countries engaged in the
convergence of nanotechnology in energy, health and environment and the
conference will be hosted by the Academy of scientific research and technology
(ASRT), Egypt. In addition, the co-chairs will invite the keynote speakers to
publish their unique research in the Journal of Nanoparticle Research and the
invitation will be opened for the development of a special journal l issue to
include all innovative and transformative research from attendees. The
successful outcome of this conference will be the development of solid US-NA
research collaborations that can serve to promote science and engineering
research and education in both regions.&lt;br/&gt;The 1st US-North Africa
conference on Nanotechnology Convergence for Sustainable Energy, Health, and
Environment will take place in Cairo, Egypt from August 9th through August 14th,
2020 at the Grand Nile Tower Hotel. The conference will highlight state-of-the-
art research, recent achievements and global trends in nanotechnology in the US
and North Africa using 1) a transdisciplinary integration of presentations on
fundamental science, engineering, industrial and medical applications that
address global challenges in sustainable energy, environment and health and 2)
stimulation and facilitation of research collaborations among participants. The
conference’ sessions will include important research topics such as quantum
computing, energy harvesting, environmental applications, drug delivery,
diagnoses and cancer treatment. The conference will feature daily open
discussions among attendees through short group meetings which will includes
students, postdocs, and keynote speakers to foster an environment of
collegiality and collaboration. The conference will also include three breakout
sessions in energy, health and environment during which a list of research
challenges in each of these areas will be developed. Within these topical
challenges, potential international research collaboration opportunities will be
identified. Towards the fulfillment of this aim, a listing of participants,
research areas and contact information will be created after the conference and
distributed to attendees. The conference will discuss the emerging, current
fundamental concepts and practices that describe: 1) synthesis of novel
functional nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion devices, 2) Quantum
molecular nanomagnets for new generation of quantum computing, 3) Environmental
application of nanomaterials such as water treatment, crop protection, and
climate change, and 4) Nano-Biomaterials and their applications for drug
delivery, diagnosis, and cancer therapy. In addition, the co-chairs will invite
the keynote speakers to publish their unique research in the Journal of
Nanoparticle Research and the invitation will be opened for the development of a
special journal l issue to include all innovative and transformative research
from attendees. The successful outcome of this conference will be the
development of solid US-NA research collaborations that can serve to promote
science and engineering research and education in both
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.