* 2009095
* The Photochemistry of Low-Mass Exoplanets Across the Mini-Neptune / Super-Earth Regime
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Eliza Kempton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 307,688.00

The powerful new capabilities soon to be provided by the James Webb Space
Telescope (JWST) and by ground based "Extremely Large Telescopes" will enable
many new astronomical observations. One of the most exciting of these will be
obtaining spectra of the atmospheres of individual exoplanets. This team will
provide a theoretical framework within which to understand these sorts of
measurements. They will develop models for the photochemistry and chemical
kinetics of exoplanetary atmospheres. This will include the formation and
development of hazes and other atmospheric constituents. The team will conduct a
robust K-12 outreach program. Graduate and undergraduate student volunteers will
speak at schools local to the University. This program will also support the
work of a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance
chemical kinetics and photochemistry modeling of low-mass exoplanets to fill in
critical gaps in our predictive and interpretive phase space. The team will
develop the opensource numerical chemical kinetics code PHOTOCHEM to be
applicable to a wider array of exoplanet environments, including hydrogen-rich
sub-Neptunes and the metal-rich secondary atmospheres of super-Earths, pushing
well beyond the modeling parameter space enabled by solar system studies. They
will investigate several key open scientific questions and will provide a
modeling framework for exoplanet observers performing spectroscopic studies of
transiting planet atmospheres. The specific studies that the team will undertake
include: (1) calculating photochemical haze formation rates for a broad
parameter space of low-mass exoplanet atmospheres to make testable predictions
for which sub-classes of planets should be most affected by photochemical
aerosols; (2) determining the necessary level of precision and wavelength
coverage for UV observations of exoplanet host stars to be used as input to
photochemical modeling studies; (3) directly modeling the outcomes of laboratory
haze experiments to provide a foundational basis for comparing between the
theory and measurement of haze formation; (4) producing observables
(transmission and emission spectra) for each of the modeled planets, to motivate
and interpret atmospheric characterization studies with JWST and ground-based
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.