* 2009736
* Collisional Kinetic Transport: Analysis and Numerical Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Irene Gamba, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 345,000.00

The overall objective of this research is to develop accurate analytical
modeling and simulation for a series of diverse phenomena of fundamental
scientific interest, at the edge of various technological developments such as
plasma evolution in fusion models, modeling of very cold gases in the
intermediate transition to form Bose-Einstein condensation, hot-electron
transport in semiconductor devices, nanostructures for solar generation of
hydrogen, and reacting and polyatomic molecular mixtures associated with
aerospace dynamics such as those in re-entry problems. Modeling and simulation
will be based on data obtained by accurate crystallographic calculations,
considering atomistic corrections, and the presence of rough media. Some of the
techniques that will be developed are also pertinent to exciting new
applications to non-linear dynamics modeling in bio-social sciences, such as
modeling of self-organized flows where "particle" swarms, like birds or fish,
couple to fluid dynamics, emerging consensus in population dynamics, multi-agent
information transfer and social information dynamics in Internet, to name a few.
Most significantly, this project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students that prepare them to a job market that ranges from academia,
to national labs, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research
goals comprise a broad program in the development of analytical and numerical
tools associated with statistical transport equations and systems at the core of
applied mathematics in probability, statistics applied to chemistry, physics as
well as to biological and social dynamics as well. They concern the modeling of
complex interactions systems yielding kinetic frameworks associated to Markovian
processes of birth-death dynamics. Such statistical approaches lead to nonlinear
integro-differential systems of equations of collisional classical or quantum
Boltzmann or Smolukowski type. Computational schemes will be fully designed and
analyzed to secure consistency, stability, error estimates control, and
convergence rates to equilibrium. Many of these models appear in the collisional
theory of semi-classical transport for short- and long-range particle
interactions models that describe self-consistent phenomena at nano and meso-
scales. New tools from non-linear analysis as well as new computational
strategies will be developed to address long-time behavior, stability, and decay
rates to stationary modes, as well as qualitative behavior of numerical
solutions and optimal computational strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.