* 2009726
* CNH2-L: The coupled, co-evolving roles of drought and electricity systems in humans' exposure to air pollution
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Andrew Yates, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,599,708.00

Drought disrupts electric power system operations by reducing the availability
of hydropower and nuclear power, with the latter being vulnerable to
insufficient cooling water supply. The result is an increased reliance on
fossil-fuel power plants, which emit pollutants that contribute to fine
particulate matter and ozone. Human exposure to these pollutants causes a
variety of health impacts, leading to an estimated 109,000 premature deaths in
the U.S. annually. Droughts are often associated with weather conditions that
allow for the build-up of higher concentrations of fine particulate matter and
ozone. This project investigates how drought, electric power systems, and air
quality interact to create periods of high human health risk and how these
interactions may be affected by changes in climate and other environmental
factors. Adoption of new policies and technologies may also alter human exposure
to poor air quality. Reduced dependence on fossil fuels will likely come with
significant air quality benefits, and reduced emissions could affect meteorology
and snow hydrology, potentially altering the frequency and severity of drought
and its impacts on natural and human systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this study is to advance holistic knowledge of the dynamic
connections and feedbacks among climate, meteorology, drought, power plant
emissions, localized human exposure to air pollution, and technological advances
in the electricity sector. Four approaches will be used. First, using coupled
simulations of atmospheric and meteorological processes, air physics and
chemistry, and land-atmosphere hydrology, the project will determine the
connections between drought and periods of poor air quality, and how these
interactions could change in a warmer climate. Second, using linked models of
water resource infrastructure and electric power systems, the effects of drought
and the meteorological drivers of poor air quality on power-plant emissions and
electricity market dynamics will be evaluated. Third, using health exposure
modeling and economic analysis, this research will investigate how health
impacts from drought-caused increases in power plant emissions are distributed
across demographic groups, and how water stress in power systems affects the
ability of system operators to dynamically manage pollution on the grid. Fourth,
using coupled simulations of atmospheric and meteorological processes, air
physics and chemistry, and land-atmosphere hydrology, the role of human efforts
to reduce concentrations of particulate matter and ozone will be assessed. The
project will investigate feedbacks that affect meteorological and hydrologic
processes, potentially exacerbating or ameliorating future droughts and
affecting both terrestrial and riparian ecosystems. The research team will
partner with the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences to develop a broader
impacts program that will facilitate engagement with the general public and
communication of new scientific knowledge to different demographic
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.