* 2009868
* A New Subgrid Model for AGN Feedback in Galaxy Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Paul Ricker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 504,218.00

Most galaxies have supermassive black holes in their centers. As these black
holes swallow gas, they produce jets that can remove gas in a process known as
feedback. Many galaxies inhabit clusters of galaxies and feedback can influence
both the growth of the galaxies and the evolution of galaxy clusters. This
project will develop and refine a method for simulating the effect of gas
accretion on feedback. This method can be used to better model the growth of
galaxies and galaxy clusters over cosmic time. The project will also develop
web-based demonstrations of cosmology for use in classrooms. It will also
support a girls' science summer camp for high school
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will complete the development of a novel
sub grid mode for active galactic nucleus (AGN) feedback in clusters of
galaxies. The model treats the central black hole as a sink particle and
computes the accretion rate using integration over a resolved control surface.
The accretion rate is then used to determine the state of an accretion disk
model which will determine the form and efficiency of the feedback. The model
will be applied to 3D adaptive mesh refinement simulations of the centers of
clusters of galaxies to investigate two questions: how accretion disk state
transitions interact with large-scale flows in cluster cores; and how binarity
resulting from mergers of the brightest cluster galaxies affects AGN feedback.
An existing web site for computational astrophysics education will be upgraded
with new simulations tools, and an existing outreach camp program will be
improved with resources for additional activity days and
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.