* 2009062
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Towards resilient crops:  understanding the interaction between flooding-recovery stress and plant immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Elaine Yeung, Yeung, Elaine
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/29/2024
* USD 0.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Elaine Yeung is “Towards resilient crops: understanding
the interaction between flooding-recovery stress and plant immunity.” The host
institution for the fellowship is Rothamsted Research, UK and the sponsoring
scientists are Prof. Frederica Theodoulou and Dr. Kostya
Kanyuka.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing flooding events linked to climate
change have damaged crops globally. To meet the predicted nutritional needs of
the world’s growing population, developing crops with improved tolerance to
flooding is vital. Scientific research on plant stress tolerance mechanisms has
mostly focused on single stressors, but plants experience multiple stresses in
real world conditions. Flooding decreases oxygen levels for plants underwater,
which often contributes to depleted energy resources. Even after flooding, the
inability to replenish these resources could cause slowly recovering plants to
be vulnerable to attacks from insects or plant diseases. Plants with a better
flooding tolerance in which well-maintained energy status improves post-flooding
recovery are hypothesized to have superior resistance to disease. This research
will therefore be one of the first to comprehensively address the combined
effects of two important agricultural problems, flooding and plant disease,
ultimately aiming to meet the world’s growing food demand through enhanced
disease management after flooding in crop plants. The fellowship will also
contribute to the professional development of the aspiring independent
researcher, with training in transferrable soft and technical skills to enhance
a future career in plant sciences under the dual mentorships of Prof. Theodoulou
and Dr. Kanyuka. The researcher will be trained in specific scientific skills
relevant to the project, while developing a portfolio of professional skills
including teaching and mentoring students and effective project management.
Rothamsted Research will also support public engagement and science
communication activities, with goals of raising awareness of the promises of
plant breeding through biotechnology and inspiring the next generation of
scientists from an early age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will exploit
natural variation as a starting point for investigating the crosstalk between
post-flooding recovery and biotic stress tolerance. Comparisons will be made
between flooding-tolerant and -intolerant cultivars of wheat (Triticum aestivum)
and different genotypes of the model dicot Arabidopsis thaliana. Both species
exhibit extensive natural variation in flooding tolerance and pathogen
responses. Two pathogens will be tested: the fungus Zymoseptoria tritici that
causes a widespread disease Septoria tritici blotch (STB) in wheat and
Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato (Pst) DC3000, a model pathogenic bacterium
infecting Arabidopsis. Post-flooding plant immunity will be assessed with a
novel combination of mass spectrometry-based proteomics (to monitor protein
dynamics especially for defense-related proteins), molecular physiology, and
pathogen responses in mutant and transgenic lines generated with transient
virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) or virus-mediated protein overexpression
(VOX) assays. Scientific results will be published wherever possible in open
access journals and data will be deposited in gold-standard community databases.
Transgenic Arabidopsis and wheat lines produced will be deposited in a seed bank
upon project completion and be freely distributed when requested. The researcher
will be guided by FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, re-usable) data
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.