* 2009522
* RUI: Chemical probes for studying peptidoglycan metabolism
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Christopher Reid, Bryant University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 296,275.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Christopher W. Reid from Bryant University to develop
chemical tools to study the cell wall of bacteria. While our knowledge of how
new cell wall material is built is relatively well established, our
understanding of the disassembly process and the coordination of cell wall
disassembly with assembly is less well known. Small molecule inhibitors are
often used to study biological processes. Small molecule inhibitors of enzymes
that degrade the polysaccharide backbone of the cell wall provide a new approach
to study the interaction between the assembly and disassembly of the cell wall.
The experimental procedures help to characterize the molecular differences
between chemical inhibition and genetic inactivation of these enzymes. This
project allows undergraduate students and post-baccalaureate fellows to acquire
multi-disciplinary training at the interface of chemistry and biology. The new
molecules and methods for studying the degradation of the cell wall will be made
available to the scientific community, and may help improve our understanding of
cell wall assembly ands disassembly. This project is integrated into an outreach
program to introduce high school students to chemical biology. Professor Reid is
committed to fostering dialog and engagement with science outside of the
academy, and has participated in several activities at local area schools
(K-12), both formally (state science fair, RI-NSF-EPSCoR), and informally
(volunteering at elementary schools). He plans to expand his association with
high schools in Rhode Island by providing summer research fellowships and
mentoring to under-represented sophomore and junior high school students from
economically challenged school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project undertakes a quantitative characterization of the differences between
chemical and genetic inactivation of enzymes that degrade the polysaccharide
backbone of the bacterial cell wall. This project combines genetic,
physiological, and biophysical approaches to validate a small molecule inhibitor
of a class of autolysins known as N-acetylglucosaminidases (GlcNAcases) in the
model organism Bacillus subtilis. This research project will use discovery-based
approaches (quantitative PCR, site-directed mutagenesis), and biophysical
characterization (differential scanning fluorimetry, intrinsic protein
fluorescence) to investigate the cellular and phenotypic changes observed upon
chemical inactivation of these enzymes. Information from this study may provide
new methods and reagents that can be used to better understand the structure and
function of a class of enzymes important to bacterial cell wall growth. The
validation of these inhibitors as probes to study cell wall acting GlcNAcases
may provide insight into the physiological differences between genetic and
chemical inactivation of bacterial autolysins and the impact it has on cell wall
metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.