* 2009366
* A Novel Finite Element Method Toolbox for Interface Phenomena in Plasmonic Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Camille Carvalho, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2024
* USD 295,000.00

The research in this project will lead to the development of an efficient
computational platform that will provide valuable insight into this physical
problem of light scattering. The overarching goal is to provide a toolbox that
can be used by several communities to accurately compute the electromagnetic
field, complementing experimental measurements. The research will advance
knowledge in several fields by filling a gap in the theory and mathematical
modeling of electromagnetic fields in exotic structures. The project is designed
to include an interdisciplinary (computer science, physics, mathematics), team-
based approach with graduate training. The team will focus on creating applied
math research results that directly impact current and future experiments. The
project includes activities to organize mini-symposia at conferences to foster
discussions with other researchers. This research project will be used as a
recruiting tool to further promote women and underrepresented minorities in
STEM-fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
state-of-the-art computational and mathematical platform that accurately and
efficiently capture the multiscale behaviors of the electromagnetic field in
plasmonic structures. Plasmonic structures are commonly made of metals and
dielectrics, and exhibit at optical frequencies surface electromagnetic waves at
the metal-dielectric interfaces, called surface plasmons. Over the past decades
there has been a great interest to guide and confine surface plasmons in
nanophotonic devices, with applications to antennas, cloaking, and others.
Surface plasmons are sub-wavelength, hyper-singular near corners, and
consequently highly sensitive to the geometry. Commercial software commonly used
by scientists and engineers is based on the finite element method, and poorly
approximates the electromagnetic near-field in these exotic structures. There is
a need for an adapted mathematical framework to capture the multiple scales, and
for numerical approaches for computing the electromagnetic field in plasmonic
structures to avoid inaccurate predictions. This project will develop a finite
element based approach to address this problem that involves specific treatments
near the interface the accurately capture the surface plasmons, and a functional
framework to extract the highly oscillatory behaviors of the electromagnetic
near-field. Specific work includes: (1) solve plasmonic problems for any 2D
geometries in a classical framework, (2) solve plasmonic problems for any 2D
geometries when hyper-singular behaviors appear, and (3) extend the framework to
3D plasmonic problems and other plasmonic models. Results from this project will
lead to insights into the underlying physics, develop accurate methods, and
apply them to realistic problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.