* 2009060
* AF:Small:Managing Correlation in Selection and Sampling Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Shaddin Dughmi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 430,600.00

Algorithms are being increasingly tasked with the analysis and synthesis of
data, and randomness in this data plays a central role in the design of these
algorithms. This project is concerned with how correlation in the data, whether
naturally present in input data or undesirable in output data, must influence
the design of these algorithms. There are two thrusts to this project, which
share common technical challenges. The first thrust will examine how correlation
in input data must factor into algorithmic decision making in the presence of
uncertainty. With algorithms tasked with the allocation of resources in
commerce, healthcare, industry, and government, often in view of present and
future uncertainty, it is crucial to understand how correlation between present
and future events impacts the quality of these decisions. Such understanding
will enable the automated and efficient allocation of resources in such domains.
The second thrust of this project will examine how algorithms which make
randomized decisions can minimize correlations in their decisions. This is
motivated in large part by applications to national security. In particular,
algorithms are already tasked with the allocation of security resources for the
protection of vital national assets, and the decisions made by these algorithms
are often deliberately randomized in order to make them less predictable to an
adversary. Whereas some correlation in these decisions is often unavoidable due
to logistical constraints, too much correlation renders these algorithms
vulnerable to information leakage through surveillance. Algorithms which
minimize this correlation are less vulnerable to information leakage, and hence
ultimately less predictable and more effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
thrust of this project is primarily concerned with stochastic selection
problems, which capture a myriad of applications in the aforementioned domains.
Here, a stochastic set of "requests" is presented to the algorithm, and the
algorithm must decide which of the requests to grant, subject to constraints,
with the goal of optimizing some domain-specific objective. Most prior work has
assumed that requests are stochastically independent, and this assumption was
crucial in enabling algorithms for near-optimal selection. Much less is
understood when the requests are correlated, and in particular positively
correlated, despite such correlation arising naturally in many of the intended
applications. Recent work by the primary investigator initiates the systematic
study of correlation in stochastic selection problems, and this project follows
up on this agenda. In particular, this thrust of the project will characterize
"benign" correlation permitting approximately-optimal selection, and design
efficient and near-optimal algorithms for such scenarios. The second thrust of
this project is primarily concerned with sampling a random subset of a given set
of objects, subject to constraints on the set as well as on the probability of
including each element in the sample. This task forms a crucial subroutine in a
variety of applications, including the aforementioned security scenarios. The
goal is to minimize correlation between different objects to the extent
permitted by the imposed constraints. The basic models for limited-correlation
samplings were introduced in joint work by the primary investigator, and
heuristic algorithms applying that work to security settings have already been
delivered to governmental security agencies. This thrust of the project will put
that line of work on firm theoretical ground by formally characterizing the
constraints which permit sampling with limited correlation, and designing
efficient algorithms for such sampling with provable
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.