* 2009989
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Megan Smith, Smith, Megan
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The process by which new species form
(speciation) has long been of interest to evolutionary biologists. Though
species boundaries have been documented and revised across the tree of life,
this has not led to a broad understanding of speciation. In part, this
shortcoming is a function of the approaches used in taxonomic research. Most
available methods for uncovering species boundaries using genetic data alone
ignore factors that could lend insight into speciation, while methods for
combining genetic, phenotypic (trait), and ecological data rely too heavily on
concordance across datatypes. The Fellowâ€™s work will develop conceptual models
that link process to pattern and allow more meaningful integration across
datatypes. These conceptual speciation models will be used to develop and test
predictions in taildropper slugs (Genus Prophysaon). This work will provide
unprecedented insight into speciation in Prophysaon, and will develop a general
framework for process-based studies of species limits in non-model systems. The
proposed work will also lead to the publication of a reference genome, the
development of a machine-learning approach for testing predictions in genomic
data, several training opportunities for undergraduate researchers, and
increased taxonomic knowledge in an understudied group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Fellow will use three approaches to distinguish among factors driving speciation
in Prophysaon: 1) tests of the influence of neutral and selective processes on
DNA sequence variation between species, 2) tests of ecological divergence
between species, and 3) tests of reproductive isolation between species. The
Fellow will use genomic and transcriptomic data, machine learning, electron
microscopy, geometric morphometrics, behavioral trials, and metabarcoding of gut
contents to test predictions. The Fellow will actively recruit undergraduate
researchers from underrepresented groups through established programs at Indiana
University to collaborate on the proposed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.