* 2009401
* KARMMA: Mass Mapping Worthy of LSST
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* EDUARDO ROZO, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 05/31/2023
* USD 224,359.00

The Universe is currently expanding at an ever-increasing rate. To understand
the origin of the accelerated expansion due to dark energy, the amount of matter
that is using gravity to hold the Universe together must be determined. The
astronomical community is embarking on the largest and most ambitious
astronomical survey to date: the Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and
Time (LSST). One key goal of the survey is to construct the most detailed map of
the matter distribution in our Universe ever created, thereby enabling
cosmological studies of our Universe's expansion. However, 80% of the matter of
the Universe is dark (invisible at any wavelength), so we must rely on indirect
methods of detection. These investigators will use the distortion of galaxy
images due to gravity to infer the matter density of the Universe. They will
implement improvements that will enable higher resolution mass distribution
maps, and they will extract dark matter and cosmological parameters from LSST
data using these maps. The PI will co-direct the Tucson Initiative for Minority
Engagement in Science and TEchnology Program (TIMESTEP) to promote the
participation of University of Arizona undergraduate students in STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will develop the KARMMA (Kappa Reconstruction
for Mass Mapping Algorithm), a mass mapping algorithm designed to forward model
the underlying density field subject to a homogeneous and isotropic lognormal
prior. This forward modeling approach results in two key improvements over
currently standard mass mapping techniques. 1. By forward modeling the
convergence field, KARMMA avoids numerical biases in the mass reconstruction due
to the interaction between survey boundaries and shear non-locality. 2. Forward
modeling enables us to simultaneously sample both cosmological parameters and
mass-map parameters, efficiently recovering the full information-content from
the mass map for the purposes of constraining cosmology, while regularizing the
clustering statistics on unresolved scales through physical cosmological priors.
The current KARMMA implementation is restricted to fixed cosmologies. Further,
its resolution is limited due to numerical considerations. Both of these
deficiencies will be addressed by re-implementing the algorithm using spherical
harmonics and enabling a slow/fast sampling of cosmological and mass-map
parameters. These improvements to KARMMA will define a new standard in mass-
mapping techniques in the era of LSST, while enabling cosmological analyses that
utilize the full information of the observable shear
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.