* 2009489
* ARMADA: A Unique Hunt for Exoplanets and Low-Mass Companions around Hot Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Theo ten Brummelaar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2024
* USD 373,149.00

Most known exoplanets have been discovered either through the decrease in
starlight when planets transit in front of a star (from our perspective) or
through Doppler wavelength shifts in the stellar spectrum. This team will apply
a completely different method: imaging a star to determine its wobble due to the
tug of a planet as it orbits. The team will use the CHARA and ESO’s VLTI optical
interferometry arrays to observe 70 different binary star systems. This is a
population of exoplanets that is unlikely to be detectable with other methods.
This program will provide the basis for a graduate student to complete a PhD
thesis. The team will conduct novel outreach activities through a traveling
display in rural Michigan and at NASCAR events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
will conduct a survey of 70 binary hot star (mass &gt; 1 solar mass) systems to
search for massive exoplanets and companion brown dwarfs at orbits of
approximately 1 AU. This ARMADA survey will use optical interferometry with the
CHARA array in the Northern Hemisphere and ESO’s VLTI array in the Southern
Hemisphere to detect stellar wobble due to orbiting massive exoplanets. Their
survey will include different separation distances between binary stars in order
to examine how binarity might suppress or enhance planet formation as a function
of stellar separation of the pair. They will also survey trinary systems for
potential exoplanet and low-mass brown dwarf
companions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.