* 2009939
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging Simulations in Preservice Preparation to Improve Mathematics Teaching for Students with Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Vivian Wong, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,345,425.00

The preparation of general education teachers to support the mathematics
learning of students with disabilities is critical, as students with
disabilities are overrepresented in the lower ranks of mathematics achievement.
This project aims to address this need in the context of elementary mathematics
teacher preparation through the development and use of mixed reality
simulations. These simulations represent low-stakes opportunities for preservice
teachers to practice research-based instructional strategies to support
mathematics learning, and to receive feedback on their practices. Learning units
that use the simulations will focus on two high leverage practices: teacher
modeling of self-monitoring and reflection strategies during problem solving and
using strategy instruction to teach students to support problem solving. These
high-leverage teaching practices will support teachers engaging all students,
including students with disabilities, in conceptually sophisticated mathematics
in which students are treated as sense-makers and empowered to do mathematics in
culturally meaningful ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project work encompasses
three primary aims. The first aim is to develop a consensus around shared
definitions of high-leverage practices across the mathematics education and
special education communities. To accomplish this goal, the project will convene
a series of consensus-building panels with mathematics education and special
education experts to develop shared definitions of the two targeted high
leverage practices. This work will include engaging with current research, group
discussion, and production of documents with specifications for the practices.
The second aim is to develop learning units for elementary mathematics methods
courses grounded in mixed reality simulation. These simulations will allow
teacher candidates to enact the high leverage practices with simulated students
and to receive coaching on their practice from the research team. The impact of
this work will be assessed through the analysis of interviews with teacher
educators implementing the units and observations and artifacts from the
implementations. The third aim will be to assess the effectiveness of the
simulations on teacher candidates’ practices and beliefs through small-scaled
randomized control trials. Teacher candidates will be randomly assigned to
conditions that address the practices and make use of simulations, and a
business as usual condition focused on lesson planning, student assessment, and
small group discussions of the high leverage practices. The impact of the work
will be assessed through the analysis of baseline and exit simulations, measures
of teacher self-efficacy for teaching students with disabilities, and
observations of classroom teaching in their clinical placement
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.