* 2009905
* The Onset of Star-Formation Quenching in Massive Galaxies in the Early Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Steven Finkelstein, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 229,660.00

The rate of star formation peaked when the Universe was 3 billion years old.
Curiously, when you look back even further in time, when the Universe was only
1-2 billion years old, some galaxies have seemingly already completed their
growth, becoming very massive, with little ongoing star formation. Finkelstein
and his team will use data from the Spitzer/Hobby-Eberly Telescope Dark Energy
Experiment Exploratory Large Area (SHELA) survey to discover and catalog
5000-10,000 massive galaxies and quantify how many are quiescent. To investigate
why these galaxies had such a short and effective growth spurt the team will
make a detailed comparison to simulations, deciphering which combination of
physical processes reproduce the observations. A cohort of undergraduate
students will be paired with graduate students to form the first Vertically
Integrated Project Team at UT Austin. Secondary school teachers will attend a
residential workshop at McDonald Observatory, resulting in ~4,500 students
learning about this research through classroom activities during this 3-year
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 23 square degree SHELA survey consists of
optical imaging from the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory/Dark Energy
Camera (5-sigma depths of ugriz=25-26.5 AB mag; Y=22), near-infrared imaging
from the Kitt Peak National Observatory Mayall 4 m Telescope/National Optical-
Infrared Astronomy Research Laboratoryâ€™s Extremely Wide-Field Infrared Imager
(K=23) and the Visible and Infrared Survey Telescope for Astronomy (J=21.3,
K=20.9), mid-infrared imaging from Spitzer/Infrared Array Camera ([3.6], [4.5]=
22.3 mag), as well as coverage in the X-rays from the Chandra X-ray Observatory
and sub-millimeter from the Herschel Space Observatory. Finkelstein and his team
will leverage this order of magnitude increase in sample size to i) publish a
multi-wavelength photometric catalog of massive (log M/Msol &gt; 11) galaxies at
3&lt;z&lt;5, robust against both Poisson and cosmic variance; ii) measure the
quiescent fraction as a function of stellar mass and redshift; iii) perform a
critical analysis of contamination rates in the quiescent galaxy sample using
spectroscopic observations with the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array
and the Keck/Multi-Object Spectrometer For Infra-Red Exploration, and iv)
compare the data to multiple theoretical simulations to explore which simulation
best matches the observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.