* 2009821
* CNH2-S: Measuring adaptive responses that strengthen governance of marine resources in small coastal fishing communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Heather Leslie, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 749,598.00

Marine social-ecological systems (SES) are shaped by many related social and
environmental processes, such as ocean warming and acidification, human
migration, and seafood trade. Together, these environmental and social processes
have major influences on coastal marine ecosystems and the human communities
that depend on them. They affect abundance and diversity of marine species,
shape social and economic life within a community, and influence systems of
governance. Understanding these effects is particularly relevant for small-scale
fisheries as they employ over 90% of fishers globally and provide food and labor
opportunities for hundreds of millions of people. This study will identify and
evaluate responses to social and environmental change that shape the governance
and sustainability of natural resource systems. The focal SES of this study
encompasses small-scale fisheries. After 25 collaborative projects conducted
over the last 20 years, the research team is well-positioned to create a model
for SES synthesis and analysis that is grounded in knowledge from diverse
disciplines and perspectives and is relevant to small-scale fisheries in coastal
marine systems and communities around the globe. The project will build capacity
in integrated SES science by supporting an early career investigator and
education and training activities for graduate and undergraduate students and
postdoctoral scholars. In addition, it will develop interdisciplinary
collaboration in marine conservation and management, lead to information-sharing
through further development of an open source digital platform, and engage
decision makers, fishers, and other community members through workshop
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce novel and
generalizable insights concerning the operation and transformation of integrated
socio-environmental systems (SES) and improve scientific understanding of
adaptive responses to environmental and social change in a culturally and
economically important transboundary marine ecosystem. The focus is on the SESs
associated with small-scale fisheries and the work is guided by the overall
research question: What are the observed responses, either adaptive or
maladaptive, to social and environmental drivers of change that shape the
governance and sustainability of natural resources and the human communities
that depend on them? The investigators will synthesize diverse datasets covering
oceanographic, ecological, fishery, socioeconomic, and governance system
components that the team has assembled through previous research projects and
sustained engagement with regional stakeholders and ecosystems. They will use a
series of spatially explicit and hierarchically structured models, informed by
expert knowledge of individuals with diverse disciplinary and institutional
perspectives, to test hypotheses related to 1) the frequency and spatial extent
of environmental and social drivers of change; 2) influences of these drivers on
governance arrangements; and 3) the ability of cooperative governance
arrangements to withstand shocks and exhibit adaptive strategies in the face of
change. The goal is to understand causal pathways and processes leading to
divergent socio-environmental outcomes and contribute to the theory of
adaptation in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.