* 2010502
* Study of Nonthermal Electron Driven Warm Dense Plasmas Using X-Ray Free Electron Lasers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hiroshi Sawada, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 495,000.00

This project will explore fundamental properties of warm dense matter, a
relatively low temperature but very high density plasma composed of electron and
ions. In particular, the properties of so-called "non-thermal" electrons, a
small but important population of high-energy electrons that are not in thermal
equilibrium with the rest of the plasma, will be studied experimentally and
computationally. Theoretical and numerical modeling of warm dense matter (WDM)
is challenging because temperature and density ranges of WDM are too cold and
dense to apply traditional plasma physics theory, but its temperature is too
high to be treated with condensed matter physics techniques. In experiments, the
high density and low temperature of WDM also prevent the use of conventional
plasma diagnostics. To overcome these challenges, this project will use
ultrashort hard x-ray pulses delivered by X-ray Free Electron Lasers (XFEL) to
study the creation and characterization of nonthermal electron driven warm dense
matter with a high-power short-pulse laser. The XFEL’s hard x-ray pulses
penetrate through dense plasma to provide the conditions of its interior, while
the ultrashort pulses enable capturing snapshots of time-evolving plasma states.
Ultrafast time-resolved measurements of short-pulse laser-driven WDM could both
help develop theoretical and computational models connecting condensed matter
physics and plasma physics, and reveal the role of nonthermal electrons in
unexplored WDM regimes relevant to astrophysical and fusion plasmas. This
project will also include training of graduate and undergraduate students at
state-of-the-art XFEL facilities in Japan and Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to infer conditions of nonthermal electron driven warm
dense matter with XFEL-based diagnostic techniques, and to obtain time-resolved
information on heating, equilibration and cooling phases of matter. The
interaction of a femtosecond relativistic intensity laser with a solid target
can produce a beam of nonthermal electrons with the energies ranging between
10's of keV to several MeV. The transport of the electrons isochorically heats
and transforms the solid into warm dense matter, while the density remains
constant. Using ~10 fs XFEL pulses, instantaneous conditions of the heated
target, specifically electron temperatures and ionization states, can be
diagnosed with X-ray Thomson Scattering and x-ray transmission imaging with a
~100 fs temporal resolution. Subsequently, time histories of the plasma
conditions can be constructed by varying a time delay between the XFEL and the
optical laser. Experimental results will be compared with two-dimensional
particle-in-cell plasma simulations and density functional theory-based quantum
electron simulations. This project is jointly funded by Division of Physics and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.