* 2010333
* Incorporating professional science writing into high school STEM research projects
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Sarah Fankhauser, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 313,906.00

This exploratory project addresses important challenge of incorporating
disciplinary literacy practices in scientific inquiry projects of high school
students. The project will incorporate the peer-review process and publication
in the Journal of Emerging Investigators (JEI). The Next Generation Science
Standards emphasize constructs from disciplinary literacy such as engaging in
argument from evidence, and evaluating and communicating information. However,
there are few resources available to students and teachers that integrate these
constructs in authentic forms that reflect the practices of professional
scientists. High school student learners engage in scientific inquiry, but
rarely participate in authentic forms of communication, forms that are
reflective of how scientists communicate and participate in the primary
literature of their fields. The project has three aims: 1) Generate knowledge of
the impact of peer-review and publication on perceptions and skills of
scientific inquiry and STEM identity, 2) Generate knowledge of how participation
in peer-review and publication are impacted by contextual factors (differences
in mentors and research contexts), and 3) Develop JEI field-guides across a
range of contexts in which students conduct their research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to expand high school student
participation in the peer-review process and in publishing in JEI, a science
journal dedicated to mentoring pre-college students through peer-reviewed
publication. By publishing pre-college research in an open access website, the
project will build understanding of how engaging in these activities can change
high school studentsâ€™ perceptions and practices of scientific inquiry. The
project will investigate how participation in peer-reviewed publications will
have an impact on student learning by administering a set of pre- and post-
surveys to students who submit a paper to JEI. The project will expand student
participation in JEI via outreach to teachers in under-resourced and remote
areas by delivering virtual and in-person workshops which will serve to
demystify peer review and publication, and explore ways to integrate these
processes into existing inquiry projects. Other efforts will focus on
understanding how student contextual experiences can impact their learning of
scientific inquiry. These student experiences include the location of the
project (school, home, university lab), the type of mentor they have, and how
they became motivated to pursue publication of their research. The project will
recruit students from under-resourced schools in New York through a
collaboration with MathForAmerica and from rural areas through outreach with
STEM coordinators in the Midwest. The resources created will be disseminated
directly on the JEI website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by pre-K-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.