* 2010230
* Collaborative Research: Parents, Teachers, and Multilingual Children Collaborating on Mathematics Together
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Marta Civil, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 05/31/2024
* USD 720,481.00

The connections between students' home and family contexts and the activities of
formal schooling are critical to support meaningful learning and family
engagement in formal schooling. The need to better understand and make use of
those connections is particularly important for multilingual learners whose
family and cultural contexts may differ significantly from school contexts and
their teachers' own experiences. The goal of this project is to develop and
study a mathematics partnership that engages multilingual children, their
teachers, and their parents in mathematical experiences together. These
mathematical experiences are designed to advance equity in mathematics education
for multilingual students. The project will design professional learning
opportunities for parents, teachers, and students, and study the ways in which
the professional learning opportunities influence teacher beliefs, quality of
instruction, parent beliefs, and teacher and parent understanding of
positioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a design-based
implementation research (DBIR) approach, along with principles of Social Design
Experiments to engage in iterative cycles of inquiry to develop, implement, and
refine the model. Parents, teachers, and students in three states (Arizona,
Maryland, and Missouri) will be recruited that represent diverse populations
both with respect to demographics and with respect to the policy contexts
surrounding multilingual learners. Two cohorts of parents will be invited to
participate in the parent-teacher study group, one consisting of 6 parents and
teachers per site and one consisting of 20 parents and their children’s teachers
per site. In each iteration, data will be collected at multiple time points
related to teachers’ beliefs about effective math instruction for multilingual
students; quality of mathematics instruction for linguistically diverse
students; focus group interviews with parents and students, and video records of
teachers and parents working with their students doing mathematics during study
group convenings. Data analysis will blend quantitative and qualitative methods.
Quantitative methods will include t-tests, multivariate, and correlational
analyses to examine changes in teacher beliefs, instructional quality, and the
relationships between the two. Qualitative analyses using thematic coding and
discourse analysis will be used to analyze study group meetings and outcomes
related to parent and teacher positioning of multilingual
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.