* 2010717
* Mechanics of Extreme Mechanical Instabilities via Spontaneously Periodic Delamination
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Jie Yin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2022
* USD 231,342.00

This award supports fundamental research exploring the underlying deformation
and failure mechanism governing the formation and evolution of extremely
buckling driven periodic delaminated patterns with the applied mechanical
strain. Buckling instability is ubiquitous in daily lives from human skin
wrinkling to blisters on painted walls. It has been pursued as a versatile means
to design stretchable devices, as well as dynamically tuning a variety of
surface topography related properties in wetting, adhesion, and optics. The
knowledge developed through this project could enable and advance multiple
surface properties governed technologies, including extremely stretchable
electronics, multifunctional smart windows, tunable optics, tunable structural
color change for camouflage, water harvesting, self-cleaning, slippery surface,
and green surfaces for anti-biofouling. This work will also provide rich
research opportunities for underrepresented groups through the honor program at
Temple University and the Women Engineering Exploration program broadening
participation for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through combining a
tightly coupled experimental, computational, and theoretical program, this
research will explore the mechanics of spontaneously extremely buckling driven
periodic delamination of thin film on soft substrates. Experimentally, extremely
large pre-stretched strain will be applied to an elastomer substrate, followed
by the deposition of metal or semiconductor thin films on it. The pre-strain
will be released to generate large-area, periodic extremely delaminated patterns
in the form of continuous thin film and discrete ribbons on both microscale and
millimeter-scale. The potential cracking failure in the delaminated buckled film
and ribbons during the extreme buckling will be examined through experiments and
cracking models. To reveal the deformation mechanism, energy-based theoretical
modeling, together with cohesive zone modeling based finite element simulation,
will be developed to understand and predict the tunable geometry of periodic
delaminated buckled profiles with strains. Both the theoretical modeling and
numerical simulations will be compared with experiments for validation and
modifications.