* 2010505
* SPIRAL: Supporting Professional Inquiry and Re-Aligning Learning through a structured e-Portfolio system
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jose-Felipe Martinez-Fernandez, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,563,134.00

Professional development for science teachers is often restricted to content
required for a single grade level or grade band. Consequently, teachers seldom
have the opportunity to discuss evidence of how learning occurs as students pass
from grade to grade. This project would investigate a new model of professional
development for teams of science teachers in grades K-8 who would create
electronic portfolios documenting how they taught specific concepts about
energy. In addition, teachers would also select evidence of student
understanding of the concepts and add those materials to their portfolios. The
study focuses on teaching and learning energy core ideas and science practices
that are aligned with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). The core
ideas are designed to spiral over grade levels, with each core idea being
revisited with more complexity as students advance from grades K to 8. The
electronic portfolio will include images of artifacts such as student work
samples and videos that reflect students’ evolving thinking and discourse about
energy topics. As teachers organize, share, and discuss this progression of
evidence in professional learning communities guided by the researchers, the
goal is to have a vertical electronic display of artifacts that illustrates how
learning can occur. The vertically aligned evidence will help other teachers in
the school district to gain an increasingly complex understanding of student
learning trajectories across grade levels to improve teaching and learning in
science classrooms across the district. The project is innovative because its
goal is to move beyond the grade-level collaborations typical of professional
development practice and literature, toward multi-grade teams of teachers who
engage in complex reflection about spiraling core ideas and scientific practices
developed by students over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions
are: 1.) How does participation in a vertical professional learning community
(PLC) influence teachers’ knowledge and instruction for teaching disciplinary
core ideas through engagement in science practices? 2.) In what ways does
professional learning about science teaching and learning differ in a vertical
PLC, compared to grade-level PLCs? And 3.) How does the use of an electronic
portfolio and feedback system influence teachers’ learning from a vertical PLC?
The study will first work with K-8 teacher leaders in the Little River Unified
School District in California where an electronic portfolio system is already in
place due to a prior NSF grant. In the first year, the researchers will add new
features to the electronic portfolio system to expand its capabilities. Each
teacher would provide a 5-day portfolio of lessons in the fall semester of the
first year as a baseline measure of instructional practices. The project will
focus on NGSS competencies in developing models and constructing explanations
for energy concepts. The researchers will measure progress through teacher
interviews, surveys, and lesson plans. Teachers will also collect additional
artifacts reflecting student-drawn conceptual models and written or oral causal
explanations of anchoring phenomena throughout the assigned units. By the end of
the study, teachers will collect new 5-day portfolios, to sum up what they have
learned and how they are approaching teaching the energy concepts and science
practices. Participating teacher leaders will work with the UCLA research team
to design and facilitate a series of professional development modules for all
science teachers across grades K-8. These modules will use the evidence in the
vertical portfolios to illustrate teaching and learning trajectories across K-8
Physical Science energy concepts and science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in the
Directorate for Education &amp; Human Resources. DRK-12 seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.