* 2010832
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Contributions of the Cnidarian  microbiome to holobiont stress tolerance
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Maite Bucher, Bucher, Maite Ghazaleh
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
seeks to understand heat tolerance in corals through an integrative study on the
combined effects of coral physiology and its microbial partners. Reef-building
corals make up the 3D habitat structure of global coral reefs that are
ecologically, economically, and culturally significant ecosystems. Notably,
corals live in symbiosis with bacteria that contribute greatly to coral
survival, and these partners can often shift in response to changes in the
environment. Rapidly increasing ocean temperatures due to climate change
severely threaten coral survival, but all corals are not equally vulnerable to
climate change. Corals already living in extreme environments may offer insight
into how corals that are tolerant to ocean warming might survive into the future
when the global climate will become more extreme. The extent to which coral-
associated bacteria may improve coral survival under extreme ocean warming is
poorly understood. This research will help to reveal how coral-associated
bacteria may help corals that are less tolerant to ocean warming to survive
climate change. Additionally, the project will provide data that will assist
scientists in planning interventions to protect coral reefs that are
economically and culturally important to coastal communities. The Fellow, an
under-represented Latina immigrant, will be exposed to resources not otherwise
available outside of this project. The training plan for the Fellow includes co-
mentorship from coral experts in the US and Europe, extending the Fellow’s
scientific network and resources across two hemispheres. To broaden
participation of others, the Fellow will serve as a role model and conduct
mentoring and outreach activities for members of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of the project is to compare the
composition of coral-associated bacteria in favorable and extreme environments
by analyzing samples from coral species present in both inland bay and fringing
reefs of Curaçao, Dutch Caribbean. The second goal is to perform a reciprocal
transplant experiment between favorable and extreme reefs in the Florida Keys
Reef Tract, USA to determine how the bacterial community contributes to coral
acclimatization capacity. Because studying coral adaptive capacity takes major,
long-term commitments in the field, the third goal is to utilize a laboratory
coral model, the Exaiptasia anemone, to predict bacterial community responses to
thermal stress at different life stages. Sample processing includes DNA
extraction, polymerase chain reactions (PCR), library preparation, high-
throughput 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing, and novel bioinformatics
pipelines. In effort to broaden the participation of groups under-represented in
biology, the Fellow will draw on experiencing a similar background, to integrate
mentorship, inquiry-based learning, and outreach with the goals of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.