* 2010169
* Exploring changes in teachers' engineering design self-efficacy and practice through collaborative and culturally-relevant professional development
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Frank Bowman, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 12/31/2023
* USD 449,820.00

Promoting diverse, inclusive and equitable participation in engineering design
education at the elementary and middle school levels is important for a number
of reasons. In addition to benefits of a diverse STEM workforce to industry and
the economy, youth are better able to make informed decisions about pursuing
STEM degrees and STEM career pathways and youth are able to develop critical
thinking and problem solving skills that allow them to be creative and
innovative problem solvers. However, for youth to participate in inclusive and
equitable engineering design experiences in elementary and middle schools
settings, teachers need opportunities to develop engineering content knowledge,
pedagogical content knowledge, and strategies for culturally-relevant teaching.
In this project, investigators from the University of North Dakota develop,
evaluate, and implement an on-going, collaborative professional development
program designed to support teachers in teaching engineering design to 5th-8th
grade students in rural and Native American communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances the understanding of teacher training
in K-12 engineering education and more specifically culturally-relevant
engineering design education for 5th-8th grade students. The program design is
guided by principles from Bandura's Social Learning Theory, Gladson-Billing’s
culturally-relevant teaching, and Gay’s cultural-responsive teaching. The
project combines promising, but often isolated, elements from previous
engineering education professional development to give teachers a) pedagogical
and content knowledge, b) culturally-relevant pedagogy that is inclusive of
indigenous students, c) a supportive professional learning community, d)
examples of project-based engineering problems implemented in real classrooms,
e) extended scaffolded practice with their own classroom engineering tasks, and
f) on-going support. The program is designed for teachers in rural and tribal
schools with curricular materials developed collaboratively with community input
to specifically address their community's unique needs. The project research
team, guided by a diverse advisory board, will collect both quantitative and
qualitative data in the forms of surveys, interviews, and videotaped
observations to determine if and how the project is affecting classroom
engineering instruction and pedagogy, as well as the sense of competence and
self-efficacy of the teacher participants. The classroom engineering tasks
created through this project, especially those developed to be specifically
relevant to Native American and rural student populations, will be promoted and
made available to other teachers through a project website, teaching practice
journals, and teacher conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.