* 2010897
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: The functional biogeography of  ectomycorrhizal fungi: elucidating cross-scale mechanisms that inform global models
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Peter Pellitier, Pellitier, Peter
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research will improve understanding of
biological interactions between plants and fungi that affect forest response to
a rapidly changing climate. The fellow will use a combination of field,
laboratory and climate modeling approaches to study how plants interact with
symbiotic (helpful) root-associated fungi. Soil nitrogen availability controls
forest growth and the fellow will compare how symbiotic fungi in the tropics,
temperate forests and boreal forests differ in their impact on tree uptake of
nitrogen. By determining how existing fungal communities are linked with certain
climatic regions the fellow will forecast future fungal communities in order to
predict how forests will respond to a changing climate. To broaden the impact of
the work, the fellow will promote student learning and discovery by mentoring
and teaching underserved and first-generation high-school and undergraduate
students in the field and laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses
an integrative approach to align hierarchical levels of analysis between soil
properties and the biogeographic community structure and function of
ectomycorrhizal (ECM) fungi. The fellow will use a range of sequencing
approaches to understand variation in the capacity of ECM communities to
scavenge for organic N. Moreover, the fellow will develop statistical approaches
to link measurements of ECM decay with the geographic distribution of ECM
genera. In so doing, the fellow will constrain current and future plant
assimilation of organic N, a source of plant N which is not included in existing
earth system models due to poor understanding of its overall contribution to
plant growth. Finally, the fellow will use a functional biogeographic framework
to forecast the response of ECM symbionts to climatic change. The fellow is
being trained in statistical approaches for metagenomic analysis, ecological
forecasting and climatic modeling. Working in conjunction with the Stanford
School of Education, the fellow will study and implement inquiry-based units
bridging field and laboratory approaches. Finally, the fellow will develop,
teach and publish educational undergraduate and high-school curricula on soil
and microbial ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.