* 2010876
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Carbon and nitrogen source  switching in a microbe-bivalve-plant symbiosis
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Diana Chin, Chin, Diana W
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The fellow’s project will address how human
input of nutrients from fertilizer, sewage, or other sources into coastal waters
may affect a group of clams called lucinids. Lucinid clams live buried in sand
or mud and host symbiotic bacteria inside their gills. This is a mutually
beneficial relationship because the bacteria use sulfur to make other needed
molecules. Lucinid clams often live among the roots of seagrasses and enhance
growth and survival because the sulfur compounds they remove from sediment are
toxic. Healthy seagrass beds serve important functions by reducing erosion and
providing a habitat for many commercially and recreationally important fish and
shellfish. This project will analyze how lucinid clams and the symbiotic
bacteria respond to changes in the coastal environment and how this may scale up
to impact seagrass ecosystems. Understanding the relationships will be important
for conservation and restoration efforts. To enhance the reach of the research
to underrepresented groups and the wider community, the fellow will develop a
public exhibit on the project, contribute to public science communication
programs, and participate in coastal restoration practitioner meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellowship project will use the bacteria-lucinid-
seagrass symbiosis to address three specific questions: (a) Does the nutrient
status of seagrass beds alter carbon and nitrogen sourcing by lucinids and their
sulfur-oxidizing, nitrogen-fixing symbionts? (b) Does the nutrient status of
seagrass beds change the proportional representation of symbionts in the lucinid
gill microbiome? and (c) Do these alterations to lucinid metabolism and
microbiome scale up to affect seagrass growth and condition? The project will
comprise a field survey across a gradient of anthropogenic nutrient enrichment
in coastal seagrass beds, complemented by a nutrient enrichment experiment in
mesocosms. Carbon and nitrogen stable isotope analysis, gene expression assays,
gene sequencing, sediment porewater chemistry, and standard metrics of seagrass
growth and condition will be used to assess the effect of low- and high-nutrient
conditions on the relative contributions of chemoautotrophy and nitrogen
fixation to lucinid nutrition; the diversity of symbionts and other gill-
associated bacteria in lucinid microbiomes; and consequent effects of lucinids
on sediment biogeochemistry and seagrass health. The fellow will receive
training in molecular biology techniques and bioinformatic analyses as well as
advising in project management, mentoring, and teaching. The fellow will also
participate in public outreach and restoration programs that will enhance the
communication of research results to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.