* 2010844
* Revisiting Homo Taxonomy: A Geometric Morphometric Analysis of the Hominin Skeleton
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Brittany Kenyon-Flatt, Kenyon, Brittany
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Humans belong to the incredibly diverse and geographically
widespread genus Homo. The wide range of diversity seen in the skeletons of
humans and their ancestors (hominins) makes it difficult to scientifically
classify them – do hominins belong to one incredibly diverse species or to
several different species? Historically, the shape and features of a skeletal
fossil are used to help identify what species it belongs to, though these
classifications ignore the fact that the wide range of diversity should cause us
to rethink how we define a species. This project investigates the extent to
which the range of variation seen in human ancestors mimics that of another
group of geographically widespread primates, macaque monkeys. This research
advances scientific knowledge by allowing for more accurate classification
methods that will allow us to better understand ourselves and our ancestors, and
how we are related. The 3D models generated during the project will be published
online as educational resources for K-12 teachers, along with corresponding
lesson plans to teach students about how our ancestor’s bodies are different
from ours. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores how morphological
variation throughout the skeleton informs the taxonomic assessment of genus
Homo. Several skeletal specimens, including modern humans, Neandertals, the
small-bodied species from Indonesia (H. floresiensis), the newly discovered
South African fossils (H. naledi), and others will be 3D scanned using state-of-
the-art technology for analysis with novel methods such as geometric
morphometric statistical analyses. Further, this data will be compared to the
Fellow’s previous dataset of macaque monkeys in order to compare how much
variation feasibly exists in a geographically widespread primate species. This
project tests two hypothesis: (H1) the morphological variation seen in genus
Homo mimics what is observed intra-generically in comparable primate species and
(H2) postcranial bones, particularly the limb girdles and associated bones,
reflect sub-generic taxonomy which can be used for taxonomic assessment. This
research advances the career of a woman scientist and undergraduate students
from underrepresented areas in STEM will be recruited to help with the project.
Results will be disseminated to K-12 students from historically underrepresented
groups via lesson plans following NC education standards. Public outreach also
will be achieved through blog posts, workshops, and seminar
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.