* 2010679
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Elucidating the relationship between host divergence and gut microbiome divergence in Parulid warblers
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Marcella Baiz, Baiz, Marcella D
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Living
organisms are hosts to a diversity of microscopic creatures. While some of these
microbes can be harmful to their host, others can be beneficial, for example by
breaking down complex sugars that their host can digest. In animals, microbes
are highly concentrated in the digestive tract (or gut) where they perform
specialized functions. Previous research has shown that different animal species
harbor unique sets of gut microbes but the role gut microbes play in the
evolution of new species is not well known. This research will investigate the
relationship between bird species formation and the composition of microbial
communities in their guts. The fellow will design and implement educational
activities integrating concepts from bird biology, microbiology and genetics
that will foster the inclusion of middle school, high school, and college
students underrepresented in Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
wood warblers as a study system to investigate the role of symbiotic gut
microbes in the origin and maintenance of biodiversity. To address this, the
fellow will sequence gut microbiomes of warblers at several sites in North
America, including across two naturally-occurring hybrid zones. Interspecific
hybridization may result in disruption of the gut microbiome contributing to
reproductive isolation, which is necessary for the maintenance of species
boundaries. By taking advantage of overlapping range distributions and natural
admixture, this project will distinguish between the influence of the
environment and host genetics in structuring the gut microbiome and test the
hypothesis that gut microbiome divergence contributes to host reproductive
isolation. This study will advance understanding of gut microbiome diversity in
wild bird populations, where data are especially lacking. The fellow will
develop and lead an educational activity on bird biology for middle school
students from underprivileged communities in the Higher Achievement program. The
fellow will also establish a DNA Day chapter at the host institution and
organize an annual outreach program to be implemented in regional high schools
with high rates of Hispanic student enrollment. Finally, the fellow will mentor
an undergraduate and local high school student from an underrepresented
background on an independent research project related to the study via the
EnvironMentors program at the host institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.