* 2010172
* Fostering Equitable Groupwork to Promote Conceptual Mathematics Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Anna DeJarnette, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2024
* USD 341,732.00

When students work in small groups it can promote rich learning opportunities
and teach them to collaborate in ways that are important for life and future
work. Having students work in small groups, however, can also create
opportunities for some students to be marginalized in implicit and explicit
ways. Research on using equitable groupwork in which issues of status are
consciously addressed by the teacher has shown that such work can have a
positive impact on students’ opportunities to learn (broadly defined as learning
content but also students’ developing positive mathematical identities and
perspectives on what it means to know/do mathematics). Most of the work on
equitable groupwork in mathematics education have had pre-determined definitions
of what it means to collaborate. This exploratory study involves a long-term
partnership between the principal investigator (PI) and a middle school teacher
and her students. Two major goals of the study are to describe how students
learn to collaborate with one another over time to make sense of mathematics,
and how students and their teacher negotiate what constitutes equitable
collaboration, with African American students’ perspectives being prioritized.
In this way, it adds to this body of literature by: a) prioritizing African
American students’ perspectives on collaboration from the outset; b) describing,
longitudinally, how students learn to collaborate; c) documenting students’
mathematics learning within the context of small groups; and d) developing a set
of resources for teacher educators, teachers, and students that focus on
equitable groupwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using theories and methods from
discursive psychology and discourse analysis, the PI of this project will
collaborate with a middle grades mathematics teacher to examine equitable
groupwork. The small private school enrolls mostly African American students
from low income neighborhoods. The PI draws on research related to complex
instruction and empirical studies on equitable groupwork and productive student
interactions. The basis for the developing definition of equitable collaboration
involves gathering information from students about the kinds of relationships
and interactions they value, as well as drawing on asset-based and humanizing
research related to African American students from mathematics education and
education literatures. This information will be used to inform the partnership
work as well as be used to analyze the data that will be collected. There are
many novel aspects of the work, including, for example, a continual interaction
between how students are interacting and the developing idea of “equitable
participation” and practices that might support that kind of participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal includes three phases of work with the
collaborating teacher to read, plan, reflect, and view videos and research
cycles. In the three phases, groupworthy tasks will be developed, the teacher
will use these tasks and other important aspects of complex instruction to enact
the tasks, and data will be collected focused on these enactments. The work will
begin with the 6th grade, then expand into additional years. The data sources
will be gathered in the work with the practicing teacher (e.g., recordings of
planning and reflection sessions), in the classroom enactments of the
groupworthy tasks (e.g., video, audio, fieldnotes, written work), and outside of
the classroom teaching time (e.g., interviews with students). The learning of
mathematics involves understanding the changes that take place in how students
talk about mathematics and how they collaborate over time. The PI will use
particular discourse-analytic methods, including thematic analyses from systemic
functional linguistics. Such strategies help to focus on the content of the
discussions and how people put various ideas in relationship to one another over
time. The PI will analyze the small group interactions to develop 12 vignettes
that can be used to do focus group interviews with students and later be used in
teacher education. These vignettes will include, for example, illustrations of
equitable collaborations and variations of issues that come up (e.g, “missed
opportunities” that might keep the interaction from being
productive).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.