* 2010530
* Systemic Transformation of Inquiry Learning Environments for STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ellen Meier, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,231,761.00

This project will address a special challenge for schools: preparing educators
to adopt an integrated approach to Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM). This is especially important for educators in underserved
urban populations where teacher expertise and guidance are necessary for
meaningful student engagement with STEM. Frameworks for helping teachers make
these changes are urgently needed, especially approaches that support new
perspectives for STEM teaching and learning at the school level. This project
will help teachers design and facilitate high-quality, real world STEM
experiences for students, as teachers move from traditional approaches to
organizing their teaching around interdisciplinary questions or problems. The
project will work with building administrators to make the structural changes
needed for interdisciplinary STEM instruction. School-based instructional
coaches will develop new strategies for guiding STEM teaching and sustaining the
work long-term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are to: (1) determine the
feasibility and utility of the refined project approach, (2) determine the
utility of the project’s implementation for facilitating change in teacher
knowledge and practices, (3) understand the utility of the project’s
implementation for fostering student change, and (4) understand the extent to
which the refined project model supports organizational change in schools. To do
this, the program will make its professional development more accessible by
adding a blended learning component, expanding the school leadership program,
formalizing a training program for new facilitators, and identifying novel ways
of defining student outcomes for transdisciplinary learning. The mixed methods
research design will involve twenty schools (elementary and intermediate) in New
York City and New Haven, CT. A quasi-experimental, within-school rotation model
will randomize grade-level participation at the school level to yield a sample
of at least 240 teachers, 3,000 students, 40 school-based coaches, and 20
administrators. Quantitative data will primarily capture teacher and student
outcomes, while the qualitative data will describe the context of the model
implementation and provide a deeper understanding of the quantitative results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.