* 2010398
* 2020 International Conference on Resource Sustainability (icRS 2020); Dublin, Ireland; June 30 - July 2, 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Ming Xu, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This travel award will support 20 U.S.-based early-career researchers to attend
the 2020 International Conference on Resource Sustainability (icRS 2020) to be
held in Dublin, Ireland from June 30th to July 2nd, 2020. The icRS 2020
conference serves as a platform for researchers and practitioners around the
world to advance the critical role of resources in the circular economy from the
diverse perspectives of underdeveloped, developing and developed economies. The
conference will discuss how to achieve urban sustainability through wise
resources management policy and practices. Attending the conference will allow
the U.S.-based early-career researchers to showcase their research and to
develop networks with their peers around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
conference, it is expected that a diverse group of 400-500 participants will
share their work through both paper and poster presentations, as well as formal
and informal discussions. Researchers from groups underrepresented in STEM
fields will be given priority in participant selection. High-quality papers from
the conference will be recommended to special issues in journals that support
the conference. An Editor Panel will be organized at the conference to allow
direct interactions between conference attendees and editors of relevant
journals on academic publishing. Early-career researchers will benefit from
formal interactions with editors at the Editor Panel as well as informal
interactions during the conference. This networking will help their academic
careers through a better understanding of editorial criteria in evaluating
manuscript submissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.