* 2010111
* Creating a Model for Sustainable Ambitious Mathematics Programs in High-Need Settings: a Researcher-Practitioner Collaboration
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Choppin, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,527,058.00

A long-standing challenge in secondary mathematics education is broadening
participation in STEM. Reform of schools and districts to support this goal can
be challenging to sustain. This implementation and improvement project will
study a successful, ambitious mathematics reform effort in high-needs secondary
schools. The goal is to develop resources and tools to support other high-needs
schools and districts in transforming and sustaining their mathematics programs.
The model focuses on the resources required for change and the aspects of the
organization that support or constrain change in mathematics teaching and
learning. The project team includes school district partners that have
successfully transformed mathematics teaching to better support studentsâ€™
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a model for
understanding the demands and resources from an organizational perspective that
support ambitious mathematics teaching and learning reforms. Demands are
requirements for physical resources or efforts that need to be met in the
instructional system. Resources are the material, human, instructional, and
organizational requirements needed to address demands. The project will develop
the model through a collaboration of researchers, professional development
leaders, students, teachers, coaches, and administrators to: (1) understand the
demands created throughout a school or district when implementing an ambitious
secondary mathematics program in a high-need context; (2) identify the resources
and organizational dynamics necessary to address the demands and thus sustain
the program; and (3) articulate a model for a sustainable ambitious secondary
mathematics program in high-need settings that has validity across a range of
implementation contexts. To develop the model over multiple iterations, the
project will examine the demands and resources related to implementing an
ambitious mathematics program, the perspectives of stakeholders, the
organizational structure, and the program goals and implementation. The project
will also conduct a systematic literature review to bring together findings from
the successful district and other research findings. The data collection and
analysis process will include interviews, document analysis, collection of
artifacts, and observations across four phases of the project. Participants will
include students, teachers, instructional support personnel, and administrators
(from schools and the district). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students
and teachers, through the research and development of new innovations and
approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.