* 2010708
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Exploration of viruses in hydrothermal vents of the Lost City and the rocky subseafloor
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Cecilia Prator, Prator, Cecilia A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Where life is
found, so too are viruses. Viral life abounds in the air, water and soil. With
each new infection, viruses can have a profound impact on their hosts by
altering genes, affecting host diversity and abundance, and influencing cycles
in biology and the environment. In the oceans, microorganisms drive nutrient and
energy cycles and make up more than 90% of the living biomass, yet the
pervasiveness of viral life on the seafloor remains largely unknown. The
recently discovered Lost City hydrothermal field, with its towering carbonate
monoliths venting warm, high pH fluids, represents one of the most unusual earth
systems described to date. This project will examine the role of viruses in the
Lost City chimneys, which has not been previously explored. Characterizing viral
diversity and abundance in the Lost City, will lead to a better understanding of
capacity of viruses to thrive in extreme conditions, and reveal the role viruses
play in extreme ecosystems, which are relevant to the origins of life. To
broaden the impact of the project, the fellow will produce educational videos
for schools and mentor underserved students in research at the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viral diversity in the Lost City will be
explored through the analysis of metagenomes from chimney biofilms and
hydrothermal fluids venting from the chimneys. In addition to identifying viral
sequences, the metagenomic sequences of archaea and bacteria will be examined
for evidence of viral infections through the identification of CRISPR (clustered
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat) sequences in host genomes.
CRISPRs provide a record of previous viral infections of that host, so
cataloging the distribution of viral-derived sequences encoded within CRISPRs in
the metagenomes will provide a window into the network of virus-host
relationships. The Fellow will also examine the morphologies of viral particles
from Lost City chimneys to identify novel virus morphotypes and open doors for
future research to characterize extreme virus structures, protein stability, and
virus evolution. The combination of metagenomic and morphological approaches
will provide a first look at the limits of viral activity in high-temperature,
high-pH environments, and it will shed light on viral-mediated evolutionary
processes in deep subsurface environments. The Fellow will cultivate public
engagement by collaborating with the Genetic Science Learning Center (University
of Utah) to create educational videos and lessons that can be used in K-12
classrooms. Mentorship of low-income and underserved high school and college
students through the University of Utah’s Upward Bound and TRIO programs will
also be integrated into the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.