* 2010863
* Floer Invariants, Cobordisms, and Contact Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,08/31/2020
* Chuen Ming Mike Wong, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 122,813.00

Low-dimensional topology is the study of geometric shapes and spaces in
dimensions up to four, which has, perhaps unintuitively, proved to be more
difficult than high-dimensional topology. Within this subject lies the theory of
knots, loops of tangled string that are tied together at their ends, which has
various connections to physics (via quantum theory and string theory), chemistry
(via molecular knots), and biology (via DNA structure, with applications to drug
design). To better understand knots and other geometric objects, topologists
have invented tools called invariants. Some modern invariants are inspired by
theoretical physics, such as gauge theory. On the one hand, these invariants
have been successfully applied to solve many important and long-standing
questions in topology; on the other hand, their behaviors are far from entirely
understood. The goal of this research project is to further the development of
modern invariants in terms of both theory and computation, harnessing their
power to explore the link between low-dimensional topology and contact geometry,
a related area of mathematics that has its roots in Newtonian mechanics and that
has emerged as an exciting area of research in recent years. As part of this
project, the investigator will provide research training to undergraduate and
graduate students, make modern invariants accessible to a wide audience, and
continue efforts in mathematical outreach.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Floer theory,
which encompasses instanton, monopole, and Heegaard Floer homologies, is a large
package of invariants for three-manifolds and knots, as well as their
cobordisms, that originate from gauge theory and symplectic geometry. In recent
years, Heegaard Floer homology has been shown to be algorithmically computable,
using combinatorial diagrams or bordered invariants. This project aims to
harness the power of Floer invariants that comes from combining theory and
computation, in several related directions. First, Floer theory provides
information on the existence or non-existence of cobordisms between three-
manifolds and between knots, with topological or geometric constraints. It is
also known to be closely related to contact geometry, giving rise to invariants
that certify tightness of a contact three-manifold, and distinguish smoothly
isotopic knots that are not Legendrian isotopic. One goal of the project is to
further extend these applications to cobordisms and contact geometry. To do so,
the investigator aims to establish naturality results that will refine
isomorphism class invariants to concrete homology group elements. The
combinatorial diagrams involved will also shed light on the significant yet
mysterious link between Floer theory and representation-theoretic invariants,
which has been established in the form of spectral sequences. Similarly, the
project also aims to advance bordered Floer invariants, which will activate more
topological applications and significantly augment the use of the contact
invariants above. This project is jointly funded by Topology and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.