* 2010712
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Mechanisms driving food web dynamics in terrestrial ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Philip Manlick, Manlick, Philip J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Despite nearly a century of research, what regulates energy
flow and food web structure remains one of the most elusive questions in
ecology. Historically, food webs were classified as either “green” webs stemming
from primary producers like plants or “brown” webs with decomposers fueled by
decaying material. However, up to 90% of primary production escapes herbivores
and is decomposed in brown webs that transform indigestible plant material into
usable energy. The flow of green energy to brown food webs is well documented,
but the flow of brown energy in the other direction to animal consumers is
poorly understood. Moreover, this flow of brown energy has significant potential
to impact food webs and could determine food chain length, especially in
terrestrial ecosystems. This research will analyze plant, animal, and fungal
specimens to measure the consumption of green and brown energy by small mammal
consumers. Further, this work will assess food web structure across the “sky
islands” of New Mexico and will test the impact of brown energy consumption on
food chain length. This project will also strive to increase diversity in STEM
by engaging K-12 and undergraduate students to promote collections-based
education and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use specimens
from New Mexico sky islands across a gradient of primary production and
ecosystem size to quantify the drivers of food web integration and trophic
structure in terrestrial ecosystems. The project leverages extensive mammal and
herbarium specimens at the University of New Mexico’s Museum of Southwestern
Biology, as well as fungal collections from the USDA Center for Forest Mycology
Research. The fellow will measure the assimilation of green (e.g., plant) and
brown (e.g., bacterial, fungal) energy by small mammals using carbon isotope
analysis of essential amino acids, and will estimate trophic position and food
web structure using nitrogen isotope analysis of trophic and source amino acids.
The fellow will then use mixed effects models to assess the drivers of food web
structure and test the relative influence of brown energy assimilation on food
chain length across terrestrial ecosystems. This project will also focus on
increasing diversity in STEM, engaging K-12 education, and promoting
collections-based education through the direct mentoring of minority
undergraduates and through hands-on workshops for high school students. Lastly,
the project will interface with an undergraduate mammalogy course to provide
hands-on research experience and to develop online learning modules for
collections-based education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.