* 2010791
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Understanding the  environment-to-epigenetic alterations driving ecosystem function and resilience under  continuing climate change
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Juliet Wong, Wong, Juliet Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The research
aims to understand how organisms respond to changes in their environment. This
is important for accurately predicting the effects of a changing climate. This
project will investigate how the sea urchin, Diadema antillarum, responds to
warming temperatures. These sea urchins play a vital role in Caribbean coral
reef ecosystems, which are severely threatened by environmental change. The
research will contribute to the management and conservation of coral reef
ecosystems that generate essential ecosystem services to people (e.g.,
fisheries, recreation, tourism, and protection from tropical storms).
Additionally, the Fellow will increase the inclusion of underrepresented groups
in biology by mentoring students and providing educational outreach activities
at institutions that serve historically underrepresented racial
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the role of
epigenetic processes in providing rapid phenotypic plasticity under changing
environmental conditions. The project assesses epigenetic patterns and their
connection to varying genotypes, demography, and physiological responses (e.g.,
righting ability), in sea urchins inhabiting areas that naturally differ in
their temperature regimes. A reciprocal transplant experiment will be used to
distinguish between local adaptation and acclimation processes, followed by
spawning and crossing of adult urchins to investigate the persistence of
epigenetic marks across generations. Genome-wide differences in DNA methylation,
body size, and thermal tolerance will be compared across larvae that differ in
their developmental and parental thermal history exposure. The project will also
generate a draft genome for Diadema antillarum. The Fellow will mentor students
at Florida International University and the University of Puerto Rico.
Additionally, the Fellow will provide educational outreach activities to high
school students and their families at a South Florida public high school, the
Marine Academy of Science and Technology at Florida International Universityâ€™s
Biscayne Bay Campus. Public outreach will also be performed in Puerto Rico with
the Sociedad Ambiente Marino conservation organization that will include events
in which participants actively interact with the study organism to connect its
importance to coral reefs and the value that coral reef ecosystems provide to
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.