* 2010561
* 6th International Conference of Quantitative Genetics (ICQG6)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Bruce Weir, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 47,280.00

The Sixth International Conference of Quantitative Genetics (ICQG6) will be held
in Brisbane, Australia, June 2021. Quantitative genetics is concerned with
traits for which variation between individuals is controlled in part by DNA
differences between individuals. These traits include those that are affected by
environmental factors and change during evolution and that affect human health
or economic traits in domesticated plants and animals. The hereditary component
for these traits is often complex and requires sophisticated mathematical and
statistical analyses to relate observed trait values to genetic profiles.
Quantitative geneticists are now addressing very large genetic datasets made
possible by advances in molecular biology, with human genetic studies now
capable of revealing information for a billion separate genetic elements, and
the scale of data is also large for plants and animals. The ICQG6 will bring
over 500 scientists and students together to survey the current state of the
field and to consider future activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sixth
International Conference of Quantitative Genetics (ICQG6) to be held in
Brisbane, Australia, June 2021. Important health problems will are addressed in
this application by an emphasis on the genetic determinants of human disease.
Studies of disease rest heavily on sound statistical methodology. Many new
statistical techniques that address complex traits and the integration of
genotype, gene expression and clinical trait data will be covered in the
Conference. Advances in human health often follow the studies made on model
organisms to be described at the ICQG6. Use of model organisms requires an
understanding of the shared evolutionary history of man and other organisms, and
some speakers will address the evolution of quantitative traits. Quantitative
genetic methodology, especially techniques for mapping quantitative trait loci
(QTL), is often developed for plant and animal populations where controlled
crosses can be made. Advances in plant and animal breeding also lead to improved
human health by increasing the quality and quantity of food. The technological
advances of the last decade have meant that quantitative genetic studies are
being conducted at an unprecedented scale. Moreover, there are also studies on
the quantitative genetics of omics traits, including at the single-cell level.
Many conference attendees develop new methods that are applicable across a range
of species and traits. In particular, progress in human genetics has been made
with methodology developed in livestock genetics. Dialog between methodologists
across species has been found to provide new ideas, new directions and new ways
of thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.