* 2010248
* Laboratory Studies of Laser-Driven, Ion-Scale Mini-Magnetospheres on the LAPD
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Derek Schaeffer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 03/31/2023
* USD 499,999.00

This project will use laboratory experiments to study magnetospheres of cosmic
objects. Magnetospheres form when a flowing plasma, like the solar wind, impacts
a magnetic obstacle, like a planet, and are an integral part of space weather
systems. Earth’s magnetosphere has been observed by spacecraft for decades, but
magnetospheres can also exist on much smaller scales, such as around comets or
asteroids that are difficult to study directly. This project will create and
explore artificial versions of these “mini” magnetospheres in a laboratory
environment. By leveraging the ability of the experiments to be carried out with
high repeatability, this study will provide an unprecedented, high-resolution
three-dimensional map of a dynamic magnetosphere. The results will advance our
fundamental understanding of magnetospheres at the smallest scales and, in turn,
improve our ability to model planetary, including Earth's, magnetospheres. This
project will also provide advanced training and mentorship to graduate students
to prepare them for the U.S. STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mini-
magnetospheres provide a unique environment to study kinetic-scale plasma
physics that have traditionally been modeled with numerical simulations. This
project will create ion-scale magnetospheres by coupling a supersonic, laser-
driven plasma flow with a dipole magnet embedded in the uniform, magnetized
plasma of the Large Plasma Device (LAPD) at the University of California, Los
Angeles. High-repetition experiments will produce highly-resolved, volumetric
datasets in order to 1) examine the evolution of global magnetospheric structure
for a range of dipole magnet and plasma parameters, 2) study the dependence of
magnetospheric structure and magnetic reconnection dynamics on the orientation
of the dipole field, 3) observe the formation of bow shocks, and 4) compare to
3D particle-in-cell simulations. The results will help validate numerical
simulations and magnetospheric models, as well as complement spacecraft
observations of mini-magnetospheres such as those associated with comets and
lunar magnetic anomalies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.