* 2010898
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* James Bernot, Bernot, James
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Copepods are a diverse group of aquatic crustaceans that are
among the most abundant animals on the planet. As key members at the base of the
marine food web, copepods support the majority of the world’s fisheries. Nearly
half of the 11,000 known species of copepods are parasites, including a number
of economically important pathogens of salmon, trout, and other aquatic animals,
which cost fisheries hundreds of millions of dollars each year. The Fellow will
utilize three of the world’s most significant copepod collections to better
understand copepod diversity using DNA sequencing and advanced imaging
techniques, with a focus on understanding the evolution of parasitism in this
group. The Fellow will receive training from experts in copepod taxonomy,
targeted capture sequencing, and specimen imaging including micro-CT. Collection
digitization and imaging efforts will help disseminate collections data to the
scientific community and the public, and the Fellow will interact with hundreds
of Smithsonian visitors and lead educational outreach events at diverse K-12
schools in the greater Washington DC region to display collection specimens and
3D images.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Copepods are an ideal system for studying
parasite evolution because no other comparatively sized animal taxon (1) has
evolved to be parasitic on as many separate occasions, (2) contains as many
parasitic species (&gt;5,000), (3) parasitizes such a diversity of hosts (&gt;13
phyla), and (4) exhibits such extreme morphological variation. However, the
ability to study parasite evolution in this context has been hampered by a lack
of molecular data: only 10% of copepod species have publicly available sequence
data, and only 5% of known species have been included in a molecular
phylogenetic analysis. To address these shortcomings, the Fellow will leverage
three of the largest copepod collections in the world to complete a phylogenomic
analysis of copepods using copepod-specific exon capture sequencing probes for
over 1,000 loci. The sequencing work, phylogenomic analyses, and collections
will enable the Fellow to test the validity of the copepod orders, revise
copepod classification, identify appropriate diagnostic characters, and provide
accurately identified and vouchered reference sequences to bolster future
molecular identification efforts. With a robust phylogeny across copepod
diversity, the Fellow will then examine the evolution of parasitism, convergent
morphological evolution, and host colonization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.