* 2010821
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Dawson White, White, Dawson M
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. One way to understand species and build evolutionary trees is
through DNA analysis, but this method is can be expensive and laborious to scale
to hundreds of geographically diverse specimens. Spectral signatures are
inexpensive datasets that reveal a tremendous amount of biological information
by recording the interactions of visual and infrared light with leaf tissues.
Just like DNA sequence analysis, spectral signatures can inform leaf physiology,
species boundaries, and evolutionary relationships. This project will provide a
novel approach and primary case study of the application of spectral signatures
to museum collections. It will teach undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds (especially first-generation academics) in the Chicago area to scan
leaves in the Field Museum herbarium and then the Fellow will use the scans for
species identification, taxonomy, and evolutionary analysis. The results will
help speed up our understanding of biological diversity by coupling a powerful
new technology with the wealth of biological specimens sitting in museum
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will generate new
genomic data and spectral signatures (400-2,500 nm) from herbarium and
archaeological collections to refine hypotheses of the origins and domestication
of coca (Erythroxylum spp.), a culturally significant South American crop and
the natural source of cocaine. The Fellowâ€™s previous phylogeographic research
has shown that the four modern coca varieties originated from at least two
independent domestication events from the wild progenitor E. gracilipes. This
project will add 198 more samples representing key geographic areas to the exon-
capture DNA dataset and conduct statistical phylogeographic analyses. It will
also incorporate spectral signatures made from ~1000 herbarium specimens plus 40
archaeological leaf remains up to 8,000 years old for high-resolution phenotypic
analyses of modern and ancient coca leaves. The project will also analyze
spectral signatures from the other ~260 wild species in the Coca family and
compare these to existing phylogenomic hypotheses to research the general
utility of spectral signatures for species identification and phylogenetic
inference. Thus, the PI will receive training in remote sensing as well as in
population genetics; undergraduate students underrepresented in STEM disciplines
will, in turn, gain herbarium and laboratory experience in these same areas of
inquiry, refining our understanding of the systematics of the Coca family in the
Neotropics and stimulating collections-based research using spectral
signatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.