* 2010306
* An Online Reflection and Community-based Instructional Development System for Mathematics Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Stephen Weimar, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,919,777.00

The project will create a system of online mathematics teacher professional
development modules for middle and high school teachers. Teachers will engage in
online, asynchronous, high-quality mathematics learning experiences that mirror
research-based productive classroom practices and models of instruction that
feature active learning and student collaboration, explanation and discussion.
The modules will integrate mathematics content and teaching strategies for
teachers. The teachers will work collaboratively using math tasks, their own
students’ work, and other resources to develop teaching practices to support
mathematical problem solving. Developing online environments for teacher
development is critical to reaching greater numbers of teachers, providing
flexible options for learning, and taking advantage of online opportunities for
collaborative learning. In particular, the software will allow teachers to
share, comment and discuss mathematical work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of
mathematics education needs to understand the development and implementation of
online learning modules for mathematics teacher development. This project will
create an environment that integrates content and pedagogical knowledge via
mathematics-focused modules. The project builds on the Online Asynchronous
Collaboration in Mathematics Teacher Education model to create the modules. The
project’s research questions are about the how the teachers build mathematics
knowledge for teaching together online. They also examine teacher reflection on
students’ mathematical works, teacher collaboration, and reciprocal perspective-
taking. Finally, the research examines how shifts in instruction are supported
as teachers are learning new practices in the modules. The implementation study
will use data such as measures of teacher knowledge, questionnaires, artifacts
from the online platform, interviews, and other sources. These will be analyzed
using a mixed methods approach to understand teachers’ learning, collaboration
and use of the modules and to refine the modules themselves. The findings of the
study should inform the design of online learning experiences for mathematics
teachers, new models for teacher development, and understanding of secondary
mathematics teacher knowledge and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12
students and teachers, through the research and development of new innovations
and approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for the
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.