* 2010776
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Linking Micro- and  Macroevolutionary Approaches to Understand the Paradox of Polymorphism in  Plethodon
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Maggie Hantak, Hantak, Maggie
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Woodland salamanders can have different color patterns (color
polymorphisms) in the same populations. Color types (morphs) are not simply
different colors, they also vary in behavior, body form, and ecology. Long-term
persistence of multiple color morphs remains an evolutionary puzzle, as previous
studies have suggested that selection should either lead to one color morph
dominating or formation of separate differently colored species. The aim of this
project is to examine the evolution of a striped/unstriped color polymorphism in
woodland salamanders using data collected from several U.S. natural history
museums. Archived tissue samples will be used to understand the evolutionary
relationships of salamanders. The fellow will also take digital images of
polymorphic salamanders using high-throughput approaches, which will
subsequently be identified as striped or unstriped by community scientists, and
through machine learning approaches. The fellowship will facilitate mentorship
training and foster opportunities for undergraduates who are interested in
research. The fellow will collaborate with local high schools and participate in
outreach events to share the results of this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the genus Plethodon, a striped/unstriped color
pattern polymorphism has either independently originated 10 times or has been
lost in 14 species that are fixed for a single morph. Extensive research on one
polymorphic species (P. cinereus) suggests that the color morphs are associated
with distinct sets of morphological and ecological traits. Thus, this system
presents an ideal opportunity to test: 1) the origin and evolution of the
polymorphism; 2) climatic niche overlap between morphs and species with
divergent phenotypes; 3) whether there are non-random patterns of co-adapted
trait complexes that evolved in Plethodon; and 4) how quickly those traits
respond to fluctuating environmental conditions, including rapid environmental
changes in the present. Using phylogenetic comparative approaches, the fellow
will assess the relationship between intra-specific patterns and
macroevolutionary outcomes within Plethodon, which represents a critical next
step in understanding the evolution of this widespread polymorphism. This work
is enabled by an interdisciplinary approach to use biological collections, while
leveraging machine learning, and citizen scientist efforts. The end results will
provide essential new knowledge about the evolution of color morphs and the
relationship between polymorphism and diversity. Citizen science, mentoring of
undergraduate students and outreach will broaden the impact of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.