* 2010118
* Using bidirectional shear protocols to determine microstructural changes responsible for thickening and dethickening in colloidal suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Itai Cohen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 479,513.00

Shear-thickening fluids have viscosities that increase during vigorous flows.
This property enables many fascinating natural and industrial phenomena ranging
from people walking across pools filled with cornstarch in water mixtures, to
the processing properties of concrete. Recent studies have started to define the
mechanism of shear thickening in particle suspensions. These studies have shown
that formation of contacts between the suspended particles acts to build a
force-supporting network of interacting particles that aligns with the flows.
Previous work has shown that when jostled perpendicularly to the flow direction
these networks can in some cases be broken apart allowing for complete
dethickening of the suspension. This project will determine if this dethickening
approach depends on the density of the suspension. New experiments, simulations,
and theory will be used to determine the equations governing this phenomenon.
Such equations will predict suspension behavior in arbitrary flow geometries and
enable new strategies for controlling the viscosity. Because controlling the
thickening of colloidal suspensions is important for processing products such as
tooth-pastes, paints, and cement, this work will have very broad impact with the
potential to change practices in both the scientific and industrial communities
to the benefit of the US economy and society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and controlling the non-Newtonian behavior
of shear-thickening fluids is crucial for increasing the efficiency of many
industrial phenomena ranging from controlling the flow of drilling muds to the
processing of concrete. Recent studies have shown that shear thickening in dense
colloidal suspensions arises from the formation of contacts between the
suspended particles, which act to build a force supporting network that aligns
with the flows. Previous work on continuous shear thickening has shown that when
perturbed orthogonally to the flow direction these networks can be broken apart
allowing for complete dethickening of the suspension. This award will support
experiments, simulations, and theory aimed at addressing knowledge gaps that
would aid development of more efficient and broadly applicable dethickening
strategies by tackling three outstanding questions in the area of shear
thickening. First, it is proposed to use experiments and simulations to
determine whether the orthogonal shear technique can be extended to the
discontinuous shear thickening and shear jamming regimes. Second, it is proposed
that new shear protocols be developed to determine the tensorial nature of the
viscosity. These measurements along with the simulations will be used to
construct a tensorial model of the viscosity. Such a theory would aid in
determining the contact network in other flow geometries. Third, a state of the
art imaging confocal rheology technique will be used to image the contact
network giving rise to thickening. These data will enable testing of theoretical
predictions for the contact network. Collectively, these projects will yield a
deeper understanding of shear thickening aimed at improving the efficiency of
applying orthogonal shear and extending its range of application to other flows.
This award will promote the progress of science and ultimately benefit the US
economy and society. Additionally, a number of educational activities are
proposed ranging from outreach focused around thickening fluids to continued
development of a science communication course for graduate students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.