* 2010290
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Daniel Friedman, Friedman, Daniel A
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research investigates the ecology and
evolution of the Hymenoptera, the order of insects containing species such as
ants, bees, wasps, and sawflies. The work contributes to our scientific
understanding of how genetics, epigenetics, behavior, and ecology are related
over developmental and ecological time scales, in the context of a well-studied
and biodiverse clade of insects. This project addresses fundamental questions in
biology including: How did colony living (eusociality) arise in ants and bees
from their solitary ancestors? How do colony traits originate and become
elaborate? How are the hormonal and neurobiological underpinnings of colony
traits linked to genetic and ecological variation among species? How might these
insights from eusocial colony evolution help humans design resilient distributed
systems, for example to respond to disasters, manage socially-spread pathogens,
and improve the security of cyberphysical systems? The Fellow will also actively
engage in science communication, mentoring, and outreach programs, with a
special emphasis on local underserved communities, team-based remote education,
and transdisciplinary approaches such as Complexity
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eusocial (colony-living) insect species display
variation within populations and among species in ecologically-important colony
traits such as behavior (e.g. collective foraging, search, offense/defense) and
reproductive strategies. Tissue-specific gene expression patterns can influence
colony traits such as collective behavior in a non-linear fashion through
altering colony-level physiological processes. Previous approaches to studying
the evolution of eusocial insect colony traits have been of limited phylogenetic
scope, have not considered the role of tissue-specific gene expression in
colony-level physiological processes, or only considered genes with single-copy
orthologs present in all species considered. This project will integrate
multiple biological techniques (phylogenomics, transcriptomics, chemical
profiling, ecological niche modeling) to investigate the evolutionary and
functional roles of lineage-specific genes, complex gene families, and tissue-
specific expression patterns in Hymenoptera. More broadly, the theoretical
models and bioinformatic pipelines developed in this research will generalize
far beyond the Hymenoptera, and provide avenues for integrative synthesis across
taxa. The Fellow will be co-trained by Prof. Brian Johnson (University of
California, Davis) and Prof. Tim Linksvayer (University of Pennsylvania), and
will work to increase participation, inclusion, reproducibility, and
transparency in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.