* 2010018
* Rui: Active Noise in the Dynamics of Self-Propelled Particles – Stochastic Modeling and Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Nicholas Brubaker, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 364,582.00

The discovery of the atom in the early 19th century was an incredible scientific
achievement and the mathematical developments of the time yielded indispensable
modern techniques essential for understanding the behavior of noisy and random
processes. These techniques have produced fundamental results in a wide range of
fields, such as climatology, astronomy, economics, and many more. Today, in the
field of active noisy systems — e.g., the study of objects that propel
themselves but are subjected to noise (randomness), such as cells or autonomous
robots — there is potentially another important juncture, where both the
scientific and mathematical implications can innumerably benefit modern life.
This project aims to discover and develop the fundamental mathematical framework
for understanding these noisy active systems by developing accurate models of
the individual agents, i.e., of a cell or single robot, and testing the models
with experimental measurements. Movement of the individuals is a fundamental
building block that’s vital to explicating the group or flocking behaviors
present in, for example, living organisms, robotic explorations, or dynamically-
adapting engineered materials. Scientifically, this project will advance our
fundamental understanding of active noise and set the stage for developing
applications in science and engineering. This research will take place in an
interdisciplinary environment and students will be trained in the emerging
scientific field of active noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active noise exists in a
wide range of systems, where it is often manifested as a non-equilibrium force
that consistently induces complex dynamics. Recently, interest in active noise
has grown rapidly because of its fundamental importance in the interdisciplinary
fields of active matter and stochastic thermodynamics. This project will develop
a mathematical framework to model active noise in self-propelled particles and
its connection to physical law. Active self-propelled particles that consume
energy to drive persistent motion are a model building block of many complex
dynamical systems. Investigating how active noise drives dynamics holds promise
to revolutionize our understanding of non-equilibrium systems and the associated
mathematical techniques, much like our mathematical understanding of thermal
noise revolutionized thermodynamics and material science. More specifically,
self-propelled particles are by definition out-of-equilibrium and thus
experience non-thermal active fluctuations. They serve as an ideal model system
to study the non-equilibrium fluctuations of particles. This project will
develop the mathematical framework for underdamped self-propelled particles. It
will establish the foundational steps for understanding active noise by: (1)
Building a stochastic model of self-propelled particles with the full inertial
dynamics; (2) Developing a true model of active noise that mimics physical
systems; and (3) Connecting active noise to relations in physics via stochastic
thermodynamics. The generalized Langevin approach will be used for modeling, and
experiments will done on both micro- and macro-scale self-propelled particles in
confining potentials. Active noise is present in a wide variety of systems,
including information systems, stochastic synchronization, fluid turbulence,
active matter, living organisms, etc. Thus, studying how active noise can reveal
the underlying dynamics of a system has potential to impact many
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.