* 2010946
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: The Role of the Damaged-Induced Immune Response in Shaping the Plant Root Microbiome
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* David Thoms, Thoms, David
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2022
* USD 186,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to David Thoms is "The Role of the Damaged-Induced Immune
Response in Shaping the Plant Root Microbiome". The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of British Columbia and the sponsoring scientist is
Dr. Cara Haney.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving agricultural productivity and
efficiency is of extreme importance due to the pressures of a growing
population, increasingly sporadic weather patterns, and human-induced land
degradation. Therefore, improving plant health and productivity in a manner that
preserves the health of our limited arable land is of utmost importance. While
some bacteria and microbes are known to be harmful to plants and animals, many
that make up an organism's microbiome have been shown to provide significant
health benefits. Bacteria present in the plant microbiome can promote plant
growth, productivity, tolerance to harsh environmental conditions, and
resistance to pests and pathogens. Taking advantage of the beneficial
interactions between plants and bacteria is an ideal alternative to chemical-
based fertilizers and pesticides. However, how plants promote positive
associations with bacteria while avoiding harmful interactions is poorly
understood. This project seeks to understand how plants select for beneficial
bacteria while simultaneously evading bacterial pathogens. This project will
focus on how plants can sense damage caused by bacterial pathogens and use that
to identify, target, and eliminate harmful bacteria while leaving the beneficial
bacteria intact. Training objectives include acquiring new skills and knowledge
in bacteriology, next-generation sequencing, and microfluidics. Broader impacts
will include the creation of educational electronic learning modules for
children and adults along with the scientific mentorship of students to help
increase the diversity in STEM related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how plants exclude pathogens while
allowing establishment of a microbiome is of major importance for diverse host-
microbiome-pathogen interaction systems. This project uses a genetically
tractable and high-throughput model system consisting of Arabidopsis and its
associated pathogens and commensals, for which a multitude of genetic,
molecular, and cell biology tools exist. It has previously been shown that plant
sensing of cellular damage can trigger an immune response. This research will
test the hypothesis that a localized damage signal triggered by a root pathogen
could provide a cue that allows plants to distinguish pathogenic from commensal
microbes. Preliminary data indicates that a plant opportunistic pathogen, that
is a close relative of a known commensal, can induce a damage response on roots.
The first aim of this research blends single-cell quantitative microfluidics
with microbiome community ecology to understand how damage-induced immune
signaling shapes plant microbiome interactions. The second aim combines forward
genetics with plant physiology and cell biology to determine how beneficial
microbes modulate plant immune signaling. Collectively these aims will identify
how a plant immune system distinguishes between beneficial and pathogenic
microbes to ultimately shape a healthy microbiome. In the face of a rising
population and changing climate, this knowledge is essential for improving
agricultural outputs via plant breeding programs that simultaneously bolster
plant disease resistance and improve interactions with beneficial microbes. The
data generated by this project will be available in public repositories such as
NCBI and will be uploaded online onto a preprint server (bioRxiv.org) prior to
acceptance into a peer-reviewed journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords:
rhizosphere, microbiome, plant immunity, plant defense, Arabidopsis, microscopy,
microfluidics, DAMP, PAMP, cell damage&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.