* 2010591
* Developing a Suite of Standards-based Instructionally Supportive Tools for Middle School Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Satabdi Basu, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,448,777.00

As computing has become an integral part of the world and the workforce, demand
for computer science (CS) education in K-12 classrooms is growing. States and
school districts in the U.S. are increasing CS course offerings, increasing the
need for teachers with CS content and teaching knowledge. However, many CS
teachers are not originally certified to teach computer science and often lack
the necessary tools, resources, and training. This project will develop a set of
educational resources, assessment tools and teacher professional development
(PD) activities to support teachers in developing knowledge of CS content and
standards. Improved CS instruction that is responsive to the needs and
challenges of the student population is particularly critical in school
districts with a large population of students who are typically underserved and
under-represented in computer science. The project, a partnership between SRI
International, the Milwaukee Public School District, and the San Francisco
United Public School District, will provide professional development experiences
tied to standards. Teachers will receive training via a combination of virtual
webinars and face-to-face instruction. Teachers will have opportunities to
evaluate their own teaching and measure their students' progress towards the
standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine how these teacher
professional development activities can help improve CS content and pedagogical
knowledge for teachers. The team will use a mixed-methods design to answer three
research questions: 1) How can CS standards-aligned educative instructional
supports be designed to be informative and useful to middle school CS teachers
using different CS curricula and what professional development (PD) do teachers
need to be able to use and benefit from these educative instructional supports?
2) What are the different ways in which teachers adapt and use the standards-
aligned educative resources and instructionally supportive CS assessment tools
in their CS classes? 3) How can standards-aligned instructional supports and
teacher PD improve middle school teachers' CS pedagogical content knowledge and
improve their implementation of standards-aligned CS instruction? To answer
research question one, the team will use an Evidence-Centered Design approach to
systematically unpack each standard and develop aligned instructionally
supportive assessments and scoring guides. Data analysis for research question
one includes qualitative analysis of student cognitive interviews to determine
the student's proficiencies and challenges. Inter-rater reliability analysis of
teacher and researcher scores on assessments. Psychometric analysis of student
responses for reliability and validity evidence. Analysis of classroom
observations of teachers responding to data from assessments. Teacher interviews
providing feedback on the usefulness of the tasks and scoring guides that have
been developed. For research questions two and three, the project will collect
and analyze data from multiple sources, including teacher interviews, classroom
observations, teacher PCK (pedagogical content knowledge) surveys, and teacher
logs to determine the impacts of the project. Data analysis for questions two
and three will include analysis of shifts in teacher PCK between the start of
year two and the end of year three. Qualitative analysis of observations for
instructional practices teachers are using in their classroom from the classroom
pilot and case studies. The project will recruit 24 teachers of varying
experience levels. Additionally, 450 middle school students will be recruited
with a significant number of female, African-American, and Hispanic students
represented in the sample. Project evaluation will examine the overall
achievement of program goals and objectives. Project results will be
disseminated widely at national conferences and through submissions to refereed
journals. The project resources and instructionally supportive tools including
PD Webinars will be made available online to school districts and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.