* 2010851
* Collaborative research: CIBR: Computational resources for modeling and analysis of realistic cell membranes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Andrei Lomize, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 791,094.00

Biological membranes are semi-permeable barriers that separate living cells from
the environment and create intracellular compartments. They are composed of many
types of lipids and are crowded with numerous transmembrane and peripheral
membrane proteins. These proteins participate in all vital cellular processes,
including biogenesis, energy and signal transduction, molecular transport,
vesicular trafficking, cell motility, recognition, adhesion, and shape
regulation. Despite the growing number of atomic structures of membrane
proteins, the lack of information about their spatial positions and protein-
lipid interactions in their native membranes impedes our understanding of
molecular mechanisms of their folding, stability, function, and regulation.
Motivated by rising demands in realistic representation of proteins in non-
planar and deformable membranes with natural lipid compositions, we propose a
creation of a high-capacity cyberinfrastructure for fast and reproducible
assembly of membrane proteins with natural lipids to build flexible
multicomponent biomembranes for subsequent structural analysis and molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations. This project will promote synergy between scientific
research and education by training computer science students in developing
bioinformatics resources, by using the developed toolbox for teaching, and by
providing training materials and web-based workshops for students and the user
community to promote research experience in membrane
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will enhance and
combine capabilities of the highly recognized and widely used PPM/OPM and
CHARMM-GUI resources that have been developed by the research teams from the
University of Michigan and Lehigh University. The project has three main
components. First, the PPM (Positioning of Proteins in Membranes) method will be
advanced for calculating the spatial arrangement and binding energy of proteins
in deformable membranes characterized by diverse polarity profiles, asymmetry,
charge, and curvature. Second, a new PPM/CHARMM-GUI toolbox will be developed by
integrating the improved PPM method and CHARMM-GUI Membrane Builder to assemble
native-like protein-lipid systems and provide input files for realistic
simulations of biomembranes by various MD simulation packages. The open web-
based platform will allow users of diverse expertise to easily setup and perform
simulations of membrane proteins with known three-dimensional (3D) structures in
deformable membranes with complex lipid composition. Third, native-like all-atom
membrane systems for thousands of known membrane protein structures with natural
lipids from eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells and organelles will be produced
using this toolbox. The generated protein-lipid systems together with the inputs
for MD simulations will be deposited in the improved and expanded OPM database
(at opm.phar.umich.edu). These inputs can be directly used for state-of-the-art
MD simulations of realistic cell membranes to assist in planning and
interpreting experimental studies. The proposed toolbox (at charmm-gui.org) will
significantly enhance the capacity of existing web resources for biomolecular
simulations, while ensuring the long-awaited transition from modeling only
transmembrane proteins to simulations of both transmembrane and peripheral
proteins and their complexes in membranes; from artificial
lipid&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.