* 2010609
* Reducing Environmental Impacts by Radical Large-Scale Change in Hydraulic Fracturing
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2020
* John McLennan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 49,945.00

This workshop's goal is to identify potential transformational research
approaches for the recovery of unconventional oil and gas that would achieve a
radical large-scale improvement in the recovery factor and much reduced
environmental impacts. This would be accomplished by changing hydraulic
fracturing. This workshop is based on the understanding that the recovery of
hydrocarbons from unconventional resources, led by the US, has drastically
changed the world and continues to be important to the US and the world. This
relatively new source of gas and oil has required horizontal drilling and
intensive hydraulic fracturing. Although many improvements have occurred,
hydraulic fracturing technologies remain inefficient. The recovery factor
continues to be low, less than ten percent of the hydrocarbon liquids in place.
This leads to substantial environmental impacts as massive amounts of water and
sand are injected to create the required formation surface area for production.
The volumes of water required and the mass of sand injected per barrel of new
oil recovered continues to increase. These commodity volumes lead to projections
of even higher environmental impacts as oil production increases. A small group
of experts from universities, industry, and national laboratories will be
convened with a moderator with considerable experience in coordinating
innovative brainstorming-type meetings. The discussion and recommendations for
research opportunities to achieve a drastic large-scale change will be presented
in a Final Report and distributed widely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Defining this
research requires vision, as well as strong science and engineering. The
challenge mandates multi-disciplinary participation, involving solid and fluid
mechanics, chemistry, physics, mathematics, and application fields such as
petroleum and mining engineering. Great talent is available within industry,
universities, and national laboratories to work the problem; however, what is
missing is a focus on the required research opportunities. This workshop will
bring together a diverse group of scientists and engineers in an innovative
environment to define these research opportunities. It is certain that an
approach different from "business-as-usual" is required. Drastic, large-scale
change must be considered; however, this will be difficult in the current
atmosphere that is based primarily on short-term cost reductions. Radical change
will not be easy and will require the joint efforts of industry, universities,
and national laboratories. A first step to gain industry support is to define
research opportunities that have potential for radical but viable change. Once
potential opportunities are defined and vetted by experts drawn from diverse
sectors, impactful industry engagement is anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.