* 2010702
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Exploring the genetic and behavioral basis of variation in sequestration ability in the polymorphic tortoise beetle
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Lynette Strickland, Strickland, Lynette Renae
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 162,947.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The focus of
this study is a colorful tortoise beetle found in tropical rainforests, called
Chelymorpha alternans. This beetle varies in color across its range and
incorporates toxins produced by host plants into the outer exoskeleton as a
defense mechanism against predators. By incorporating toxic compounds, these
organisms become distasteful to predators, and by using bright and contrasting
coloration they advertise that they are toxic, making it easier for predators to
learn and remember to avoid them. Often variation in color or pattern signals
individuals who differ in their level of toxicity. This research seeks to
understand how individual differences in the ability to incorporate toxins from
the plants contributes to survival in beetle larvae and predation as adults.
Understanding how some individuals are better equipped to process toxins will
provide insights into the ways that insects adapt to their environment and to
agricultural pesticides. To broaden participation, motivated high school and
undergraduate students in the Memphis area will be mentored in research and
outreach partnerships between the University and the community will be
facilitated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand how intraspecific
variation mediates the sequestration ability of plant secondary metabolites by
larvae of the polymorphic tortoise beetle, C. alternans, an integrative study
assessing differences in gene expression, larval and adult fitness and
functional genomics will be performed. In aposematic organisms, variation in
color pattern often indicates individuals with differing levels of toxic
protection. To investigate the genotypic and phenotypic impacts on larval
survival, individuals of different genotypes will be assessed for larval
survival. Predator bioassays with the ant predator, Azteca chartifex, will be
conducted to assess genotypic and phenotypic impacts on adult palatability.
Individuals that are better at processing secondary metabolites from the plant
are expected to have higher survival through larval development, and those that
are better at incorporating these metabolites are expected to have increased
toxicity and experience less predation as adults. A cuticular hydrocarbon study
will be used to analyze chemical variation between genotypes and phenotypes.
Additionally, to assess variation in larval sequestration ability, the
expression patterns of genes related to sequestration metabolic pathways will be
determined. Combining chemical ecology, genomics and behavior will facilitate
deeper insights in cascading effects on larval survival, adult chemical profiles
and overall levels of palatability. To broaden the impact of the work, students
will be mentored in research and community outreach will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.