* 2010724
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Controls on the formation and  persistence of mineral-associated organic matter
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ashley Lang, Lang, Ashley K
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The project will identify the environmental conditions that
best support long term soil carbon storage in forests across the U.S. Soils act
as an enormous reservoir of carbon, trapping organic matter below ground and
slowing the accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Soil is therefore
an important resource for mitigating further environmental change. However, the
understanding of the amount of carbon that soil can sequester is continually
evolving. This research will explore how the vegetation type, soil microbial
communities, and physical structure of soil minerals affect the ability of
ecosystems to effectively store carbon over long time periods. The Fellow will
test these ideas using soil collected from sites across the U.S. operated by the
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). The Fellow will also participate
in a K-12 teacher training course and several student-outreach programs to
advance scientific literacy. Data generated through this work will be used for
hands-on lessons about analyzing and interpreting environmental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mineral soil from the sample archives of thirteen
forested NEON sites will be separated into mineral-associated organic matter
(MAOM) and other organic matter pools using sequential density fractionation.
Using existing vegetation and microbial data from the NEON data portal, the
Fellow will assess how variation in tree species, microbial communities, and
soil mineralogy influence the proportion of soil carbon stored as MAOM at both
the within-site and across-site levels. Further, the Fellow will investigate
MAOM stability using organic matter labeled with both 13C and 15N isotopes.
Simulated rhizosphere conditions will be generated in experimental mesocosms
using a flow-through system with a synthetic root exudate solution of organic
acids. Dual-labeled MAOM will be subjected to these conditions and
destabilization from mineral surfaces will be quantified with isotope ratio mass
spectrometry. The remaining material will be visualized with advanced imaging
techniques to identify the particular organo-mineral bonds that resist
desorption. The Fellow will create an online lesson plan with the Data Nuggets
program to teach high school students about the process of analyzing ecological
data. The Fellow will work with underrepresented groups in science during a
summer research program for local high school students, and will participate in
a K-12 teacher training course designing effective strategies for teaching about
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.