* 2010755
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Evolution of genomic regulatory  control of ctenophore development and regeneration
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Allison Edgar, Edgar, Allison
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

It is not yet known why some animals have remarkable abilities to regenerate
(some can replace their whole body from just a small part that has been cut
off), while others have very little regenerative capacity. Surprisingly, the
ability to regenerate has been lost and gained many times independently across
animals. This research uses two closely related invertebrate animals,
ctenophores (known as comb jellies), one that can regenerate its whole body and
one that cannot, to test the hypothesis that evolutionary changes in epigenomic
regulation (differences in how the DNA of the genome is physically packaged)
plays a major role in the gain and loss of regenerative abilities. The results
of this project will contribute to understanding whether ctenophores have
specialized stem cells, or if all body cells have the ability to regenerate. The
results may help to identify ways to increase regeneration in other animals and
ultimately to repair or replace damaged or diseased human tissues. This project
includes a plan to help teachers and scientists work together to develop class
activities that anyone can use so that a scientist does not need to live nearby
to bring their knowledge to any classroom that wants
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ctenophore Mnemiopsis has biological features that
make it an ideal laboratory model to study the intersection of normal
development and regeneration: it has stereotyped development with known cell
lineages, optically clear embryos and juveniles, and can undergo whole-body
regeneration. This research uses ctenophores’ highly stereotyped development to
lineage trace the source of replacement cells in a regenerating ctenophore,
focusing on both whole-body as well as organ-specific regeneration. Moreover,
since competence to regenerate appears at a stereotyped developmental stage in
Mnemiopsis, profiling chromatin accessibility with ATAC-seq in pre-competent and
competent Mnemiopsis as well in as a non-regenerative ctenophore (Beroe) will
identify open chromatin regions specifically associated with regenerative
competence in ctenophores. These open chromatin regions can then be assessed for
actual function in regeneration. The research is integrated with an outreach
program to share both the results and underlying scientific concepts with
students and interested members of the public. Conducting the research and
outreach activities will prepare the fellow for an independent research career,
contribute to the ongoing efforts to establish ctenophores a powerful model
system, and directly benefit students and educators by creating and
disseminating lesson plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.