* 2010676
* Broadening Participation Research Center: HBCU STEM Undergraduate Success Research Center
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Lawrence Blumer, Morehouse College
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 08/31/2025
* USD 8,336,340.00

Broadening Participation Research Centers provide support to Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to conduct broadening participation research
and serve as national hubs for the rigorous study and broad dissemination of the
critical theories, structures and pedagogies, as well as culturally sensitive
interventions that contribute to the success of HBCUs in educating African
American STEM undergraduates. The project at Morehouse College, in partnership
with Spelman College and Virginia State University, seeks to formally establish
the HBCU STEM Undergraduate Success Research Center – STEM-US. The mission of
the center is to “understand and tell the stories of HBCUs through convergence
research for us and the Nation; thereby, documenting the legacy of excellence in
STEM education at HBCUs and contributing to future educational innovation”.
Among higher education institutions, HBCUs have a sustained record of
consistently producing a diverse group of graduates in the STEM fields who are
prepared for further education and the STEM workforce. Through research,
education, knowledge building, and outreach, this center will have an impact on
STEM education reform and broadening participation at all HBCUs, but will also
allow all of higher education, and thus society, to benefit from the experience
and lessons of HBCUs in broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM-US
will conduct a systematic and comprehensive investigation to elucidate how HBCUs
with diverse academic cultures successfully graduate African American students
at a higher rate than other institutions; produce a higher rate of African
American STEM students receiving PhDs; and instill in students a greater sense
of well-being. STEM-US will take a comprehensive approach that includes: 1) a
strategy integrating research, education, knowledge transfer and outreach to
understand and disseminate, at local, state and national levels, the
contributions, impact, and positive legacy of HBCUs in broadening participation;
2) a common theoretical framework that exposes individual and systematic
vulnerabilities while developing the institutional supports necessary to promote
success and retention of students; and 3) research to support the development of
evidence-based interventions that will inform education reform. Specific
research projects will emanate from a core research hub consisting of three
partner institutions - Morehouse College, Spelman College and Virginia State
University - as well as fifty other HBCU participants. The center will conduct
convergence research using a community-based participatory research model to
include education and knowledge transfer that will allow for the sharing of data
and results to improve student outcomes across the HBCU network. The center will
conduct outreach to all accredited HBCUs with education and knowledge transfer
strategies utilizing online newsletters, white papers, listservs, blogs,
webinars, and workshop-based conferences. A robust external evaluation will
monitor and assess progress on all objectives, providing both formative and
summative assessment of all center activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Broadening Participation Research Center is funded by the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program, with significant and generous
cofunding provided by the Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
program , NSF INCLUDES, the Build and Broaden program, the EHR Core Research
program, and the Convergence Accelerator program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.