* 2010918
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Stephen Gaughran, Gaughran, Stephen John
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The rapid rate of species extinction is one of the great crises
of our time. Even when endangered species recover, though, population
bottlenecks may have long-term effects on the speciesâ€™ survival. This project
combines computer science, evolutionary genetics, and conservation biology to
understand the impact of the extreme bottleneck and remarkable recovery of the
northern elephant seal. This charismatic marine mammal was hunted to the verge
of extinction in the 19th Century, but legal protections have allowed the
species to rebound. Understanding the role of natural selection during the
bottleneck and recovery of the northern elephant seal will help inform plans for
the successful management of other species on the brink of extinction. In
addition, the computational tools developed in this project can be applied to
other species, including humans, for which genomes are available from before,
during, and after a population bottleneck. The Fellow will collaborate with
programming departments at the National and American Museums of Natural History
to recruit diverse audiences to events designed as educational outreach
opportunities focused on marine mammal evolution and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of research in mathematical
population genetics have led to many statistical approaches that aim to detect
signals of natural selection and demographic history, but the patterns from
these two forces can be difficult to disentangle. More recent developments in
machine learning, however, show promise in deconvolving these signals. This
project will focus on developing a new machine learning method to infer
selection and demographic events, with increased sensitivity through the use of
temporally sampled genomes. To test this method on empirical data, the Fellow
will generate whole genome sequences from northern elephant seal specimens
collected before, during, and after their extreme population bottleneck. This
sampling strategy will track allele frequency changes through time, which can
then be used by the machine learning algorithm to distinguish subtle differences
in the patterns caused by selection and demography. In elephant seals, this
method will be used specifically to examine how selection has shaped immune
function and extreme sexual dimorphism. To achieve a widespread application of
this method, the Fellow will work to create accessible documentation for these
computational tools and will design workshops for researchers at various
collections-based research institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.