* 2010989
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Andrew George, George, Andrew Bradley
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. This project will assess the impacts of protection status on
frog and fish diversity in Amazonian Northeast Peru’s Yaguas watershed. The
Amazon basin is home to over 400 amphibian species and the highest biodiversity
of freshwater fishes in the world. Conserving this biodiversity is critical to
maintaining healthy Amazonian ecosystems, which influence global climate
patterns. These habitats are often disturbed by human activities, resulting in
biodiversity losses. Conservationists aim to prevent these losses by
establishing protected areas. However, the impacts of these protected areas
remain poorly understood. Comprehensive ecosystem health monitoring requires the
integration of both the number of species present and the ecological functions
performed by each species. The most vulnerable species often perform unique
ecological roles, and the loss of just one of them may translate to a high loss
of functional diversity, leaving ecosystems more damaged than biodiversity data
alone could predict. This project will improve our understanding of current
conservation efforts by incorporating functional diversity into ecosystem
monitoring practices. Methods developed in this study will be applicable to a
variety of ecosystems and the results will help assess the urgency of the
proposed Bajo Putumayo Protection Area, adjacent to Yaguas National
Park.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Yaguas watershed provides a unique opportunity
to assess the impacts of protection status on wildlife diversity due to the
wealth of biodiversity data collected through the Field Museum’s rapid
biological inventories in 2010. Some sampled sites have since received
protection status with the establishment of the Yaguas Reserved Zone in 2011 and
Yaguas National Park in 2018. The Fellow will work with local community members
to resample amphibians and fishes in protected and unprotected sites in 2020.
Specimens will be collected for biodiversity and functional morphology analyses,
and water samples will be taken for water quality and environmental DNA
analyses. It is hypothesized that biodiversity, functional diversity, and water
quality will have increased between 2010 and 2020 in the protected site and
decreased in the unprotected site. The Fellow will receive training in specimen
collection and genetic techniques from the sponsoring scientists and will
develop field guides for the Yaguas watershed and educational programs for
children at the Field Museum of Natural History in
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.