* 2010153
* Responsive Instruction for Emergent Bilingual Learners in Biology Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Julie Brown, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,120,163.00

The population of students who are emergent bilinguals in the US is not only
growing in number but also, historically, has been underrepresented in STEM
fields. Emergent bilingual students have not had access to the same high-quality
science education as their peers, despite bringing rich academic, linguistic and
cultural strengths to their learning. Building on smaller pilot studies and
ideas that have shown to be successful in supporting emergent bilingual
students’ learning of elementary science, this project seeks to support emergent
bilingual students in high school biology classrooms. The project team will
study how teachers make sense of and use an instructional model that builds on
students’ cultural and linguistic strengths to teach biology in ways that are
responsive. The team will also study how such a model impacts emergent bilingual
students’ learning of biology and scientific language practices, as well as how
it supports students’ identities as knowers/doers of science. The collaboration
will include two partner districts that will allow the project work to impact
about 11,000 high school students and 30 biology teachers in Florida. Over time,
the project team plans to enact and study three cohorts of teachers and
students; use the information learned to improve the instructional model; and
develop lessons, a website, and other materials that can be applied to other
contexts to support emergent bilingual students’ learning of biology. This
project will increase emergent bilingual students’ participation in biology
classes, improve their achievement and engagement in science and engineering
practices, extend current research-based practices, and document how to build on
emergent bilingual students’ strengths and prior experiences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In two previous pilot studies through the collaboration of an
interdisciplinary team, the project team developed an instructional model that
they found supported emergent bilingual students to have high-quality
opportunities for science learning. The model builds on research related to
culturally responsive instruction; funds of knowledge (including work on
identity affirmation and collaboration); and linguistically responsive
instruction (including using students’ home languages and multiple modalities,
and explicit attention to academic language). Using design-based research, the
project team will gather data from two primary settings: their professional
development program and biology teachers’ classrooms. They will use these data
both to improve the instructional model and professional development for biology
teachers. Additionally, the project team will study how teachers use the model
to support emergent bilingual students’ biology engagement and achievement, as
well as study how biology teachers enact the instructional model in two school
districts. The project will work toward three main outcomes: a) to develop new
knowledge related to how diverse learners develop language and content knowledge
in biology through engaging in science and engineering practices; b) to generate
new knowledge about how biology teachers can adapt responsive instruction to
local contexts and student populations; and c) to articulate an instructional
model for biology teachers of emergent bilingual students that is rigorous, yet
practical. The dissemination and sustainability include publishing and
presenting findings at a range of conferences and journals; making available the
refined instructional framework and professional development materials on a
website; communication with district leaders and policymakers; and white papers
that can be more widely distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.