* 2010259
* Internet of Things Pedagogical Ecosystem for Integrated Computer Science and Software Engineering Education for Grades 9-12
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Pramod Abichandani, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2024
* USD 378,508.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) technology connects physical devices such as
industrial machines, vehicles, kitchen appliances, medical devices to the
internet to enable users, businesses, and computers to make data driven
decisions. The IoT is a rapidly improving, transformative field that is bound to
positively impact global job markets and industries. With continued advancement
in science and technology comes the need to educate K-12 students in emerging
technologies to better prepare them for future academic and professional
pursuits. This project aims to develop, implement, and evaluate an Internet of
Things (IoT) based educational curriculum and technology that provides grades
9-12 students with Computer Science (CS) and Software Engineering (SE)
education. At its core, the IoT technology uses inexpensive microcomputers that
run code to collect, analyze, and share data with other devices or users. Due to
this inherent integration between hardware and software, IoT has the potential
to serve as an excellent platform for teaching CS and SE to high school
students. Grades 9-12 teachers and students from diverse and varied
socioeconomic backgrounds will participate in this curricular experience through
their STEM/CS/Engineering classes. Broad dissemination through online platforms,
summer camps, and museums will be used to share content, testimonials, teaching
strategies, and best practices to a wide audience in the K-12 education
community. Over three hundred high school students and 27 teachers will be
engaged directly in-class or via outreach activities. The skills and knowledge
gained as part of this curricular experience will provide strong college and
career readiness to high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed IoT
pedagogical ecosystem features an innovative approach to bringing CS and SE
education to grades 9-12 by immersing students in the technical challenges of
building web-connected physical computing systems. This project will focus on
identifying critical elements for effective instructional design for CS and SE
education by understanding student and teacher motivation. A key innovation of
this effort will be the low-cost, IoT-hardware kits for project-based learning
to create a hands-on experience in the classroom. The curriculum will involve
real-world projects inspired by the National Academy of Engineering grand
challenges that have direct applications in the industry (e.g., urban
infrastructure, wearable technology, connected vehicles, connected health, and
cybersecurity). Continuous and methodical assessment via rubrics and focus
groups will enable data collection on students’ CS/SE/IoT knowledge and skills,
teamwork skills, and overall engagement. Rigorous quantitative statistical
analysis (parametric and non-parametric) and qualitative methods (first cycle
and second cycle coding) will be used to answer three research questions: 1)
What is the impact of IoT-based projects on students’ CS, SE, and hardware
skills and knowledge? 2)What is the effect of IoT-based projects on students’
engagement and teamwork skills? 3) What factors of instructional design
promote/hinder engagement? This project will cumulatively provide an evidence-
based understanding of how effective IoT is as a means to provide high school
students with critical and modern CS/SE skills and
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's Discovery
Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in the Directorate for Education &amp; Human
Resources. DRK-12 seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.