* 2010853
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Connecting comparative, genomic, and evolutionary ecology factors to extreme mammalian longevity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tanya Lama, Lama, Tanya
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. In mammals,
maximum lifespan increases with body mass such that large species tend to live
longer than smaller species. Bats are a unique exception to this Rule of Life
and several species live much longer than expected given their body mass.
Extreme longevity, as seen in several species of bats, is facilitated by
mechanisms that repair cell and tissue damage, maintain immune system function,
and prevent the emergence of mutations that cause aging-associated degenerative
disease such as cancer. Evolutionary theory proposes that the evolution of
flight, nocturnal behavior, and in some species, hibernation released bats from
sources of mortality such as predation, reshaping life history to allow greater
investment in mechanisms that allow bats to remain reproductive and healthy at
older life stages. This project will test this theory using genomic analyses to
explore the basis of unexpected longevity in pairs of closely related bat
species with divergent lifespans and life history strategies. The fellow will
also explore how mortality caused by white-nose syndrome, an emergent disease in
North American bats, is reshaping life history and thus investment in the
mechanisms that facilitate healthy aging among bat populations. This project
will test longstanding theories of aging and evaluate the impact of disease
mortality on aging in a natural population. To promote broader participation in
biology, the fellow will highlight research by scientists from underrepresented
groups in a seminar series, providing successful role models to inspire students
to remain in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary Theory suggests that
this Rule of Life reflects physiological tradeoffs between maintenance and
reproduction, while Damage Theory proposes that aging results from an
accumulation of wear and tear. This project will test competing theories of
aging and elucidate genotype-to-phenotype connections and gene regulatory
networks that underlie extreme longevity using 1) comparative phylogenetics to
test whether extreme longevity evolved through an adaptive model of trait
evolution corresponding to variation in extrinsic mortality (Evolutionary
Theory) or to metabolic rate variation (Damage Theory) or following a random-
walk model; 2) comparative genomics to explore the molecular correlates of
extreme longevity in several bat lineages; and 3) a search for signatures of
divergence between epigenetic age and chronological age among Myotis lucifugus
populations impacted by high disease-mediated extrinsic mortality from white-
nose syndrome. Further, the fellow will establish a seminar series at SUNY Stony
Brook that highlights early-career researchers from underrepresented groups in
biology. This effort will increase the visibility of underrepresented
scientists, allow early-career researchers to establish collaborations at a
leading research university, and combat the attrition of underrepresented
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.