* 2010822
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Christopher Whalen, Whalen, Christopher Daniel
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Cephalopods (such as squids and octopuses) are among the most
intelligent invertebrate animals. They act as important mid-level predators in
marine ecosystems and support valuable commercial fisheries. As global ocean
temperatures continue to increase, fish populations are declining but cephalopod
populations appear to be increasing. Today fishes are far more diverse than
cephalopods; there are approximately 33,000 species of fish compared to about
700 species of cephalopods. However, prior to the Cretaceous-Paleogene mass
extinction, which wiped out the non-avian dinosaurs, cephalopods were
substantially more diverse. This suggests that an understanding of ancient
interactions could aid models of future ecosystems as marine temperatures
continue to increase and cephalopods radiate. In order to study these extinct
ecological changes, it is necessary to reconstruct the evolutionary history of
cephalopods through time. This research will primarily investigate the
interrelationships of fossil and living cephalopods. In doing so, it will
incorporate museum educational activities that serve a diverse group of
middle/high school students in New York. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
investigation will include representatives from the Cephalopoda. Phylogenetic
trees will be inferred in a Bayesian framework under the fossilized birth-death
range process, incorporating morphological characters and stratigraphic ranges
for all taxa and genomic sequences for extant members. Paleozoic nautiloids
encompass the lineages that preserve the sequence of character acquisition
approaching crown cephalopods, so a primary goal is to elucidate their
interrelationships. The first comprehensive ammonoid phylogeny will also be
inferred. This research will utilize fossils from the American Museum of Natural
History (New York, NY) and the Yale Peabody Museum (New Haven, CT).
Additionally, the research will involve the collection of new fossil materials
from the Early Ordovician Tribes Hill Formation of New York and Vermont. The
morphology of internal anatomical structures will be examined through microCT
imaging at the American Museum and will generate publicly available models
online. The Fellow will have training in invertebrate paleontological field work
and gain experience with new quantitative methods that will benefit the creation
of a valuable framework for further macroevolutionary study of living and
extinct cephalopods. The results, communicated through museum displays, local
K-12 school partnerships, and digital materials, will help increase public
understanding of evolutionary biology and the interplay between environmental
and biological change through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.