* 2010614
* Workshop on The State of High School Cybersecurity Education for Preparing a Cybersecurity Workforce
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Gaby Dagher, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The cybersecurity workforce shortage is a critical, immediate, and growing
problem in the United States. Increasing the number of youth pursuing
cybersecurity degrees and careers will require a multilayered strategy. Some of
the steps needed to achieve this goal include: making cybersecurity teaching and
learning in secondary schools rigorous, engaging and relevant; providing
opportunities for youth to learn about cybersecurity as a field of study and
career options, and smoothing the transition to postsecondary success by
including additional studies or workforce placement. Some states have begun
integrating cybersecurity content into their K-12 computer science and/or Career
Technical Education (CTE) standards and are offering curriculum in
cybersecurity; however, the breadth, depth, and implementation varies from one
state to another. In many states, integrating cybersecurity into the K-12
curriculum still emphasizes students’ online safety, e.g. secure passwords,
cyberbullying and identity protection. This project will implement a workshop to
analyze the current state of cybersecurity education in high schools. The
results will advance knowledge and understanding about the state of K-12
cybersecurity education in the United States at a crucial time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to implement a workshop to analyze the
state of the art of cybersecurity education in the U.S. high schools.
Approximately 30 participants (educators, policymakers, and industry leaders)
from six states — which have made good progress in implementing cybersecurity
education standards and creating career pathways in high schools — will attend
the workshop and produce a report on the state of high school cybersecurity
education for preparing a cybersecurity workforce. The goals of the workshop are
to: 1) understand the prospective effectiveness of these standards, and their
consequent curricula and pathways, for generating meaningful cybersecurity
learning and meeting workforce demands; 2) identify factors that enable or
thwart the implementation of cybersecurity standards across school districts
with a specific focus on factors involving different socioeconomic and
racial/ethnic profiles; 3) Understand the developmental support needed to
effectively teach cybersecurity in high schools; and 4) summarize challenges and
provide recommendations for advancing cybersecurity in high school education in
the context of addressing the cybersecurity workforce shortage. The workshop
will produce timely and useful information about the efficacy of various
educational standards to fill the cybersecurity workforce gap and provide a
blueprint for states that are looking for creating their own cybersecurity
strands and pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially supported
by NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in the Directorate for
Education &amp; Human Resources. DRK-12 seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.