* 2010527
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020:  Evolution of glucosinolate  innovation among non-Arabidopsis Brassicaceae species
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Joshua Trujillo, Trujillo, Joshua T
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Joshua Trujillo is "Evolution of glucosinolate
innovation". The host institution for the fellowship is Purdue University and
the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Jennifer Wisecaver and Dr. Mark
Beilstein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants produce an immense collection of diverse,
specialized molecules that help attract pollinators, protect plants from insects
and diseases, and provide protection against other stress such as drought.
Glucosinolates are one such group of plant specialized molecules, that are of
great interest for agricultural, medicinal, and biotechnological purposes.
Hundreds of glucosinolate chemical compounds have been identified, and these
compounds exist in varying amounts in different species, suggesting that the
genes responsible for making these glucosinolate compounds are also highly
variable between species. Despite this known diversity, the vast majority, as of
genes involved in glucosinolate biosynthesis have been characterized in one
plant alone. This focus on a single species makes it impossible to understand
what genes are responsible for making this diversity of glucosinolates and
production of diverse specialized molecules in general. Comparing the genes
responsible for glucosinolate biosynthesis across multiple species will greatly
advance our understanding of how these specialized molecules are made, as well
as the ability to manipulate, synthesize, and utilize these specialized
molecules for human society. In addition, this fellowship will provide advanced
postdoctoral training, mentoring of undergraduate students in academic research,
and educational outreach to teach the general public about plant evolution and
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research project is to
investigate the evolution of innovation in glucosinolate biosynthesis between
several closely related Brassicaceae species. To address the need for
comparative genomic and functional data, the glucosinolate biosynthesis pathway
will be characterized in seven non-Arabidopsis Brassicaceae species through
integration of comparative genomics, metabolomics, and molecular analyses. The
central hypothesis of the project is that the diversity of glucosinolate
structures produced across Brassicaceae species is a consequence of
neofunctionalization of either lineage- (or even species-) specific members of
gene families (such as methylthioalkylmalate synthases, cytochrome P450s, and
2-oxoacid-dependent dioxygenases) or regulatory elements of conserved gene
homologs of these families. To evaluate this hypothesis, the project will
consist of three components; gene coexpression and metabolomics networks to
characterize and compare glucosinolate biosynthesis pathways in diverse
Brassicaceae species. Reconstruction of glucosinolate biosynthesis gene
evolution to identify evolutionary processes that have led to innovation in
glucosinolate biosynthesis. Lastly, functional characterization of select genes
responsible for glucosinolate pathway innovation. Biological samples will be
archived in the Wisecaver laboratory, and data/code gathered or produced during
the extent of the project will be made publicly available through NCBI
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.