* 2010728
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020:Connecting development and  physiology to understand the evolution of novel sensory systems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Corey Allard, Allard, Corey Albert Harris
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. To perceive and interact with their worlds,
all organisms depend on a host of sensory abilities that evolved to meet the
specific demands of the organism’s lifestyle. Among animals these senses are
mediated by specialized organs that evolved to detect certain stimuli, such as
eyes for light and ears for sound. These organs contain specialized cells that
detect a specific stimulus and then transmit that information onward to the
animal’s nervous system to enable specific behavioral responses. While many
animals share a common set of sensory organs such as eyes and ears, some sensory
specialists have acquired unique sensory abilities through the evolution of
novel sensory organs that provide a competitive advantage in certain
environments. One such organism is the sea robin, which is a fish that has
evolved six leg-like appendages with sensory properties that enable it to locate
prey buried in the sea floor. These legs are thought to sense both chemical and
mechanical stimuli, but the cells and molecules that endow sea robin legs with
sensory abilities have not been identified, and the developmental basis for the
evolution of the legs is unknown. The goals of this research are to identify the
molecules, cells, and developmental programs that have enabled the evolution of
these specialized sensory appendages. By examining the physiology, evolution and
development of these unusual sensory organs, this research will contribute to
the understanding of the diverse mechanisms that underlie sensory processes, and
more broadly illuminate the relationship between sensory systems and evolution.
Beyond the scientific merit, the impact of this work will be broadened through
the training and inclusion of new scientists, and through scientific
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project spans hierarchical levels of
biological organization to link the structure and function of proteins, cells,
and tissues with the specific, niche-defining animal behaviors they enable.
First, sensory receptors and cells in the sensory legs will be identified using
genetic approaches including bulk-tissue and single-cell transcriptional
profiling (Aim1). Next, the mechanisms of sensory signal transduction used in
leg-localized sensory cells will be investigated using biophysical approaches
including patch-clamp electrophysiology in combination with quantitative
behavioral analysis of live sea robins (Aim 2). Finally, the developmental basis
for the evolution of sensory legs will be examined in developing sea robins
through techniques including RNA sequencing and histology, with the goal of
uncovering the origins of their sensory cells and elucidating the genetic
blueprint underlying their unique morphology (Aim 3). Broader impacts of the
project include student mentoring and outreach to increase public understanding
of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.