* 2010276
* Storytelling for Mathematics Learning and Engagement
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Robin Wilson, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,510,490.00

Mathematics education in the United States has long been challenged by three key
issues this project seeks to address: (a) narrow conceptions of mathematics as a
discipline (b) the lack of racially/ethnically diverse role models for
mathematics in terms of representation in the public imagination, media, and
schools; and (c) a paucity of resources for instruction to harness students’
early interest and engagement in mathematics across racial and gender groups.
One promising way to expose teachers and students to a variety of images and
diversity of models of mathematics is to include images of diverse people
telling their stories about their doing and knowing of mathematics. Although
storytelling is a natural part of human activity and is used extensively in
other elementary school subjects like social studies and language arts, it is
not usually found in elementary mathematics. As part of this three-year project,
the project team will collect and curate digital stories of diverse
mathematicians sharing stories of their learning within and beyond schools.
These short videos will become part of a more extensive digital database of
mathematics stories that will be aligned with K-8 mathematics topics and then
materials will be developed for teachers to use. Throughout this work, the
project team will explore the use of mathematics storytelling on K-8 teacher and
student mathematics learning and engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
responds to calls for improved equity and access to rich, rigorous math: to
contribute to understanding a more equitable K-12 pedagogy; to disrupt racial
inequities in math (and STEM, more broadly) through culturally responsive and
inclusive instructional practice; and to enhance teachers’ instructional
practice. The first phase of the work will involve collecting and curating a set
of digital stories told by mathematicians. Then, through two cycles of design
and piloting, the project team will work with participating teachers and
students to finalize the design of the videos and associated instructional
materials. A sample of pilot teachers will be purposefully selected to account
for diversity in region, school population, and experience level of teachers.
The research team will also design grade-level appropriate research instruments,
collect surveys, and conduct interviews to investigate both teachers’ and
students’ conceptions of mathematics, their conceptions of who ‘belongs’ in
mathematics, and teachers’ instructional practice with the storytelling
materials themselves. Their analysis will draw on quantitative and qualitative
research methods. For example, they will use narrative inquiry to examine
teachers’ and students’ experiences with the videos. Using the research
findings, the project will make available samples of teachers’ pedagogical
repertoires related to these videos and demonstrate how storytelling can be used
as an effective mechanism for mathematics teaching and learning. Products from
this project will include a digital database and supporting instructional
materials for teachers, school leaders, and professional developers to use. The
dissemination of this research will contribute to building models for
mathematics education that serve to deepen understanding of mathematics of
teachers and students, as well as simultaneously empowering students of all
backgrounds, but especially underserved students, to activate and pursue their
interests in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.