* 2010885
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Ecological and Evolutionary Interactions in a Dynamic Microbial System
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* William Shoemaker, Shoemaker, William Randolph
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. It is increasingly clear that the microscopic
organisms that inhabit the human gut (i.e., the microbiome) play a major role in
human health. However, the microbiome is not static. Rather, species within the
microbiome continue to acquire new mutations and evolve on a timescale that is
relevant for human health. This award provides support that will enable the
fellow to characterize key evolutionary features of the human microbiome and
examine how these features affect the species composition of the human gut,
questions that have implications for human health. Because knowledge of
evolutionary processes is essential to understand the natural world, the fellow
will work to help the public embrace evolution through outreach activities that
center the microbiome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will primarily focus on
inferring the distribution of fitness effects (DFE) of populations in the human
microbiome, a key parameter for determining the course of evolution. To infer
the DFE and examine its evolutionary and ecological consequences, the fellow
will develop computational and statistical tools that can be applied to
empirical data. First, the fellow will determine the degree that the DFE can be
inferred solely using information contained in the distribution of allele
frequencies within microbial populations. The fellow will then work to
incorporate information from correlations between allele frequencies that arise
as a result of alleles being on the same chromosome. The degree the DFE can be
inferred and correlations incorporated will be ground-truthed using population
genetic theory and computational simulations of evolutionary dynamics. Variation
in the shape of the DFE across species as well as the degree that the shape
depends on species composition will be assessed using publicly available
microbiome metagenomic datasets. At UCLA, the fellow will receive educational
and career development training, focusing on data science and management,
participating in and developing workshops at the UCLA Institute for Quantitative
and Computational Biosciences, undergraduate and graduate student mentoring, and
collaborating with researchers across a range of scientific disciplines.
Outreach efforts will consist of incorporating evolution and the microbiome into
zero-fee educational programs at UCLA, Letters to a Pre-Scientist, and Skype a
Scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.