* 2010843
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Kelsey Lucas, Lucas, Kelsey Noelle
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. In fishes, different swimming movements and body shapes
(morphologies) likely confer various functional advantages. A major example is
the difference between steady and unsteady swimming specialists. Steady
specialists, like trout, have streamlined forms that appear to minimize
unfavorable forces and are found in areas of open water and high environmental
flows. In contrast, unsteady-swimming specialists, like pike or bluegill, have
bulkier bodies and fins that appear to maximize forces for short bursts of
movement and for rapid turning in low-flow environments with lots of structure
(vegetation, etc.). Previous studies indicate that the swimming abilities of
unsteady specialists are more negatively affected by environmental flows than
those of steady specialists, so it is thought that fish body shape and swimming
ability influence fish habitat selection. But, the links between fish form,
swimming, and habitat have rarely been formally tested. Temperate lake
shorelines provide an excellent system in which to explore these relationships
because they harbor a wide variety of fish species and habitats. Shorelines,
globally, are one of the most threatened natural systems. So, in addition to
providing a fundamental understanding of fish form and function, the Fellow’s
findings will help predict how human-driven shoreline change influences fishes,
inform lakes conservation programs, and provide habitat guidelines for shoreside
construction and restoration. This work will also inform engineering
applications by offering solutions for underwater vehicle design
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will use an interdisciplinary
approach to both evaluate the strength of morphology-habitat associations and
describe the physical mechanics that underly them, with the following three
objectives. (1) Identify the axes of variation of morphology in Michigan inland
lake fishes through measurements of museum specimens. (2) Determine how
morphological features map to shoreline habitats along a turbulence gradient
using ecological models based on specimen and lake survey data. (3) Evaluate the
significance of morphology for tolerating environmental flows through
hydrodynamic studies of live fishes swimming in flumes. Alongside the Fellow’s
training in collections-based functional morphological and ecological modeling
methods, the Fellow will recruit and train diverse undergraduate students
through independent projects aligned with the Fellow’s work. Synergistic
activities will include writing popular press articles, developing lessons for
K-12 STEM classrooms, and hosting inquiry-based activities at natural history
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.