* 2010970
* Extending the Reach of Gravitational-Wave Detectors to Detect Post-Merger Signals from Binary Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Michael Coughlin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2023
* USD 246,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Multi-
messenger gravitational-wave (GW) astronomy has already shown itself capable of
answering fundamental questions about the synthesis of heavy elements and the
expansion rate of the Universe. New methods developed here will study the non-
astrophysical noise sources, including earthquakes and Earth-wide magnetic
fields, and remove those effects from the data. It will also make it possible to
detect more neutron star and black hole mergers, in addition to GWs from other
astrophysical sources such as exploding stars or the emission from a newly-born
neutron star. This work will capitalize on the excitement of GW astronomy to
build a new outreach program with a focus on GWs to Minneapolis and St. Paul.
The group will use these activities to help students understand what LIGO is and
how it detects GW signals in order to make this field accessible and available
to a new generation of young scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-messenger
gravitational-wave (GW) astronomy has arrived with the detection of the merger
of compact binary systems. With Advanced LIGO and Advanced Virgo pushing towards
design sensitivity, continued and new efforts to characterize the detectors and
subtract known physical effects from the data is required. This work enables the
possibility of detecting more compact binaries, as well as discoveries of GWs
from other astrophysical sources. Along with the ongoing advances in
instrumentation, the realization of GW astronomy depends critically on continued
advances in data analysis capabilities. With the goal of significantly
increasing the science reach of the advanced detectors, this project will
develop techniques and lead searches with new observing run data. The improved
search for long-duration burst GWs from compact binary mergers and other sources
will increase our sensitivity to signals belonging to an astrophysically
important sector of parameter space. Work on the identification and
characterization of the seismic environments will increase the available
observing time for the observatories, maximizing both their sensitivity and
uptime. The new techniques for subtraction of non-linear signals illuminate all
of the information that is possible to extract from the interferometer data,
supporting understanding of the detector and increasing
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.