* 2010735
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Influence of m6A In Gene  Regulation and Protein Occupancy in Bacillus Subtilis
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Nicolas Fernandez, Fernandez, Nicolas
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow’s
research assesses how chemical modifications (methylation) of DNA control how
genes are turned on and off. Cells from bacteria to humans have these
modifications in their DNA. In bacteria, a major function of methylation is to
identify and destroy invading DNA from sources including viruses that infect
bacteria. However, the broad occurrence of DNA methylation suggests that
methylation is important for other biological processes. The goal of this
research is to determine how DNA methylation influences and coordinates the
process for gene expression. Due to the prevalence of DNA methylation in
bacteria, the knowledge gained will have broad implications. During the course
of this research, the Fellow will utilize programs and clubs within the
institution to promote research and scholarship for populations under-
represented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the bacterial model organism
Bacillus subtilis, the Fellow will utilize in vitro and in vivo assays to
determine how DNA methylation, specifically N6-methyladenosine (m6A), influences
protein-DNA interactions. Preliminary evidence suggests that DNA binding of the
global regulator ScoC is negatively controlled by m6A. The Fellow will analyze
the effect of m6A on DNA binding by ScoC to determine how methylation alters DNA
binding in vitro. The Fellow will also use targeted and untargeted systems-level
approaches to determine how m6A influences protein-DNA interactions in vivo.
Results from these experiments will 1) determine the effect of m6A on global DNA
binding by ScoC and 2) identify regions of the genome that display methylation-
dependent levels of protein binding. By coupling systems analysis with
traditional biochemical characterization, the Fellow will take a novel approach
to understand the functional consequences of m6A on gene expression and
chromosome occupancy which will advance the field of bacterial epigenetics. The
Fellow will also develop projects based on this topic that are suitable for
summer research opportunities for under-represented populations and science
outreach opportunities targeted at middle-school and high-school students. In
addition, the Fellow will undertake formal training modules and seminars on
college-level teaching and professional development in pursuit of a career in
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.