* 2010413
* From Access to Sustainability: Investigating Ways to Foster Sustainable Use of Computational Modeling in K-12 Science Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Paulo Blikstein, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,999,187.00

Modeling is a core scientific activity in which a difficult-to-observe
phenomenon is represented, e.g., visually or in a computer program. Research has
shown that sustained experience with modeling contributes to sophisticated
understanding, learning, and engagement of scientific practices. Computational
modeling is a promising way to integrate computation and science learning. Yet
computational modeling is not widely adopted in science classrooms over
sustained periods of time because of difficulties such as the time required for
students to become adept modelers, the need to better integrate computational
modeling with other scientific practices, and the need for teachers to
experience agency in using these modeling tools. This Design and Development
project investigates how to support sustained engagement in computational
modeling in middle school classrooms in two ways: 1) Design and develop an
accessible modeling toolkit and accompanying thematically linked curricular
units; and, 2) Examine how this toolkit and curriculum enable students to become
sophisticated modelers and integrate modeling with other scientific practices
such as physical experimentation and argumentation. The project will contribute
to the conversation around how to support students and teachers to incorporate
computational modeling together with valued scientific practices into their
classrooms for sustained periods. For three years, the project will work with
six sixth and seventh grade teachers and approximately 400
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through iterative cycles of design-based
research, the project will design a computational modeling tool and six
curricular units for sixth and seventh-grade students. The team will work
closely with two teacher co-designers to design and develop each of the six
curricular units. The goal is to investigate: 1) How students become
sophisticated modelers as they shift from using phenomenon-level primitives to
unpacking and modifying these primitives for extended investigations; 2) How
classroom norms around computational modeling develop over time. Specifically,
how do student models become objects for classroom reflection and how students
integrate modeling into other practices such as explanation and argumentation;
3) How data from physical experiments support students in constructing and
refining models; and, 4) How sustained engagement supports students’ conceptual
learning and learning to model using computing tools. The team will collect and
analyze video and written data, as well as log files and pre/posttests, to
examine how communities of students and teachers adopt computational modeling as
an integral practice in science learning. For video and text analysis, the team
will use qualitative coding to detect patterns before, during, and after the
activities. For the examination of logfiles from the software, the project will
use learning analytics techniques such as the classification and clustering of
students’ sequences of actions. Finally, the team will also conduct pre/post-
tests on both content and meta-modeling skills, analyzing the results with
standard statistical tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in the Directorate for
Education &amp; Human Resources. DRK-12 seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.