* 2010680
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Functional traits as indicators of  community structure and function
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Rachel Short, Short, Rachel A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will use biological collections in innovative
ways. Large mammal communities are being affected by climate change and habitat
loss at a startling rate. This research will investigate how physical traits,
such as teeth and skeletal elements, within mammalian communities are related to
the specific environments where they are found. Using traits preserved in the
fossil record, the fellow will explore how communities of mammals are naturally
assembled and how those communities respond to environmental changes and human
activities over long time scales. This research will contribute to conservation
of biodiversity by providing a more complete understanding of ecosystems and how
they change through time and across environments. While conducting this
research, the fellow will be trained in novel methods of three-dimensional data
collection from museum specimens, evidence-based techniques for teaching
quantitative data analysis, and innovative strategies for communicating science
to a public audience. The fellow will develop informational manuals local
animals and how these change through time based on research results and will
collaborate with 40 US biological field stations to use the manuals into their
outreach programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research objectives will use
functional trait-environment relationships to connect trait patterns with
mammalian community assembly and describe the related effects of ecological and
evolutionary processes. First, the fellow will characterize trait-environment
patterns in the fossil record by evaluating response lags in traits and
functional groups in relation to the environment. Geographic, temporal,
environmental, and faunal components of each lag will be used to identify
patterns of primary and significant underpinning processes, such as speciation,
extinction, and range shift. Second, the fellow will investigate how modern
trait-environment patterns are affected by anthropogenic pressures, such as land
use and non-native species including domestic and invasive species. Inclusion of
land use patterns and replacement by or addition of new, non-native community
members will be used to improve predictive trait-environment models of
biodiversity change. With training from mentors, the fellow will integrate two
research objectives and three training objectives to produce informal, place-
based learning materials that incorporate the paleobiological results from this
research. The fellow will gain mentoring experience by supervising two
undergraduates who will participate in this project as student
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.