* 2010958
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Do energy gradients mediate cannibalism-driven population dynamics?
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Scott Thomas, Thomas, Scott
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Energy from food and heat supports survival
and reproduction, suggesting that energy availability could control population
size, but this remains largely unstudied. This problem is particularly pressing
for imperiled organisms such as amphibians that live in many different places
including harsh northerly and high-elevation environments. One potentially
important biological response to a lack of resources is increased cannibalism.
Some studies have shown cannibalism affects population size in amphibians
(including salamanders) as well as other organisms such as economically
important fish. This research tests the role of cannibalism in regulating
population size in energy-scarce conditions, focusing on salamanders inhabiting
mountain ponds. The fellow will use a combination of long-term population data,
experiments, and computer modeling to test how availability of resources
influences the role of cannibalism in controlling population numbers. The fellow
will broaden the impact of this research and develop as a teacher and science
communicator by creating online lessons and establishing an K-12 outreach
program at the rural host institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will take
an integrative approach to explore how energy gradients influence population
dynamics across multiple spatial and temporal scales. Analyses of a 30+ year
mark-recapture dataset will test relationships between tiger salamander
recruitment and the energy available to potential cannibals across years and
ponds at one high-elevation Colorado site. Common garden experiments and stable
isotope analyses will compare cannibalism rates across spatial energy gradients
both within the long-term study site and across locations throughout west-
central Colorado. The fellow will also use the long-term data to parameterize
individual-based population models to simulate the effects of life history
responses to energetic shifts such as climate warming on long-term population
dynamics and viability. The fellowâ€™s training and career development will be
further enhanced through activities including grant writing, analytical
training, symposium organization, and student mentoring that will prepare the
fellow to succeed as an independent and collaborative researcher. The impact of
the project will be broadened by educational outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.