* 2010698
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Integrating biological collections  and observational data sources to estimate long-term butterfly population trends
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Courtney Davis, Davis, Courtney Lynn
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 04/30/2022
* USD 39,255.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will use biological collections in innovative
ways. Recent studies suggest the possibility of being in the middle of an
“insect apocalypse,” but true rates of decline for most insect species are
unknown because of data limitations. For many insect species, biological
collections (including digital specimens) are the only available long-term
source of data on insect numbers and diversity. This postdoctoral research
project aims to use biological collection data and other observational data
sources to identify current trends and reasons for butterfly population changes.
The project will also raise public awareness about conservation and the value of
museum collections and promote additional museum-based research. To broaden the
impact of the work, a museum exhibit and educational module will be designed,
and undergraduates will be mentored in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological collection's data exhibit spatiotemporal and
collector-specific biases that make it difficult to estimate population trends
using only digitized museum records. These biases have limited the use of museum
records such that there is an untapped wealth of data available to evaluate the
impacts of global changes on insects. This project evaluates the utility of
newly developed data integration methods for estimating long-term population
trends using multiple data sources, including digitized museum records,
opportunistic citizen science observations, and structured count data from
monitoring schemes that follow standardized protocols. An extensive simulation
study will be used to evaluate the conditions under which it is useful and
reasonable to integrate these three data types to track long-term population
trends. An empirical case study focuses on estimating long-term trends for 32
open-habitat butterfly species in the Midwest Plains. Achievement of these
research objectives will result in a transferable modeling framework that allows
researchers to use biological collections data to reconstruct population trends
through time. This research will also be used by the Lepidoptera of North
America Network Thematic Collection’s Network to identify geographic regions in
North America that are most amenable for inclusion in an integrated analysis and
should be prioritized in future targeted digitization efforts. To broaden the
impact of the work, undergraduates will be mentored in independent research, and
an interactive museum display and K-12 educational module on butterfly ecology
will be generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.