* 2010963
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Elucidating the diversity,  prevalence, and stability of deep-sea RNA viruses
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Bayleigh Benner, Benner, Bayleigh Esther
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Viruses are the world’s most prevalent
microbes and play a vital role in the function of the organisms with which they
interact. This can have global effects, as cell death caused by viral infection
leads to the release of carbon and nutrients back into the environment to be
used by other organisms. As the importance of viruses in the environment becomes
more widely recognized, it is critical to understand the diversity of viruses
found in the deep ocean where the interplay between viruses and their hosts has
not been well studied. This research will identify and characterize RNA viruses,
a specific group of viruses found in the deep ocean about which little is
currently known. The results will provide insights into virus-host interactions
that will be important for understanding microbial function and carbon cycling.
To broaden the https://www.ejacket.nsf.gov/ej/showContextStatementList.do?pagePr
oposalId=2010963&amp;source=docsummaryimpact of the work, the fellow will apply
experiential learning modules and mentorship to increase exposure and
participation of underrepresented middle-school and community college students
in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA viruses represent a group of biological
entities that remain vastly understudied in the natural world and even more so
in marine environments such as the deep sea. The lack of knowledge about
environmental RNA viruses impacts understanding of the marine microbial loop and
the importance of viruses in driving microbial adaptation. The proposed work
will explore the diversity and prevalence of RNA viruses within deep-sea
environments that represent important sites for microbial adaptation and
evolution. Utilizing culture-independent sequencing approaches and deep-sea
microbial isolates, this work aims to 1) identify novel RNA viruses, 2)
elucidate the presence of auxiliary metabolic genes which drive virus-host
interactions, and 3) classify viral genes required for maintenance and stability
of RNA virus genomes in deep-sea environments. This research will be the first
in-depth ‘omics’ study to uncover the role RNA viruses play as drivers of
microbial adaptation, evolution, and biogeochemical cycling in the deep sea.
Together this proposed work will provide novel insights into the co-evolution of
RNA viruses and their hosts in deep-sea environments, providing a new model for
virus-host interactions in the conceptual framework of deep-sea ecosystems.
Additional broader impacts of this research are aimed towards development and
implementation of STEM modules related to the study of marine, viral, and
microbial ecosystems for mentorship of middle-school and community college
students to improve the diversity and inclusion of underrepresented
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.