* 2010852
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Cryoconite hole community  dynamics on Tibetan debris-covered glaciers
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Heather Fair, Fair                    Heather
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The focus of
this research is to increase the understanding of the physical and ecological
role of melt-holes on debris-covered glaciers in Tibet. These water-filled
habitats are surrounded by a sea of ice and they expand, contract, and disappear
with unpredictable timing. The fellow will compare the physical appearance,
water chemistry, and biodiversity of invertebrates, bacteria, fungi, algae and
mosses in melt holes on glaciers that are either pristine or debris covered. The
fellow will study how melt holes develop with time-lapse photography and how
communities within the melt holes respond to environmental factors. The research
will lead to a better understanding of the causes of glacier melting. The fellow
will also engage in outreach activities to increase involvement of deaf and hard
of hearing (DHH) individuals in environmental science and ecology, as attracting
and retaining DHH individuals is a longstanding issue in STEM fields. Outreach
activities include: 1) introducing environmental science and ecology through
teaching demonstrations for DHH high school students in the United States and
China; 2) surveying professional organizations with internship programs
targeting underrepresented students to help them improve their ability to serve
DHH individuals; and 3) developing a professional network website that will
connect DHH students with potential mentors and established DHH scientists with
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to document spatiotemporal
changes in community structure within cryoconite holes on debris-covered
glaciers in southeastern Tibet. The approaches include: 1) conducting linear
mixed effect model analyses to determine if physical habitat, water chemistry,
and community structure differ among cryoconite holes on clean or debris-covered
glacier surfaces; 2) using time-lapse photography and similar methods to
determine if community structure changes temporally and spatially; and 3)
conducting multiple linear regression and canonical correspondence analyses to
identify the abiotic factors having the greatest influence on community
structure. The research will provide the fellow with training in next generation
sequencing to examine microbial communities, bioinformatics, and statistical
analysis of time series and GIS spatial data. The DHH outreach activities will
provide the fellow with the experiences needed to become a mentor for DHH
university students studying environmental science and
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.