* 2010015
* The Sound of Darkness
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lloyd Knox, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 161,328.00

Scientists are able to observe light that last interacted with matter about 14
billion years ago when the universe was just a few hundred thousand years old.
By studying this light, they can study the universe when it was much simpler
than it is now. Due to that simplicity, for a given model of the cosmos, the
properties of this light can be accurately calculated. For what has become the
standard model of the cosmos the agreement between predictions and observations
is quite extraordinary. However, this standard model predicts that the current
rate of expansion of the cosmos is significantly smaller than what is found by
much more direct observation of the expansion. This project is a theoretical
investigation of what adjustments to the standard model of the cosmos might be
required to bring the predicted expansion rate in line with the observed
expansion rate, while maintaining consistency with all other data. The
researchers will train graduate students in research, and will develop a board
game aimed at improving public understanding of cosmology, expanding awareness
and appreciation of various large-scale cosmology projects, deepening
understanding of academic science as a human enterprise, and communicating the
benefits of a diverse team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support an
investigation of the contents of the universe in a particular target epoch: the
two decades of scale factor evolution prior to recombination. The researchers
will examine consistency of cosmic microwave background (CMB) data with the
standard cosmological model, Lambda Cold Dark Matter (LCDM), and take a "bottom-
up" approach to studying possible extensions. They will examine what is allowed,
or even favored, and why, with and without the inclusion of distance ladder and
baryon acoustic oscillation data. This investigation is important for its
discovery prospects, its ability to rule out particular extensions, and its
impact on cosmological parameter determination. It might also point toward a new
"dark" ingredient in addition to the dark matter and dark energy that
cosmologists already need to make sense of observations of the
cosmos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.