* 2010393
* Collaborative Research: Three-Dimensional Stability of Kinetic Flux Rope Structures in a Collisionless Magnetized Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Kai Germaschewski, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 144,322.00

This project will theoretically and computationally study formation of self-
organized structures in a plasma. Most observable matter in the universe is in
the form of a plasma, consisting of electrically charged particles with
electrons freed from atoms. In a plasma, the electrons and the charged atoms
(the ions) move quasi-randomly, but their spatial distribution and movement can
produce electric and magnetic fields leading to formation of plasma structures
with sizes much larger than atomic sizes but much smaller than the volume of the
whole plasma. Such small structures can fundamentally change the properties of
plasmas. However, whether and how such structures can form is still poorly
understood and will be pursued within this project. Results from this research
will increase our understandings of properties of space, astrophysical, and
laboratory plasmas, with societally important applications for space weather
prediction and future fusion energy devices. This collaborative project will
support a PhD student at University of Alaska Fairbanks, as well as a PhD
student at University of New Hampshire. The students will receive training in
both theory and numerical simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High temperature
plasmas can be considered collisionless, with particle distributions in a
collisionless plasma often deviating from a Maxwellian. While the forms of such
non-Maxwellian distributions are important, it is also important to explore how
small-scale kinetic structures can exist in such plasmas, with the Bernstein-
Greene-Kruskal (BGK) modes in 1D being one example. This project will perform
numerical simulations using the state-of-the-art Particle-In-Cell (PIC) code
"PSC" to study the stability of analytic multi-dimensional solutions of
localized kinetic structures in the form of magnetic flux ropes satisfying the
Vlasov-Poisson-Amp√®re system of equations. Possible formation mechanisms for the
generation of stable two-dimensional or three-dimensional localized kinetic
structures will also be studied numerically. The main goal of this research is
to characterize quantitatively the conditions under which kinetic structures can
be stable. This project is expected to produce new understanding of small-scale
kinetic physics in collisionless magnetized plasmas. New insights obtained
through this project will have impact on fundamental plasma theory, as well as
affect frontier problems in laboratory, space and astrophysical plasmas. For
example, it can have significant implication for understanding the process of
magnetic reconnection, where recent large-scale kinetic simulations have
discovered the generation of small kinetic scale flux ropes during magnetic
reconnection. Small-scale kinetic structures have also been observed by the
Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) mission, which has the main objective of
studying magnetic reconnection in space. Moreover, this project can impact other
fields in science since the Vlasov equation is widely applied in many different
physical systems. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Physics and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.