* 2010971
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Patric Vaelli, Vaelli, Patric
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Animals perceive the world through dedicated
sensory systems such as vision, hearing, taste, and smell. In many animals,
these systems have become specialized to detect and filter the most ecologically
relevant signals from the environment. Animals that are sensory specialists
provide excellent research models for understanding the core molecular and
cellular processes underlying sensory stimulus detection, transduction, and
processing by the nervous system, as sensory receptors and downstream cellular
pathways are often enhanced to facilitate an organism’s unique lifestyle and
ecological niche. Furthermore, because sensory systems transduce similar
environmental stimuli such as light, chemicals, and mechanical force into
cellular signals, comparative investigations across diverse animals can provide
key insight into the basic principles by which molecular and cellular processes
facilitate sensory transduction and adaptation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
studies proposed here will leverage the unique sensory biology of marine
molluscs, including cephalopods (octopus, squid, cuttlefish) and sacoglossan sea
slugs, to identify cellular mechanisms underlying sensory stimulus detection and
transduction. Specifically, comparative transcriptomics and ribosomal profiling
will be used to identify gene expression profiles from morphologically- and
physiologically-distinct sensory cells in the specialized arms and sucker cups
of the octopus, as well as from various other molluscan species. This multi-
species approach will facilitate the identification of conserved and divergent
features underlying sensory transduction both within molluscs and among animals
more broadly. Functional properties of putative sensory receptor proteins will
be characterized using single-cell electrophysiological recordings in both
acutely dissociated native cells and heterologous expression systems including
Xenopus oocytes and HEK293 cells. Finally, immunohistochemical staining, ex vivo
nerve recordings, and quantitative behavioral analyses will be employed to
understand how sensory information is integrated by the nervous system to
generate appropriate behavioral responses. This research will provide a crucial
training opportunity for the Fellow to develop experimental skills in gene
expression, cell physiology, and behavioral analyses. Additionally, the
charismatic nature of the study organisms will attract public interest for
educational outreach activities and will facilitate research and mentorship
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students of diverse and
underrepresented groups. Outreach activities will occur at Boston-based
institutions like the New England Aquarium and Harvard Museum of Natural
History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.