* 2010010
* Manipulating Fluid Flow in Mechanoadaptation of Bone
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* James Monaghan, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 02/29/2024
* USD 711,660.00

Bone is sensitive to mechanical loads, or “mechano-sensitive”. It responds to
increased loading by making more bone and to decreased loading by taking away
bone. This project will study how mechanical signals are translated into a
biological response using analysis at the tissue, cellular, and molecular level.
Investigations will reveal how to optimize the mechanical signal by adjusting
the speed and magnitude of a load applied to the tibia bone of a living mouse.
Evaluation of where new bone is made in response to the loading will be made by
imaging methods. These include high resolution 3D x-ray tomography and
fluorescent labeling that can indicate where new bone has formed. The in-flux of
calcium signaling into bone cells in a mouse tibia will also be measured under
different mechanical loading conditions. These measurements will indicate how
the cell-level response changes with different loading protocols. A molecular
imaging technique will be used to determine what proteins are being made by the
bone cells in response to loading. Bones from old mice and younger mice will be
compared to see how the response changes with age. This work will provide
insight about how to optimize mechanical loading to cause bone formation, which
can help to inform exercise and rehabilitation therapies to keep bone
healthy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the in vivo
murine tibial loading model to explore two potential fluid based stimuli: peak
fluid velocity and fluid signal (integral of fluid velocity over time). By
exploring the effects of loading profiles in a computational poroelastic finite
element models, loading profiles will be designed to optimize each stimuli
separately as well as both together in mature and aged bone. The effects of the
loading profile on the tissue level will be observed by measuring the amount of
bone formation. Cellular signaling during mechanical loading will be determined
by using in vivo multi-photon imaging of calcium reporter osteocytes. This will
indicate if cells are sensitive to peak fluid velocity or fluid signal (the
amount of time there is fluid-induced shear stress). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) will be used to quantitatively assess intracellular
signaling of genes involved in mechanoadaptation (mechano-RNA). This study will
not only provide a mechanistic understanding of adaptation to load but will also
advance imaging and assessment techniques for exploring mechanoadaptation at the
cellular and molecular level. This work is co-funded by the Biomechanics &amp;
Mechanobiology and the Physiological Mechanisms &amp; Biomechanics
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.