* 2010982
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Grace Smith-Vidaurre, Smith-Vidaurre, Grace
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Research
conducted by the Fellow will address how the early-life environment influences
vocal learning, the ability to learn vocalizations from family and social
companions that is shared by various mammalian and avian species. Although vocal
learning is one of the best studied forms of social learning, much remains to be
discovered about why animals vary in vocal learning abilities, and how variation
in these abilities is inherited across generations. This research will
contribute to our understanding of how vocal learning is sensitive to the early-
life environment, and whether influences of the early-life environment persist
across two generations. The Fellow will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups by including grassroots scientists, mentoring
undergraduate students through independent research, and disseminating
quantitative skills important for diverse careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Fellow will manipulate early-life stress over two generations of zebra finches
(Taeniopygia guttata) to identify changes in vocal learning phenotypes and
heritable epigenetic patterns in brain vocal learning centers. Zebra finch pairs
will be exposed to either random, repeated food withdrawal (high early-life
stress), or no food manipulation (low early-life stress), and eggs will be
cross-fostered among treatments. Male fledglingsâ€™ vocal learning abilities and
social interactions will be assessed in naturalistic aviaries to characterize
vocal learning phenotypes and social factors that could influence brain
molecular patterns (such as social rank). A subset of males will be sacrificed
to evaluate DNA methylation and gene expression patterns in two brain vocal
learning centers. Remaining males and females will be bred within early-life
treatments and subjected to these early-life treatments as above. Offspring will
be cross-fostered across early-life treatments to reflect either sustained or
reversed early-life stress across two generations, and male vocal learning
phenotypes and brain molecular patterns evaluated as before. The Fellow will be
trained in cutting-edge neurogenetic techniques and quantitative analyses of
animal social interactions. This project will recruit grassroots scientists to
crowd-source acoustic data analysis, facilitate independent research by
underrepresented minority undergraduate students, and result in the bilingual
dissemination of critical quantitative skills through workshops and teaching
materials in the R programming language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.