* 2010841
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Investigation of the Ancestral  Modulation Rule, a Proposed Rule for Reversal of Sex-biased Traits
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Andrew Anderson, Anderson, Andrew P
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports a research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area
of Rules of Life in innovative ways. The remarkable diversity of characteristics
biased toward one mating type or the other is underappreciated and often
overlooked. Almost every trait with mating type-bias in one species can be found
with the opposite mating type-bias in a different species. The fellow proposes
to test an idea that the evolutionary history of these reversals predicts the
physiological, genetic, and behavioral pathways that are responsible for the
expression of a mating type-biased trait. This research will advance
understanding of how mating type-biased traits develop and can be used to
explain the diversity of mating type-biased traits within and across species.
The Fellow will work to develop educational materials that present behavioral
and evolutionary themes in ways that students can discover ideas for themselves
so that the subjects are more approachable.

Mating type-biased phenotypes ultimately feed back into evolution driving
diversity and even speciation, thereby necessitating the need for a framework
for studying biased trait evolution. Such an overarching framework would have
predictive power to suggest testable hypotheses in numerous species even in
cases where the patterns are not obvious. The Fellowâ€™s proposed ancestral
modulation rule, brings together apparently disparate results, identifying the
time of evolutionary origin of the apparently reversed-biased phenotype as the
explanation for which of two underlying mechanistic patterns should evolve. When
a mating type-biased trait emerges de novo, new pathways and genes are co-opted
and therefore rely on the mating type-typical hormones (altered control
hypothesis); however, when the biased trait is reversed from the ancestral bias,
increased sensitivity to the traditionally regulating hormone will evolve
(altered sensitivity hypothesis) thereby preserving the ancestral genetic
framework and possibly the plastic response to the environment as an atavistic
trait. The Fellow will use several species of fishes (cichlids and gouramis)
that have undergone shifts in mating type-biased traits (brood care, aggression,
and ornamentation) to test if the ancestral modulation rule can correctly
predict which hormonal control mechanisms are present. Results of this study
will provide insight into the drivers and consequences of mating type-biased
traits generally and reversed mating type-biased traits specifically, leading to
an increased understanding of mating type-biased trait evolution. Educational
outreach will be conducted as part of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.