* 2010642
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020:  Developing a maize meristem model to assess the impact of CLAVATA signaling on yield traits
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Penelope Lindsay, Lindsay, Penelope L
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Penelope Lindsay is “Developing a maize meristem
model to assess the impact of CLAVATA signaling on yield traits". The host
institution for the fellowship is Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. David Jackson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. is the
world’s largest producer of maize, producing 384 million tons annually. With a
changing environment and burgeoning global population, we need to maximize maize
yield while minimizing agricultural land use. One way to increase maize yield
per plant is to increase the amount of seed produced per ear. The maize ear
arises from a group of undifferentiated stem cells called the apical meristem.
Subtle genetic changes between maize lines affect meristem growth and can have
big impacts on yield. This project will build a computational framework to
understand how genes function together to regulate the meristem and to form the
ear and seeds. Maize lines are very diverse, and this will be used to our
advantage to find how differences in these gene networks contribute to making
the maize ear. This project will provide the fellow with training in maize
genetics and genomics, coupled with bioinformatics and mathematical modeling
techniques gleaned through collaborative research. Outreach in plant genetics
will occur through High School student and teacher training in plant biology at
GenSpace, a community lab space in Brooklyn, NY.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to understand the complex regulation of maize ear development
through analysis of the nested association mapping (NAM) founders, a diverse
panel of maize lines which vary in both meristem and inflorescence size. Precise
phenotypic and transcriptomic analysis of these lines will inform the
development of a maize inflorescence meristem model. The model will be used to
modulate spatial and quantitative gene expression in silico to generate
predictions for effects on maize yield. These predictions can be applied in
precision breeding to maximize yield per plant, reducing land use and minimizing
agricultural environmental impact. Data generated from this project will be
shared in peer-reviewed publications and be presented at national scientific
conferences. In addition, transcriptomic data generated from this project will
be uploaded to the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). Code generated from modeling the genetic
control of the maize inflorescence meristem will be shared on GitHub
(https://github.com/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.