* 2010789
* TRTech-PGR: A mass spectrometric-based interdisciplinary approach to deciphering the molecular dialogue between between crop plants and their microbial friends and foes.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Joshua Coon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2024
* USD 3,027,018.00

In soil, the roots of crop plants interact with bacteria and fungi that play
interconnected, fundamental roles in agriculture in a process known as
‘symbiosis’ whereby the plants and microbes feed each other with essential
nutrients. This interdependent relationship of soil microbes and crop roots
provides important elements such as nitrogen and phosphorous to the plant.
Without these microbes, farmers must use fertilizers to satisfy the plant’s need
for nutrients. Fertilizer use is both financially expensive and environmentally
deleterious because the runoff from agricultural fields causes overfertilization
of the nation’s waterways. This, in turn, results in disastrous overgrowth of
unwanted organisms and large die-offs of desirable organisms like fish and other
creatures living in rivers, lakes and oceans. In this project, the essential
chemical signals that soil microbes use to tell a plant that they are friends,
not foes, so they can live in harmony rather than at war, will be analyzed at a
molecular level. In addition, during this project, the proteins in the plant
that specifically recognize these signals will be characterized at the molecular
level. In general, these signals represent a chemical ‘internet’ in the soil
that allows plants and microbes to satisfy their critical roles in modern
agriculture. This project will provide a potential strategy for increasing crop
productivity needed to nourish a growing population, while decreasing the
deleterious financial and environmental costs. In addition, the team will
continue to provide an annual course at the University of Wisconsin on advanced
methods in the use of mass spectrometry and
proteomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometers play a fundamental role in
modern research, as well as in the health and forensics industry. For example,
there is a mass spectrometer on Mars looking for signs of life, there is one at
the airport that looks for terrorism-related chemicals in our bags and body, and
there are mass spectrometers in our hospitals that analyze the presence and
metabolism of drugs in our blood and bodily secretions. Despite their
importance, most lay citizens and modern research scientists have a poor
understanding of what these instruments can do and why. This renewal project is
devoted to developing and applying state-of-the-art mass spectrometric
technologies to profile early molecular events involved in the recognition of
symbiotic microbes with their host crop plants. This project will also assist
the general plant community with understanding and using mass spectrometric
based analyses of metabolomes and proteomes involved in the plant's ability to
recognize and respond to microbes. Finally, via continuation of the annual
summer Mass Spectrometry Workshop previously established with prior PGRP NSF
funding at UW-Madison, this renewal project will be able to ensure that the mass
spectrometric-based technologies being developed will be made available and
placed in the hands of the research community's biologists in plant and
microbial laboratories throughout the USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was
co-funded by the Plant Genome Research Program and the Plant Biotic Interactions
Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.