* 2010718
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Morphology, kinematics and evolution of Eunicidan annelid jaws
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jenna Moore, Moore                   Jenna          M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Jawed annelids, a diverse and ancient group which includes the
famous “sand-striker” worm, play important roles as predators, prey, and
scavengers in the ocean. The classification of these worms is based on their jaw
structures. However, jaw and tooth structures are often similar in unrelated
animals with similar diets. The goal of this project is to determine whether
diet or relatedness better predicts jaw structure in annelids. The project uses
DNA sequencing and CT scanning of museum specimens to trace the evolution of jaw
shape in annelids over time. Jaw function will be studied using video
observations of jaw motion in live worms. This research advances scientific
knowledge by linking jaw shape with function in an understudied group of animals
and will provide a basis for predicting ecosystem function in both living and
extinct marine communities. The videos and 3D models generated during this
project will be published online as educational resources for K-12 and
university instructors. These resources will also be included in a public
exhibit on marine worms at the Dauphin Island Sea Lab Estuarium, and at outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates studies of morphology and
function in a phylogenetic context to test specific hypotheses concerning
morphological convergence and function in eunicidan (Annelida) jaw structures. A
targeted exon capture approach will be used to generate a new phylogeny of
Eunicida with broad taxon and gene sampling from museum specimens. The jaw
elements and associated musculature of the specimens will be imaged using
microCT. Morphological characters will be measured and coded from 3D
reconstructions. Phylogenetic comparative methods will be used to reconstruct
ancestral states and identify morphological convergences. Jaw morphology will be
related to function through observation of the movements of jaw elements in
living representatives. Integrating morphology with kinematics will provide a
better understanding of the functional basis of morphological convergences in
annelid jaw structures. Assessing the homology of jaw structures will also
provide a basis for re-evaluating the utility of morphological characters used
in Eunicidan systematics. This research will be conducted at the Dauphin Island
Sea Lab and utilizes the extensive specimen collections and imaging resources at
the Florida Museum of Natural History. This project will provide
interdisciplinary training in phylogenetics, morphology, kinematics, and
behavior and broaden the fellow's skill set for conducting integrative
collections-based research as a museum scientist. The project will also include
undergraduate training in kinematic research on
invertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.