* 2010950
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Evolutionary consequences of hybridization across life
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Quinn Langdon, Langdon, Quinn K
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Hybridization, the sharing of genetic material
between different species (to form a hybrid), was once thought to happen
infrequently; however new data are revealing that this process is common across
the tree of life. The widespread occurrence of hybrids throughout life has
profound impacts on humans; from the microorganisms used to make food, food
crops, to human biology itself. For example, ancient hybridization between
humans and extinct relatives led to the sharing of important genes. Different
factors influence what happens when the genetic material of two different
species is combined in a hybrid. This project will combine data from diverse
species with experiments to investigate how variables such as when hybridization
happened, how different the species that hybridized were, and how genes from
each distinct species interact together shape the outcomes of hybridization.
Answering these questions will help to understand how hybridization, once
thought to be rare, has influenced the genomes of diverse species, including
humans. Educational materials and outreach about the research will increase the
broader impacts of the project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will
integrate whole-genome data and analyze the ancestry of diverse groups of
organisms with a history of hybridization: including plants, animals, and fungi.
With this the fellow will build a model of hybrid genome evolution that
incorporates numerous variables that influence this dynamic process; including
mating-system, recombination rates, time of hybridization, level of divergence
between parental species, and other demographic variables. These rich datasets
can be leveraged to characterize adaptive introgression and to identify
coordinated introgression or lack of introgression across the genome.
Identifying gene networks that are permissive or resistant to introgression in
hybrids will provide insight into functional implications of hybridization and
could predict the repeatability of hybridization. With synthetic yeast hybrids,
the fellow will track genome evolution and fitness changes in real time. The
results of this experimental evolution can be compared to observations in wild
hybrids to shed light on the potential paths to genomic stabilization in
hybrids. Through this project the fellow will develop many new skills; including
expertise in experimental evolution, simulation, comparative computational
approaches, and theory and model refinement. The fellow will also gain teaching
and outreach experience, through course development and hands-on applications in
classroom settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.