* 2010556
* Comparing the Efficacy of Collaborative Professional Development Formats for Improving Student Outcomes of a Student-Teacher-Scientist Partnership Program
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Anne Westbrook, Botanical Society of America
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,230,566.00

Science classrooms in the U.S. today increasingly expect students to engage in
the practices of science in a way that help them form a deeper understanding of
disciplinary core ideas and the practices by which science is done. To do this,
students should learn how scientists work and communicate. It also calls for
changes in how teachers teach science, which in turn creates a need for high-
quality professional development so they can be more effective in the classroom.
Professional scientists can also benefit from training preparing them to support
teachers, motivate students, and model for students how scientists think and
work. Preparing teachers and scientists through collaborative professional
development can help maximize the impact they can have on student outcomes. To
have the broadest impact, such professional development should be cost-effective
and available to teachers in rural or underserved areas. This project focuses on
high school life science (biology) teachers and their students. It will make use
of an online mentoring platform, a student-teacher-scientist partnership program
established in 2005. That study found that implementing in combination with
high-quality, in-person collaborative teacher/scientist professional development
resulted in positive and statistically significant effects on student
achievement and attitudes versus business-as-usual methods of teaching the same
science content. This project has two main components: 1) a replication study to
determine if findings of the previous successful study hold true; and 2) adding
an online format for delivering collaborative professional development to
teachers and scientists enabling one to compare the effectiveness of online
professional development and in-person professional development delivery formats
for improving student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to study how the integration of an online curriculum, scientist mentoring of
students, and professional development for both teachers and scientist mentors
can improve student outcomes. In this project, teachers and scientist mentors
will engage collaboratively in a professional development module which focuses
on photosynthesis and cellular respiration and is an example of a student-
teacher-scientist partnership. Teachers will use their training to teach the
curriculum to their students with students receiving mentoring from the
scientists through an online platform. Evaluation will examine whether this
curriculum, professional development, and mentoring by scientists will improve
student achievement on science content and attitudes toward scientists. The
project will use mixed-methods approaches to explore potential factors
underlying efficacy differences between in-person and online professional
development. An important component of this project is comparing in-person
professional development to an online delivery of professional development,
which can be more cost-effective and accessible by teachers, especially those in
rural and underserved areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models, and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.