* 2010817
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Comparative neural mechanisms of pair bonding
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lisa Hiura, Hiura, Lisa
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Most mammals
do not form pair bonds, yet a few mammalian species including humans and prairie
voles are capable of developing lifelong opposite sex bonds. Chemical signals
within the brain’s reward structures are critical for pair bonding, underscoring
the rewarding nature of partner interactions. Meadow voles are closely related
to prairie voles but do not pair bond. It is unknown if the ability to form a
pair bond is tied to how social interactions with a mate engage the reward
circuit of each species. The Fellow will measure if there are species
differences in how the brain’s reward circuitry responds to experiences with a
mate. Moreover, the Fellow will experimentally manipulate reward pathways to
determine if these circuits control vole pair bonding behaviors. This research
will provide insights into how evolutionary changes in common brain circuits
have resulted in species-specific social behaviors. This research will also
inform our understanding of brain circuits that play a role in psychopathologies
characterized by atypical social functioning. The Fellow will gain advanced
technical training and will bring neuroscientific learning opportunities to
underserved communities to increase their participation in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although prior work has revealed differences in
mesolimbic dopamine receptor expression in prairie and meadow voles, differences
in socially-elicited dopamine dynamics are unexplored but represent a potential
evolutionary switch that may be crucial for the transition to monogamy. The
Fellow will test the hypothesis that species differences in pair bonding depend
on the differential activation of reward circuitry by using neurophotometric and
chemogenetic approaches in prairie and meadows voles to 1) compare activation
profiles of dopaminergic cells in the ventral tegmental area and downstream
dopamine transmission in the nucleus accumbens during interactions with a mate
and a novel opposite-sex animal, and 2) directly activate and inhibit mesolimbic
dopaminergic projections to find the necessary and sufficient conditions for
pair bonding. The Fellow will master techniques including virally mediated cell
targeting, pharmacogenetics, and assessment of real-time neurotransmitter
release dynamics, while also honing mentorship skills, and a research and
teaching pedagogy. Furthermore, the Fellow will expand inclusion of
underrepresented groups in biology through the creation and presentation of
exhibits and workshops on comparative neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.