* 2010660
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Going back in time: using museum collections to reconstruct the history of a host shift in an invasive insect
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jeremy Davis, Davis, Jeremy S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Interactions between insects and the plants they eat impacts
biodiversity, and the introduction of a non-native species provides a unique
window into the earliest stages of how these introduced insects adapt to a new
food source. This research uses a wealth of historical data in museum
collections to reconstruct how an invasive insect pest adapted to a native host
plant over a 100-year period. By integrating fieldwork, laboratory work, and
genomic data from historical and current samples, the fellow will gain insight
into how invasive species adapt over time and in different environments. Better
knowledge of how invasive species change to fit their new surroundings is vital
for understanding evolution, as well as developing strategies for agricultural
pest management. This research will also provide training for the fellow to use
and contribute to undervalued museum collections, mentor individuals from
underrepresented groups in field research, and create a website for public
engagement in pest identification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will
investigate the morphological, behavioral, and genetic changes that accompanied
adaptation to a native pine in the invasive pine sawfly Diprion similis. First
introduced to North America in 1914, D. similis rapidly shifted to native White
Pine, Pinus strobus. To reconstruct the history of this host shift, the fellow
will combine extensive museum collections of D. similis from 3 international
institutions together with sampling from contemporary populations. First, the
fellow will use museum specimens and associated host data to assess
morphological and behavioral change across both the native and introduced ranges
over the entire history of the invasion. Second, the fellow will evaluate
whether these morphological and behavioral changes are adaptive by revisiting
historical collection sites and using a combination of field surveys and
laboratory assays to measure host preference and host performance. Finally, the
project aims to use whole-genome resequencing data from both modern and
historical samples to uncover the demographic history of the North American
invasion. Together, this project aims to address several longstanding questions
about host specialization and rapid adaptation in invasive species, while
meeting several career training goals. The fellow will become an expert in
working with D. similis, as well as develop genomic skills and resources to
enable use of this novel study system in an independent research position. The
broader impacts of the project include student mentoring and public
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.