* 2010119
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Modeling Orientation to Science: Teaching and Learning Variability and Change in Ecosystems
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Daniel Damelin, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,232,077.00

This project engages middle-school students in building and revising models of
variability and change in ecosystems and studies the learning and instruction in
these classroom contexts. Students construct and critique models that they and
peers invent and – through the lens of models –develop foundational knowledge
about the roles of variability and change in ecosystem functioning, as well as
the roles of models and argumentation in scientific practice. The context for
students’ work is a set of citizen science-based investigations of changes in
ecosystems in Maine conducted in twelve collaborating classrooms. The project
studies how and to what extent students’ use of different forms of modeling
emerges from and informs how they investigate ecosystems. A parallel research
effort investigates how and to what extent the development of teachers’ comfort
and proficiency with modeling changes students’ engagement in these forms of
modeling and students’ understandings of ecosystems. A key contribution of the
project is capitalizing on the Gulf of Maine Research Institutes’s Ecosystem
Investigation Network's citizen science field research to ground for middle
school students the need to invent, revise, and contest models about real
ecosystems. The understandings that result from the project’s research provide
evidence toward first, scaling the learning experiences to the network of 500+
teachers who are part of the Ecosystem Investigation Network, and, second,
replication by programs nationally that aim to engage students in data-rich,
field-based ecological investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation
takes place in twelve collaborating middle-school classrooms, drawn from the
network of 500+ Maine teachers trained in Maine's Ecosystem Investigation
Network. Over the course of their field investigations, students engage in the
construction, critique, and revision of three forms of modeling that play
central roles in ecology: microcosms, system dynamics, and data modeling. Two
innovations are introduced over the course of the project. The first is focused
on enriching classroom supports for engaging in multiple forms of modeling. The
second involves enhancing middle school teachers’ learning about modeling,
especially in the context of large data citizen science investigations. The
study uses a mixed methods approach to explore the impact of the innovations on
the experiences and understandings of both teachers and students. Instruments
include teacher interviews and questionnaires, student interviews, and classroom
observation. The understandings that result from the project’s research will
inform the design of professional development for teachers around data analysis
and interpretation, and around how student understanding of modeling develops
with sustained support, both of which are practices at the heart of scientific
literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and teachers, through the
research and development of new innovations and approaches. Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for the projects. This project is jointly funded by DRK-12 and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.