* 2010782
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Development and Evolution of  Olfactory Perception in Response to Temperature
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Robert Mobley, Mobley, Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The project will examine gene expression,
brain structure, and behavior of fish raised under different thermal conditions.
The fellow will conduct research to investigate how temperature experienced
during development affects brain development, which will provide an
understanding of how organisms maintain or alter reproductive behaviors in the
face of global climate change. Environmental temperatures alter the expression
of genes, and can change how organisms grow and develop. The project will also
assess the potential for evolutionary pressures to act upon different genes that
respond to changing temperatures. The work will provide the fellow training in
molecular, physiological and bioinformatic techniques, as well as professional
development in the life sciences. The project will provide research
opportunities to many underrepresented undergraduate students at a public
university, and the fellow will take part in outreach activities designed to
engage girls and underrepresented minority students in STEM fields.

This project will explore relationships between temperature and development of
the brain, by measuring the growth and function of olfactory processing centers
throughout development. Expression of the sonic hedgehog gene regulates the
dorsal-ventral patterning of vertebrate brain regions during development, which
may impact an organism's fitness by altering sensory processing. Temperature is
a pervasive part of the environment, capable of influencing many developmental
processes and expected to change around the world in years to come. The fellow
will generate reaction norms of sonic hedgehog expression during development
under different ecologically relevant temperatures and quantify effects on
neuroanatomy. The life long-consequences of these temperature effects will be
evaluated by behaviorally and physiologically measuring the detection of
socially relevant olfactory stimuli in different parts of the telencephalon of
the adult organism. The project will also measure differential expression of the
entire transcriptome under different temperatures and use phylogenetic analysis
to explore the potential for evolutionary processes to provide supplemental, or
alternative, methods of response to temperature. The fellow will be trained in
front-line biological techniques to expand their research abilities and generate
public outreach through educational experiences and online dissemination. The
project bears societal implications for biodiversity and conservation management
in response to global climate change. To broaden the impact of the work, the
fellow will engage students from underrepresented groups in the research and
conduct outreach to girls to increase participation in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.