* 2010768
* Conference: Spatio-Temporal Dynamics in Communication: A Workshop and Symposium at Consecutive SICB Meetings, 2020 in Austin, TX and 2021 in Washington, D.C.
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Nathan Morehouse, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 89,702.00

An animal’s position in space and time determines its ability to collect
information about the world around it. These ‘spatio-temporal’ concerns are of
particular importance to animals engaged in communication with each other: the
relative positioning of sender and receiver over time can help to optimize
information exchange or hamper it. One key reason for this is that sensory
systems and the signals that stimulate them are often highly directional. Take,
for example, the courtship display of the male broad-tailed hummingbird, which
involves a dramatic high-speed dive, a loud feather-generated sound, and a
stunning flash of his iridescent throat. For maximum effect on a prospective
mate, the male must time and place these elements of his display perfectly,
coordinated with millisecond and millimeter precision. If he doesn’t align his
feathers just right in relation to the sun and her perch, his magenta flash
doesn’t quite go off. And the female must be looking directly at him. If he’s in
the corner of her eye, she may miss most of the show. But how are such spatio-
temporal dynamics coordinated by those involved? And do individuals differ in
their ability to navigate space and time in ways that impact their success in
communication and associated decision-making? In other words, how and why might
this aspect of animal communication evolve? Answers to these deceptively simple
questions require integration of insights from a number of scientific fields,
including neuroscience, cognitive ecology, biomechanics, sensory ecology,
computer science, evolutionary biology, animal behavior, and philosophy. Such
integration, although challenging, promises to open exciting new avenues of
inquiry that should pay dividends across these fields and beyond. This workshop
and symposium series will bring researchers from various field together to begin
addressing these questions and others to better understand how signaling is
impacted by time and position. Early career and researchers from
underrepresented groups will be recruited to participate at all steps to broaden
the investigative process and audience for this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
organizing team will coordinate a workshop and symposium, hosted at consecutive
annual meetings of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, to draw
together researchers from these different disciplines in discussions about
interdisciplinary approaches and novel transdisciplinary paradigms for
investigating spatio-temporal dynamics in animal communication. The initial,
one-day workshop will partner early career researchers with interdisciplinary
clusters of invited faculty to discuss major challenges, key knowledge gaps, and
research boundaries in need if increased interdisciplinary crosstalk. These
working clusters will then identify a profitable topic for further study in the
subsequent 12 months, with a presentation and/or working paper to emerge from
such efforts. The follow-up symposium will showcase workshop products alongside
cutting edge research in three thematic sessions. One session will address
receiver encoding of complex signals from neurobiological, cognitive, and
philosophical perspectives. Talks in this session will address how variation in
signal spatio-temporal dynamics impact attention, habituation, learning,
localization, and scene analysis. The second session will consider
biomechanical, neurophysiological, and ecological constraints on display
production, with talks addressing both display performance as well as directing
displays effectively toward appropriate receivers. The third session will focus
on machine learning and social network tool development to characterize spatio-
temporal dynamics, as common methods for examining relatively simple displays in
dyadic interactions do not capture the full range of features relevant in
complex communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.