* 2010884
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Ecological drivers of disease  adaptation
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Mary Lauterbur, Lauterbur, Mary Elise
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. When a pathogen infects a new host species, it
can cause disease. The host species needs to adapt to this new threat through
natural selection. The more disease-causing pathogens there are in the
environment, the more adaptations it needs. Pathogen and disease abundance vary
substantially between different ecosystems because of differences in
temperature, precipitation, and other environmental conditions. However, the
ecological rules and principles that govern pathogen abundance in specific
environments are not well understood. These principles are critical to
understanding how climate and human-wildlife contact impact human, agricultural,
and wildlife diseases. To define the most important ecological principles of
pathogen abundance, the fellow will integrate bat genomics and ecology to
quantify adaptation to pathogens across ecosystems and species, using field
sampling, genome sequencing, and computational methods development. This project
can affect disease management and prediction of climate change impacts on
pathogen spillover. Another major goal is to expand science participation of
local underrepresented students by introducing them to science in their
backyard, the Sonoran Desert.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infectious disease results
from host-pathogen interactions in an environment conducive to transmission. The
resulting patterns of disease prevalence are driven by complex ecological
interactions. By collapsing host-pathogen interactions into their integrated
effect on the host genome as genomic disease adaptation, this project will
develop the RoL describing ecological drivers of disease adaptation. This
relates ecology to disease prevalence at three levels: across species in
different environments (aim 1); within species across populations in different
environments (aim 2); and within populations across time (aim 3). To do so, the
fellow will sequence Myotis bat genomes across multiple ecosystems, develop a
deep-learning pipeline to quantify selective sweeps in virus- and bacteria-
interacting proteins, and correlate ecological characteristics with signatures
of selection using GIS methods. The fellow will gain training in population
genetics and methods development, and create methods and data resources. To
broaden the impact of the work, the fellow will develop science outreach using
native bat biodiversity and the unique Sonoran Desert to increase interest and
science literacy in local first-generation, Hispanic, and Native American high
school and university students, and recruit long-term research
interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.