* 2010774
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Implications of hybridization on  persistence at macroevolutionary and contemporary timescales
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Tyler Chafin, Chafin, Tyler K
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Recent advances in the understanding of
biodiversity have shown the ‘Tree of Life’ to be more like a web, due to
processes such as interbreeding among species (called hybridization) allowing
for the exchange of genes. This underscores the fact that there are multiple
ways in which species can be related—both by inheritance from a shared ancestor
and by mating between individuals of different lineages. This can sometimes
allow for the exchange of critical adaptations or genes underlying key traits.
Although emerging as an important evolutionary mechanism, the consequences of
hybridization on the long-term persistence and adaptability of species is poorly
understood. The research undertaken by the Fellow joins many aspects of genomic,
population, and evolutionary biology with novel computational and statistical
approaches to better understand the role of hybridization in shaping
biodiversity. This project will accelerate research with multiple societal
benefits, for example in understanding genes which underly important traits
(e.g., pesticide resistance) and in predicting how hybridization affects
endangered species in changing environments. The Fellow will also expand STEM
initiatives at multiple levels, including workshops aimed at developing
analytical skills in early-career researchers, extensive involvement of
trainees, and value-added software components for the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research conducted by the Fellow will
examine the role of hybridization in biodiversity dynamics along both
macroevolutionary and contemporary timescales. The first will characterize
empirical phylogenetic signatures of hybridization across comprehensively
sampled focal groups by scaling phylogenetic network inference methods to make
use of high-performance computing. This will be used to test the fates of
hybridizing lineages and provide a comparative framework within which to examine
the interplay between life history, hybridization, and diversification rates.
The second will examine the permeability of species boundaries using time-series
genomic sampling of museum specimens and employ a ‘reverse-ecology’ approach to
seek functional components in the genome which show an adaptive response.
Collectively, these objectives increase understanding of the significance of
hybridization as a fundamental evolutionary process looking ‘backwards’ as a
driver of diversification, and ‘forwards’ as a component of species’
persistence—or extinction—in a changing climate. The impact of the project will
be broadened by developing software and techniques for the research community
and STEM initiatives for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.