* 2010706
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020:Consequences of reductive evolution on cell wall metabolism in the obligate intracellular bacterium Rickettsia parkeri
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Wanda Figueroa-Cuilan, Figueroa-Cuilan, Wanda Melissa
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Bacteria are
single-celled microbes that have evolved to colonize a wide variety of natural
environments including soil, lakes, and even the depths of the ocean. Some
bacteria have evolved to become dependent on hosts, forming beneficial
(endosymbiotic) or detrimental (pathogenic) associations. The Rickettsiales are
bacteria that grow exclusively inside a host cell and may be transmitted to
mammals by ticks and other arthropods. Through evolution, the Rickettsiales have
lost many genes that support essential activities, leading to their strict
dependence on the host for growth. While the understanding of processes that
allow growth of free-living organisms is well-developed, knowledge of these
processes in bacteria that live within host cells is limited due to a lack of
tools. Through this award, the fellow will translate technologies available for
free-living organisms to understand how bacteria residing inside host cells grow
and replicate, focusing on a member of the Rickettsiales. The project has the
potential to impact insect biology and to provide novel bacterial or host
targets for the next generation of antimicrobial drugs. In addition, the project
will develop a graduate student and postdoctoral trainee mentoring program,
called BRIDGE, to enhance diversity by maximizing graduate student advancement
and retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Rickettsia parkeri as a
representative member of the Rickettsiales, the objectives of this project are
(1) to implement live and fixed microscopy methods for quantitatively evaluating
growth of single bacterial cells within the host cell and (2) to characterize R.
parkeri slow-growing mutants. To address these objectives, the fellow will
develop live time-lapse and fixed microscopy with probes for active cell wall
synthesis coupled to quantitative image analysis tools. This approach will
establish methods for quantifying parameters of growth in intracellular
bacteria. Second, the fellow will characterize intracellular growth and cell
wall metabolism of slow-growing mutants in the cell wall recycling pathway
factor AmpG. During execution of this project, the fellow will receive training
by the sponsor scientist and a postdoctoral advisory committee, and will
leverage resources available at the Professional Development and Career Office
at Johns Hopkins University. Finally, the fellow will broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups by creating a mentoring program called BRIDGE. The
core of the program involves matching URM postdocs as mentors to graduate
students from diversity and inclusion-oriented organizations at Johns Hopkins
University to help graduate students develop and meet their individual
development plan goals while advancing postdoctoral
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.