* 2010633
* Supporting students' language, knowledge and culture through science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sue Ann Bottoms, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,923,581.00

The Language, Culture, and Knowledge-building through Science project seeks to
explore and positively influence the work of science teachers at the
intersection of three significant and ongoing challenges affecting U.S. STEM
education. First, U.S. student demographics are rapidly changing, with an
increasing number of students learning STEM subjects in their second language.
This change means that all teachers need new skills for meeting students where
they currently are, linguistically, culturally, and in terms of prior science
knowledge. Second, the needs and opportunities of the national STEM workforce
are changing rapidly within a shifting employment landscape. This shift means
that teachers need to better understand future job opportunities and the
knowledge and skills that will be necessary in those careers. Third, academic
expectations in schools have changed, driven by changes in education standards.
These new expectations mean that teachers need new skills to support all
students to master a range of practices that are both conceptual and linguistic.
To address these challenges, teachers require new models that bring together
current research about the role of language in science learning, the role of
cultural connections in students’ science engagement, and how students’ science
knowledge builds over time. This project begins with such an initial model,
developed collaboratively with science teachers in a prior project. The model
will be rigorously tested and refined in a new geographic and demographic
context. The outcome will be to provide an integrated framework that can guide
current and future science teachers in preparing all students with the
conceptual and linguistic practices they will need to succeed in school and in
the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project model starts with three
theoretical constructs that have been integrated into an innovative framework of
nine practices. These practices guide teachers in how to simultaneously support
students’ language development, cultural sustenance, and knowledge building
through science with a focus on supporting and challenging multilingual
learners. The project uses a functional view of language development, which
highlights the need to support students in understanding both how and why to
make shifts in language use. For example, students’ attention will be drawn to
differences in language use when they shift from language that is suited to peer
negotiation in a lab group to written explanations suitable for a lab report.
Moving beyond a funds of knowledge approach to culture, the team view of
integrating students’ cultural knowledge includes strengthening the role of home
knowledge in school, but also guiding students to apply school knowledge to
their out-of-school interests and passions. Finally, the project team’s view of
cumulative knowledge building, informed by work in the sociology of knowledge,
highlights the need for teachers and students to understand the norms for
meaning making within a given discipline. In the case of science, the three-
dimensional learning model in the Next Generation Science Standards makes these
disciplinary norms visible and serves as a launching point for the project’s
work. Teachers will be supported to structure learning opportunities that
highlight what is unique about meaning making through science. Using a range of
data collection and analysis methods, the project team will study changes in
teachers’ practices and beliefs related to language, culture and knowledge
building, as teachers work with all students, and particularly with multilingual
learners. The project work will take place in both classrooms and out of class
science learning settings. By working closely over several years with a group of
fifty science teachers spread across the state of Oregon, the project team will
develop a typology of teachers (design personas) to increase the field’s
understanding of how to support different teachers, given their own backgrounds,
in preparing all students for the broad range of academic and occupational
pathways they will encounter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.