* 2010896
* SBIR Phase I:  Agent-based Cognitive Assistant for Enabling Intelligent Space Operations
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Reuben Garcia, Masten Space Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2021
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I project is to process
extremely large data sets efficiently. The sheer abundance of aerospace data is
simply too overwhelming for an individual or team to have command of and control
from memory and experience. This project will develop a system that can provide
additional support through machine learning (ML) applied to big data sets where
different types of data are integrated. It can aid civilian and military
readiness, access, and speed during all phases of system development, as it
reduces lifecycle cost and improves information access during production, test,
verification, operations, and support. This capability can be applied to
aerospace and non-aerospace test environments, long spaceflight missions, and
other contexts where information in a large document set requires instant
accessibility and provides optimal actionable intelligence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project demonstrates the application of agent-based cognitive assistance in a
real-world space operations environment, integrating machine learning (ML) and
Natural Language Processing (NLP) analytical tools. To improve the speed and
lower the cost of human decision making, the latest state-of-the-art
developments in search, indexing, computational linguistics, and broadly
speaking, machine learning and natural language processing, can be leveraged to
simplify and improve the accessibility of a huge corpus of highly technical
documentation. This project will demonstrate that all types of large datasets,
including text in a multitude of formats, numerical, geospatial, structured and
unstructured, can be interrogated using an advanced distributed open-source
search engine. The information value of the search engine results is enhanced by
analyzing metadata produced from NLP ML algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.