* 2010703
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020:  Phospholipid metabolism  adaptations in Zea mays under low temperature and low nutrients
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Allison Barnes, Barnes, Allison C
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Allison Barnes is “Phospholipid metabolism
adaptations in Zea mays under low temperature and low nutrients.” The host
institution for the fellowship is North Carolina State University and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Rubén Rellán-Álvarez.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
climate changes, crops must adjust to more and different environmental stresses.
By understanding how crops adapted to the changes and stresses associated with
domestication and migration, genes responsible for stress tolerance can be
identified. One example of this is maize. It was domesticated in the valleys of
Mexico, but was later moved to the highlands and had to become tolerant to the
stresses of lower temperatures and less nutrient-rich soil. During times of
stress, modification of cell membranes is crucial for survival. Thus, a specific
target for this project is the synthesis of the building blocks of cell
membranes, lipid biosynthesis. The research funded here will facilitate training
in methods used to analyze or modify membrane lipid biosynthesis. The results
will advance the field of plant biology, specifically in understanding how
lipids respond to stress. They can be applied to the plant biotechnology and
seed corn industry by identifying genes that can be modified to engineer more
stress-tolerant crops to improve yield. Resources from this work will be turned
into basic experiments and disseminated through volunteering with Wake County
4-H. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role of phospholipid metabolism in
maize adaptations to abiotic stresses such as cold and phosphorus deficiency
will be one of the primary goals for the project. After domestication, maize
migrated from a hot, tropical environment to a cold and phosphorus-deficient
highland environment. It was found that phospholipid metabolism and, in
particular, genes involved in the synthesis and degradation of phospholipids,
are under selection in highland maize. In this project, some of the candidate
genes involved will be functionally characterize, using maize mutants and
heterologous expression systems in yeast. Finally, the possible contribution of
highland alleles of these genes to temperate maize adaptation to cold
environments in North America and Europe will be explored. Short-term, this
research will deepen understanding of lipid metabolism and its role in local
adaptation, advancing the NPGI goal of developing tools that aid in precision
plant breeding targets for sustainable systems. Long-term, this characterization
platform can be translated and applied to other metabolism genes that are
important for plant adaptation to abiotic stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.