* 2010357
* Collaborative Research: SimSnap: Orchestrating Collaborative Learning in Biology through Reconfigurable Simulations
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,151,812.00

The project will develop and research collaborative learning in biology using
tablet-style computers that support simulations of biological systems and that
can be used individually or linked together. The project will be implemented
over 4 years in middle school life science classes, in which students will solve
important socio-scientific problems, such as growing healthy plants in community
gardens to address the need to grow sufficient produce to fulfill ever
increasing and varying demands. Working within a digital plant habitat
simulation, students will investigate how different environmental and genetic
factors affect the health of a variety of plants and vegetables. As students
engage in design tasks, they will be able to seamlessly move between individual
and collaborative work with peers by “snapping” their tablets together (by
placing them next to each other) to create a single shared simulation that spans
all their devices. Students will be able to drop elements of their individual
inquiry activities (e.g., plant types, soil compositions) into their shared
simulation, providing opportunities for collaborative discussion and knowledge
integration. When students “unsnap” their tablets, their collaborative work will
stay with them in a digital journal, for individual reflection or as a resource
for future collaborative activities (with potentially new group members).
Project curriculum units will help students see the connections between the
science concepts and principles they are learning, as they iteratively work on
their designs through a combination of individual, collaborative and whole class
learning. This work will also develop new approaches that help teachers
understand the state of the class when students are taking part open-ended
biology investigations, and support the teacher classroom orchestration and
facilitation. Project research findings, materials and software will be made
available to interested teachers, administrators, policymakers, and researchers
nationwide on the project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
research collaborative learning along three planes–individual, small group and
whole class–with technologies and classroom teachers supporting learning in
innovative ways. Research has shown that technology can support collaborative
learning, but there is limited research on how it can support transitions
between individual and collaborative learning. While research has also shown
that collaborative or individual learning may be more beneficial depending on
the task or learning goal, there are relatively few studies that examine the
potential for learning when students move between these social planes. Further,
as these configurations become increasingly complex, there is also the challenge
of how to support teachers’ orchestration and facilitation. Studies will focus
around four main research questions: 1) How does engaging in personally relevant
biology curriculum through user-driven investigations help students understand
the underlying science content? 2) How are students using and sharing the work
of others to develop their own understanding about the underlying science
concepts? 3) How do designs that allow for the movement between individual,
small group, and whole class configurations allow students to work as a learning
community? 4) How does the technology platform support teachers in orchestrating
and facilitating classroom activities? Project studies will follow a design-
based research methodology, guided by the premise that learning in naturalistic
settings is the product of multiple interacting variables that cannot be reduced
to a small set of controlled factors. The research will be broken down across
four main developmental arcs: Technology design and iteration; Facilitation,
user testing, and co-design; Classroom implementation; and Research and
analysis. Each of the designed technologies will be user tested in the lab prior
to being deployed in the classroom. Part of the analysis will focus on how the
different technologies (i.e., individual and connected tablets, the teacher
orchestration tablet) support learning and collaboration in naturalistic
settings. The project research framework provides a way to examine the
usability, usefulness and impact of interactions in a multi-user collaborative
context using a mixed-method approach with various quantitative measures and
qualitative indicators. Teachers will be prepared to use the system through
2-week summer institutes, during which they will also participate in co-design
of the curriculum and the technology. Project research findings, materials and
software will be made available to interested teachers, administrators,
policymakers, and researchers nationwide on the project website, as well as
being disseminated to appropriate audiences via conference presentations and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.