* 2010778
* Novel Continuous Structural and Functional Networks and Prediction of Individual Cognition
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Moo Chung, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 12/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

In recent years, human brain networks have received great attention since they
describe comprehensive maps of structural and functional connections in the
brain in relation to cognition, neuropsychiatric and genetics. Existing methods
for network analysis partition the brain into a few hundred regions. Functional
or structural information is then overlaid on top of the parcellation for
further analysis. However, the parcellation of a few hundred regions cannot
fully characterize potential differences in the brain anatomy and function among
individuals. This project will tackle the challenge by developing
computationally efficient mathematical models for building continuous brain
networks. We will demonstrate the various uses of the new models including the
prediction of individual cognitive abilities. The project will produce new
algorithms in network models, deep learning and accompanying codes and processed
data that will serve as a testbed for the development of more advanced methods.
The impact of the project goes beyond the intended applications and will support
more advanced methods in other areas. The project has great potential to reshape
the research on how networks are constructed and analyzed. We expect that the
continuous brain networks characterize the fundamental nature of individual
brains and improve the predictive power to individual differences in terms of
cognitive abilities. The project will also provide versatile an open-source
toolbox of algorithms for modeling and visualizing large-scale functional and
structural brain networks continuously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers who use
existing brain parcellations for building and analyzing brain network models
face several challenges: 1) the inherent limitations of using predetermined
parcellations for understanding brain organizations in multiple spatial scales;
2) conflicting network topology over the choice of parcellation; 3) decreased
sensitivity over multimodal integration. These have been raised as major
challenges for the connectome-based prediction of individual cognitive
abilities. The prediction models may not perform optimally if the boundary of
the brain parcels does not fit the data well. Further, the specific choice of
brain parcellations may bias prediction outcomes. Given these limitations, the
main goal of the project is to develop computationally efficient mathematical
models for building continuous functional and structural brain networks without
using existing brain parcellations. Using these novel network constructions, we
will develop new computationally efficient deep learning approaches that
incorporate the proposed network geometry and predict individual cognitive
abilities without relying on predefined parcellations. We will demonstrate the
use of the continuous networks to understand brain organizations in multiscale
levels and predict individual cognitive abilities such as intelligence, working
memory, attention and cognitive controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
being co-funded by the CISE Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) through
the CRCNA and BRAIN Programs, and the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences
(DMS) through the Mathematical Biology Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.