* 2010365
* Study of Wavelength Dependence of Plasma Collision Dynamics and Ionization Mechanism in Laser Solid Matter Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Bonggu Shim, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 350,821.00

This research project will improve the understanding of plasma collision
dynamics when high power lasers interact with solid materials. With more than
99.9% of visible matter in the universe known to be in a plasma state, it is
important to understand the physics of particle ionization, charge collision,
and light propagation and absorption in a plasma. One method for producing and
studying plasma in laboratories is using high power lasers. When materials are
irradiated by high power lasers, bound electrons in atoms and molecules can be
freed (i.e., ionized) and thus plasma is created. Laser-plasma interactions
during and after material ionization exhibit a lot of interesting phenomena. For
example, free electron acceleration by lasers can produce high-energy radiation
such as ultraviolet and x-ray light when the accelerated electrons collide with
ions. In this project, the laser wavelength dependence of the plasma collision
dynamics in solids will be experimentally and theoretically investigated. This
project will also promote basic science education to groups who have been
traditionally underrepresented in science by hosting science camps for
grandparent-headed families and for middle school students of rural
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since electron collision plays an important role
in plasmas, systematic studies on the electron collision frequency are critical
for understanding the laser plasma interaction correctly. In this project, the
plasma dynamics in solids under laser irradiation will be experimentally studied
by measuring both electron collision times and plasma densities using
femtosecond-time-resolved interferometry. In particular, the effect of the
driver wavelength on plasma dynamics will be investigated. The experiments will
also be benchmarked against computer simulations of laser matter interactions.
This research will significantly contribute to furthering understanding of
wavelength scaling of the laser matter interaction in solids. Furthermore, this
study will impact laser-plasma-based technology such as laser-plasma
accelerators and provide guidance for high energy density physics using terawatt
and petawatt peak power lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.