* 2010666
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Broadening participation of  Native Americans in STEM fields by investigating pulmonary adaptations among marine  mammals
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Robert Cieri, Cieri, Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The broad
objective of this research project is to investigate how the lungs of marine
mammals have adapted to ocean life using medical imaging and fluid dynamics
simulations. Many marine mammals completely empty and fill their huge lungs
quickly at the surface, rapidly transporting large volumes of air. During diving
their lungs must either resist the high pressure or collapse and re-inflate at
the surface without injury. Changes in lung shape may alter gas mixing and
blood-gas exchange. These investigations will provide insights into marine
mammal evolution, and lung structure and function, leading to advances in
respiratory fluid simulations. The fellow will leverage cultural connections
between Coastal Salish persons and marine mammals to broaden the impact of the
work. Broadening participation activities include outreach to the Coastal Salish
community, showcasing the science at summer camps and mentorship programs, to
increase interest and retention of Native American students in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will use computed tomography, computational
fluid dynamics and plesmography to characterize the structure and function of
marine mammal lungs. Specifically, a range of pinnipeds and cetaceans will be
investigated to ask: (1) How does airway geometry evolve with maximum diving
depth and mode of surface ventilation? (2) What morphology corresponds to
airways that resist vs. deform during airway collapse, and what ecological
traits are related to the type of airway collapse? (3) How do the pulmonary
airflow patterns of marine mammals differ from terrestrial mammals and vary with
ventilatory mode and habitual or maximum diving depth? The fellow will utilize
cultural connections between Coastal Salish persons and marine mammals to
promote participation of groups underrepresented in biology by (1) recruiting
Native America students into STEM education through interactive lung biology
activities at pre-established camps and summer science programs; (2) increasing
STEM outcomes for current Native American students by partnering with the
Aboriginal Undergraduate Mentoring program to mentor students on the project
and; (3) increase connections with Native American communities outside of the
academy through collaborative symposia held at the First Nations Longhouse and
Xwi7xwa library on campus and a collaborative natural history museum
exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.