* 2010942
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Jeannine Richards, Richards, Jeannine Hyde
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. In tropical forests, orchids, bromeliads, ferns, and many other
species grow as epiphytes, suspended on tree branches without connection to the
ground. Because they grow high above the forest floor, epiphytes are difficult
to study, so little is known about their ecology and physiology. However, they
may be at great risk from climatic changes in temperature and precipitation.
Many epiphyte species have long been favored by collectors and are well
represented in botanical garden hothouses around the world. This research
investigates whether, instead of accessing wild plants, these living collections
can be used to gather data to help us understand how epiphytes may respond to
these changes and inform conservation efforts. The Fellow will also use a
citizen science approach for creating a public education platform as well as
involving undergraduate students of diverse backgrounds in research activities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Functional traits are morphological, anatomical, and
physiological measurements that can be used to characterize an organismâ€™s
relationship to its environment. The Fellow will collect these measurements on
300 epiphyte species housed at U.S. and international botanical gardens. These
data will be used to test relationships between traits and climate variables and
to compare the trait values with those of terrestrial plants. To investigate the
conservation implications of the findings, the Fellow will combine trait data
with species distribution models to analyze epiphyte vulnerability to climate
change. The Fellow will then develop recommendations for using living
collections to gather functional trait data that will pave the way for large-
scale functional trait analyses of plant species that are difficult to find or
hard to measure in the wild. In the process, the Fellow will receive valuable
training in making plant physiological measurements and using species
distribution modeling. Together with a group of ecologists and botanical garden
staff, the Fellow will also explore the philosophical divide between cultivated
plants and ecological research and make broad recommendations for their
integration. At each botanical garden the Fellow will give a public presentation
geared for non-scientists about the unusual aerial lifestyle of epiphytes and
how it informs their physiology, and author a similar popular press article. The
Fellow will also develop methods to engage botanical garden visitors in citizen
science functional trait data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.