* 2010450
* NSF-BSF: Collaborative Research: Rankine-Hugoniot Conditions Relating the Gyrotropic Regions of Collisionless Shocks in Non-Thermal Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Nikolai Pogorelov, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 197,177.00

This project will develop a new and more accurate model of shock waves in
rarefied plasmas in space and laboratory environments. So-called collisionless
shock waves belong to the most fundamental phenomena occurring in hot and
rarified plasmas. Astrophysical waves accelerate particles, dissipate energy,
and strongly perturb the environment they propagate through by converting
dynamic pressure of a plasma flow into thermal energy. One of the central
theoretical issues in modern plasma physics is a quantitative prediction of the
plasma state behind a shock wave (downstream) for given parameters in front of
it (upstream). The majority of directly observed collisionless shocks are in the
heliosphere; however, they can also be created in a laboratory. The grand
challenge of this project is to develop a new theoretical approach that would,
on the one hand, account for the details of how individual particles interact
with shock waves in collisionless plasma, but on the other hand, identify easy-
to-use relationships between upstream and downstream conditions, similar to
those widely used for shock waves in aerodynamics. The project will train
students and postdocs in computational science and plasma physics, as well as
expose them to international science cooperation via collaboration with Ben
Gurion University supported by the U.S. - Israel Binational Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collisionless shocks (CSs) are ubiquitous in
many space physics, astrophysics, and laboratory settings. Despite more than six
decades of CS research, the present status of the problem remains essentially
unchanged in comparison to the early advances. Application of standard
Rankineâ€“Hugoniot conditions to CSs is either invalid or highly inaccurate. The
objective of this research is to incorporate the essential ion dynamics at shock
fronts into a statistical description which would make it possible, on the one
hand, to avoid going into details of ion motion and, on the other hand, abandon
ad hoc assumptions related to the equations of state. Local hybrid and fully-
kinetic PIC simulations will be used to validate and improve on the
probabilistic, test-particle approach. This research will ensure a substantial
step forward in the CS physics by providing a theory which can be compared
quantitatively with real observations. The probabilistic approach is expected to
be efficient for other problems of plasma physics, where the full kinetic
approach is currently impossible, while the assumptions based on the fluid
approximation are not valid. Its relative simplicity and ability to cover a wide
range of shock parameters makes it possible to create convenient analytic
formulae and/or lookup tables to be used by a wide range of plasma physicists.
These will also be useful for the development of global magnetohydrodynamic
models involving collisionless shocks enabling, in particular, more accurate
forecasting of space weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.