* 2010218
* XII International Symposium (Ethylene 2020) on the Plant Hormone Ethylene
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Brad Binder, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 02/29/2024
* USD 10,000.00

Ethylene is a simple gaseous hormone that has profound effects on the growth and
development of plants. It is a central regulator of growth including the
regulation of fruit ripening, yellowing of leaves, shedding of leaves and
petals, and responses to various stresses and pathogens. Many of these responses
adversely affect crop yield and postharvest storage of fruits and vegetables.
Because of this, much research has focused on understanding the mechanisms
underlying ethylene responses. The goal of this meeting is to bring together
established scientists and early career scientists including graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers, to discuss the mechanisms by which ethylene
functions. The research that will be discussed at this meeting is highly
relevant to the agriculture, economy, and food security of the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference program covers ethylene signaling and
biosynthesis across a range of scales from biochemical to organismal. This
includes information on the structure-function of key ethylene signaling pathway
components, spatial and temporal changes of these key components within the
cell, and the output networks that control responses including impacts on other
hormone systems. Information presented at this meeting will include experiments
performed in the model organism Arabidopsis, as well as non-model crop plants,
basal lineage plants, and microbes. This conference will provide an important
opportunity for researchers to exchange the most recent research on the
mechanisms by which ethylene affects plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.