* 2010754
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Genomic and Morphological Consequences of Landscape-Level Hybridization between Wild and Domesticated Congeners
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Michael Schummer, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 145,648.00

Domestication of wild animals was important in the evolution of human societies.
However, traits that make animals suitable in domestic settings can make them
poorly suited for life in the wild. The release of domesticated animals into the
wild often results in widespread hybridization with their wild cousins (e.g., in
fish, pigs, cows, ducks, plants), potentially introducing domesticated traits
into wild populations. The consequences of such hybridization could include
declines in abundance because of reduced survival and reproduction of wild
populations. The mallard duck is one of the most recognized species in the
world, and has been a primary source for many of today’s popular domestic duck
breeds. Unfortunately, the intentional release of captive-reared mallards in
North America over the last century has resulted in widespread hybridization
with wild mallards, particularly in eastern North America. This project will
examine the genetic and morphological qualities of today’s distinct North
American mallard populations in order to understand how hybridization has
affected the wild populations, and how it may affect the species' future
viability in the wild. This project will contribute to the development of human
resources at the undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral levels. This work
will also have implications for the management and conservation of this
important game bird.&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate the propensity
for genetic material to move during gene flow events between domesticated and
wild mallards at a landscape level. They will apply a comprehensive set of
molecular techniques to geographically broad species-wide sample sets from
contemporary populations, and will extend genetic sampling 100 to 150 years into
the past using ancient DNA approaches with museum specimens. Using 3D
morphometric analysis of museum specimens, as well as feeding trails with live
wild and domesticated mallards, they will examine how the movement of traits
associated with domesticated birds (e.g., bill morphologies that affect feeding
efficacy) into wild populations may affect the adaptability of wild populations.
The researchers are set to address three broad aims: (1) Understanding the
origins and timing of development of a domestic x wild hybrid swarm of mallards
in North America by assessing molecular changes in wild mallards over
approximately the last century, (2) Determining how the combination of gene flow
with varying selective regimes (i.e., natural versus artificial selection) and
demographic histories affect estimates of molecular diversity and divergence, by
comparing the genomes of domestic and wild variants of the mallard, and (3)
Understanding the potential importance of morphological traits for population
viability, and whether domesticated traits are both increasingly prevalent and
maladaptive in wild settings, by assessing morphological and foraging efficiency
differences between domestic and wild variants of the
mallard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.