* 2010370
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Michael Veling, Veling, Michael T
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research will examine how specialized
proteins from organisms like water bears help them survive extreme conditions
with the long-term goal of developing products to stabilize a diversity of
biological materials. Learning how these proteins function will allow us to
stabilize delicate biological systems such as protein-based drugs, probiotics,
and even cell therapies to be deployed in remote environments. Previous work
indicates that a class of intrinsically disordered proteins is important in
surviving extreme conditions. It has been shown that transplanting one of these
proteins from water bears to bacteria can significantly improve its dry
resistance. Developing this technology further could lead to dry stable storage
of live bacteria that can survive extreme conditions including freeze drying,
storage, and distribution which could significantly increase the availability of
live probiotic drugs, and biosensors to remote areas of the world. The project
will also encourage student-centered research and educational practices through
a globally diverse non-profit organization devoted to the discipline of
synthetic biology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The underlying hypothesis for this
work is that this class of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) is
protective against extreme conditions such as desiccation, freeze drying, and
radiation. This hypothesis will be tested by first identifying proteins that are
likely protective by examining expression and experimental data to identify
proteins that may confer such protective capabilities. Next, these proteins will
be tested for protective capabilities in a variety of scenarios. These include
the in-vitro protection of enzyme activity for enzymes like Lactate
Dehydrogenase (LDH) against heat denaturation, and the in-vivo ability to slow
pathogenic processes such as immune activation and cell death in human tissue
culture. Protein designs that successfully mitigate damage will be studied
further to identify key properties that can be accentuated for further
protective capacity. These designs will be the basis of products that can
protect delicate biological structures from damage. Through this work, the
Fellow will gain in depth research experience with synthetic biology with the
long-term goal of running his own industrial or academic lab as well as
developing teaching and mentoring skills using the International Genetically
Engineered Machine (iGEM) as a hub for these
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.