* 2010322
* Learning Progressions in Science: Analyzing and Deconstructing the Multiple Dimensions in Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Linda Morell, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,304.00

Assessments are a crucial tool to enable the success of teaching and learning in
science classrooms. Hence, to realize the vision of current reform efforts
assessments must be developed that (a) measure the higher order cognitive skills
that are essential to those reforms, and (b) that report results in ways that
are readily accessible and interpretable. Through this project, researchers will
develop internet-based assessments that capture such learning outcomes. These
assessments can influence policy and practice by providing tangible products
that exemplify the kind of learning outcomes and performances expected in
today's science classrooms. The measures will also ensure that all students are
assessed fairly. This project has the potential to enable students to express
their knowledge and skills in a variety of ways which are less demanding and
more creative than typical in traditional
assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will develop assessment materials
aligned to the Next Generation Science Standards practice of scientific
argumentation, the cross-cutting concept of patterns, and content in each of the
following foundational middle school science domains - physical, life, and Earth
sciences. Researchers will work closely with administrators and educators to
ensure the relevance and alignment of materials to teachers’ needs. Data will be
gathered from middle and high school students from ethnically, culturally, and
linguistically diverse school districts in California and Arizona. Key measures
to be developed include embedding questions about patterns into the nine
existing scenarios (tasks) and in new scenarios about natural resources. The
team will develop assessments that can be used in both open-ended and selected
response formats, to enhance their usefulness to teachers for diagnostic
understanding, and their efficiency for summative classroom use. Data will also
be gathered from teachers, to help develop interpretational materials. Teachers
will have access, in real time, to their own students’ responses, and estimates
of students’ performance on learning progressions within each of the science
practices, crosscutting concepts and domains mentioned. The team will use the
BEAR Assessment System to develop and refine assessment materials. This system
is an integrated approach to developing assessments that seeks to provide
meaningful interpretations of student work relative to cognitive and
developmental goals. The researchers will gather empirical evidence to develop
and improve the assessment materials, and then gather reliability and validity
evidence to support their use. In total, item response data will be collected
from several thousand students across the two districts. Student response data
will be analyzed using multidimensional item response theory models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.