* 2010256
* An Interdisciplinary Approach to Supporting Computer Science in Rural Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Michael Berson, CodeVA
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,990,460.00

Strengthening computer science (CS) and computational thinking (CT) education is
a national priority with particular attention to increasing the number of
teachers prepared to deliver computer science courses. For rural schools, that
collectively serve more than 10 million students, it is especially challenging.
Rural schools find it difficult to recruit and retain STEM teachers that are
prepared to teach computer science and computational thinking. This project will
develop, test, and refine a "train-the-trainer" professional development model
for rural teacher-leaders. The project will build teachers' self-efficacy to
deliver computer science concepts and practices into middle school social
studies classrooms. The project is led by CodeVA (a statewide non-profit in
Virginia), in partnership with TERC (a STEM-focused national research
institution) and the University of South Florida College of Education, and in
collaboration with six rural school districts in Virginia. The project goal is
to design and develop a professional development model that supports teachers
integrating culturally relevant computer science skills and practices into their
middle school social studies classrooms, thereby broadening rural students'
participation in computer science. The professional development model will be
designed and developed around meeting rural teachers, where they are,
geographically, economically, and culturally. The model will also be sustainable
and will work within the resource constraints of the rural school district. The
model will also be built on strategies that will broadly spread CS education
while building rural capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a
mixed-methods research approach to understand the model's potential to build
capacity for teaching CS in rural schools. The research design is broken down
into four distinct phases; planning/development prototyping, piloting and
initial dissemination, an efficacy study, and analysis, and dissemination. The
project will recruit 45 teacher-leaders and one district-level instructional
coach, 6th and 7th-grade teachers, and serve over 1900 6th and 7th-grade
students. Participants will be recruited from the rural Virginia school
districts of Buchanan, Russell, Charlotte, Halifax, and Northampton. The
research question for phase 1 is what is each district's existing practice
around computer science education (if any) and social studies education? Phases
2, 3 and 4 research will examine the effectiveness of professional development
on teacher leadership and the CS curricular integration. Phase 4 research will
examine teacher efficacy to implement the professional development
independently, enabling district teachers to integrate CS into their social
studies classes. Teacher data sources for each phase include interviews with
administrators and teachers, teacher readiness surveys, observations, an
examination of artifacts, and CS/CT content interviews. Student data will
consist of classroom observation and student attitude surveys. Quantitative and
qualitative data will be triangulated to address each set of research questions
and provide a reliability check on findings. Qualitative data, such as
observations/video, and interview data will be analyzed through codes that
represent expected themes and patterns related to teachers’ and coaches’
experiences. Project results will be communicated through presentations at
conferences such as Special Interest Group on Computer Science Education, the
Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA), the National Council for Social
Studies (NCSS), and the American Educational Research Association. Lesson plans
will be made available on the project website, and links will be provided
through publications and newsletters such as the NCSS Middle-Level Learner, NCSS
Social Education, CSTA the Voice, the NSF-funded CADREK12 website and the NSF-
funded STEM Video Showcase. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.