* 2010309
* Functional genomics of high-altitude adaptation in a non-human primate model
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Noah Snyder-Mackler, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 394,010.00

Life at high altitude is associated with many physiological challenges,
including exposure to low oxygen levels and cold temperatures. Consequently,
most animals living at high altitude have been under strong selection to develop
adaptations to these environmental challenges. Identifying adaptations in high-
altitude-living animals, including non-human primates, could help illuminate the
mechanisms underlying adaptive evolution of many traits. The central goal of
this project is to identify these adaptations in a novel non-human primate
model, the gelada monkey. The findings will advance our knowledge of how genetic
changes lead to high-altitude adaptations in an important primate model system.
The project will provide rigorous scientific training at the postdoctoral,
graduate, and undergraduate levels. The investigators will also engage in public
outreach and international research collaborations, contributing to scientific
education and conservation efforts both domestically and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an innovative, robust, and
multi-disciplinary framework, combining theories and tools from evolutionary
biology, genomics, molecular biology, and biological anthropology, to
investigate genetic adaptations to high altitude in a non-human primate. The
project has two aims: (1) to generate and use a well-annotated gelada genome and
regulatory map to identify gene families that have undergone gene expansion and
genes under positive selection in gelada monkeys compared to their close
phylogenetic relatives, and (2) to identify candidate loci that show signatures
of positive selection in high-altitude geladas. The project will identify genes
and family expansions whose role in high-altitude adaptations was previously
unknown or poorly understood. The project also represents the application of
cutting-edge techniques for the sequencing of animal genomes from non-invasive
samples, thereby encouraging genomic analyses in wild organisms historically
constrained by sample availability. Recent advances in high throughput genomic
technologies, including the approaches the PI and co-PI have developed, have
allowed researchers to identify genes and loci under selection in captivity and
the wild. Together, the results of these studies will generate new hypotheses
and predictions for high-altitude and other adaptations in humans and other
animals through identification of genetic variants in a novel system. By
identifying novel molecular changes that allow a close primate relative to
thrive in hypoxic and cold environments, this project may also have
translational implications for understanding human diseases of impaired oxygen
intake and transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.