* 2010223
* Collaborative Research: How Deep Structural Modeling Supports Learning with Big Ideas in Biology
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Daniel Capps, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2024
* USD 549,688.00

This project addresses the pressing need to more effectively organize STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) teaching and learning around
“big ideas” that run through science disciplines. This need is forcefully
advanced by policy leaders including the National Research Council and the
College Board. They point out that learning is more effective when students
organize and link information within a consistent knowledge framework, which is
what big ideas should provide. Unfortunately, finding ways to teach big ideas
effectively—so they become useful as knowledge frameworks— is a significant
challenge. Deep structure modeling (DSM), the innovation advanced in this
project, is designed to meet this challenge in the context of high school
biology. In DSM, students learn a big idea as the underlying, or “deep”
structure of a set of examples that contain the structure, but with varying
outward details. As learners begin to apprehend the deep structure (i.e., the
big idea) within the examples, they use the tools and procedures of scientific
modeling to express and develop it. According to theories of learning that
undergird DSM, the result of this process should be a big idea that is flexible,
meaningful, and easy to express, thus providing an ideal framework for making
sense of new information learners encounter (i.e., learning with the big idea).
To the extent that this explanation is born out in rigorous research tests and
within authentic curriculum materials, it contributes important knowledge about
how teaching and learning can be organized around big ideas, and not only for
deep structural modeling but for other instructional approaches as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has twin research and prototype development
components. Both are taking place in the context of high school biology, in nine
classrooms across three districts, supporting up to 610 students. The work
focuses on three design features of DSM: (1) embedding model source materials
with intuitive, mechanistic ideas; (2) supporting learners to abstract those
ideas as a deep structure shared by a set of sources; and (3) representing this
deep structure efficiently within the model. In combination, these features
support students to understand an abstract, intuitively rich, and efficient
knowledge structure that they subsequently use as a framework to interpret,
organize, and link disciplinary content. A series of five research studies build
on one another to develop knowledge about whether and how the design features
bring about these anticipated effects. Earlier studies in the sequence are
small-scale classroom experiments randomly assigning students to either deep
structural modeling or to parallel, non modeling controls. Measures discriminate
for the anticipated effects during learning and on posttests. Later studies use
qualitative methods to carefully trace the anticipated effects over time and
across topics. As a group, these studies are contributing generalized knowledge
of how learners can effectively abstract and represent big ideas and how these
ideas can be leveraged as frameworks for learning content with understanding.
Two research-tested biology curriculum prototypes are being developed as the
studies evolve: a quarter-year DSM biology curriculum centered on energy; and an
eighth-year DSM unit centered on natural selection. The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students
and teachers, through the research and development of new innovations and
approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.