* 2010292
* Targeted Infusion Project:  Infusion of Cyber, Research, and Peer-Led Team Learning to Enhance Minority STEM Majors' Mathematics Performance and Coding Experience
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Anna Harris, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2024
* USD 396,167.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
aspires to enhance minority STEM majors’ mathematics performance and coding
experiences by incorporating cyber, research, and peer-led team learning (PLTL)
strategies into calculus courses. This work is important as it addresses the
need to reform mathematics instruction to enhance student learning in those
courses, courses that are integral to students successfully earning STEM
degrees. The project seeks to re-design existing courses in a manner that has
already proved successful in other lower-level, algebra courses. If successful,
this project will be integral to reducing the student attrition rate in STEM
courses. It will (1) aid the ongoing transformation of the course delivery of
the institution’s math courses, (2) equip the university’s STEM faculty with
additional tools for supporting improved student performance in the STEM
courses, and (3) directly increase larger numbers of students who are prepared
for entry in the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to increase passing rates of Calculus I and II courses by utilizing evidence
based (EB) instructional methods. The specific aims of the project are to (1)
provide a 2-week summer faculty development workshop in coding and Evidence
Based (EB) instructions, (2) design and implement EB instructional Calculus I
and Calculus II courses, and (3) train and mentor PLTL leaders. The PIs will use
three EB methods to teach Calculus: Julia computer programing, PLTL, and
WebAssign. Through PLTL workshops, students will enhance their math knowledge as
well as their social skills. Instructors will attend summer workshops to obtain
Julia computer programming skills and other EB instructional methods, enabling
them to effectively utilize EB methods to enhance students’ learning experiences
and ultimately improve passing, retention, and graduation rates. The PIs and
participating faculty will present project outcomes at regional and national
meetings that pertain to mathematics. These include, but are not limited to,
Mathematics Association of America and the American Mathematics Society. Project
results will also be presented at educational conferences (such as the America
Association of Colleges and Universities), at research forums at the university,
and at the HBCU-UP/CREST PI meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.