* 2010251
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Avril Harder, Harder, Avril M
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Fitness can be measured as the number of
offspring produced by an individual and is determined by an individualâ€™s genetic
makeup and the environment. For a population to remain stable, each generation
of individuals must produce a sufficient number of offspring. This research will
investigate the relative roles of individual genetic makeup and the environment
in determining fitness for a population of banner-tailed kangaroo rats. The
results from this work will be used to create a model designed to predict how
fitness, and therefore population stability, respond to changes in the
environment and the genetic properties of a population. This research will shed
light on a fundamental question in evolutionary biology (how fitness is
determined) while also informing conservation and population management
strategies. Describing influences on individual fitness will allow for more
robust predictions of long-term stability for populations threatened by
environmental change or small population size. Outreach will include a report
and a web-based application to relate population genetics concepts to the
public. This will be available as a curriculum plan, reaching a diverse group of
educators and students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The samples to be analyzed in
this project are derived from a fully pedigreed population of banner-tailed
kangaroo rats that has been monitored since 1980. The Fellow will leverage
existing long-term data on this population (familial relationships and lifetime
fitness estimates), generate new whole genomic sequence data, and incorporate
remote sensing data to identify how genomic variants interact with phenotypes
and environmental characteristics to determine individual fitness and,
consequently, long-term population stability. These empirical results will be
used to parameterize a spatially-explicit, agent-based model generalizable to
other natural systems that can be used to predict the effects of changes in
population (e.g., inbreeding, dispersal distances, migration rates) and
environmental properties (e.g., resource availability over space) on population
stability. Because samples used in this research were collected from private
land, the project will include communicating results and discussing land
management implications with landowners. The results of this project will also
be used to build a web application and associated educational materials designed
to teach undergraduate students concepts of population and conservation
genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.