* 2010240
* A Kinetic Investigation of Plasma Instabilities Driven By Energetic Particles
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Damiano Caprioli, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This project will enable better understanding of the generation of cosmic rays
throughout the Universe. The Universe is permeated with plasma, an ionized gas
where magnetic fields and charged particles evolve under their mutual
interaction. A small fraction of the charged particles may be accelerated to
very large energies and, despite being less than one percent in number, affect
the overall plasma in a prominent way. The project aims to study via controlled,
self-consistent numerical plasma simulations the processes through which such
energetic particles generate and are impacted by magnetic fields in the solar
system and other astrophysical environments. The project will train graduate and
undergraduate students, with particular emphasis on attracting underrepresented
minorities into the field, while the new knowledge is likely to improve our
ability to predict space weather and may impact design of future fusion
reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-thermal particles can be produced via several
different physical phenomena such as shocks, magnetic reconnection, and
turbulence, tapping into the free energy of the system, be it kinetic or
magnetic. The streaming of solar energetic particles in the heliosphere and
cosmic rays in astrophysical contexts naturally produces a restoring back-
reaction in the thermal plasma, which leads to tangling/amplification of the
initial magnetic field. Kinetic particle-in-cell simulations will be used to
quantify ab-initio the self-generated scattering of the energetic particles and
how energy is partitioned into electromagnetic fields, plasma heating, and bulk
motions. Instabilities driven by energetic ions and electrons are key to the
phenomenology of diverse space/astrophysical environments, such as collisionless
shocks, the solar wind, and pulsar wind nebulae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.