* 2010868
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Biotic drivers of local adaptation:  Integrating the evolutionary consequences of plant-soil feedbacks into sagebrush
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Allison Simler-Williamson, Allison Simler-Williamson
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. When a population is better suited to its
native environment than populations from other areas are, this is called local
adaptation. Changes such as climate and interaction with other species can
change local adaptation and affect species survival. This research will
investigate the extent to which species interactions shape local adaptation,
focusing on big sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata) populations and the microbial
communities that live in the soil where the shrub grows. Big sagebrush is
threatened, and replanting efforts are being made across a large region of the
western US. However, these restoration efforts often fail. This project will be
important for understanding sagebrush ecology and promoting conservation
efforts. Results will be communicated with stakeholders through partnerships
with the US Geological Survey, as well as through a graphic novel developed by
the fellow. This work will engage diverse undergraduate researchers in a
training program at Boise State University, while furthering the training of the
fellow in mathematical modeling and microbial
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species interactions can generate selection, and
inclusion of biotic selective agents may alter conclusions about a population’s
vulnerability drawn from examining local adaptation based on climate alone. To
quantify the extent to which sagebrush-soil microbe interactions shape local
adaptation, the fellow will construct a common garden experiment that
translocates plant populations and soil across a climatic gradient, sequence
microbial communities, and develop an integral projection model that leverages
short- and long-term data to assess the influence of biotic interactions on
population growth. This research will assess the following hypotheses: 1) Biotic
interactions contribute to local adaptation in sagebrush populations, but
fitness impacts vary with environment, population origin, and demographic stage;
2) Inclusion of biotic interactions alters predictions of populations’ growth
and sensitivity to translocation, compared to those based on abiotic factors
alone. This work has the potential to improve the understanding of higher-order
patterns of phenotypic plasticity and population persistence in rapidly changing
environments. To broaden the impact of the work, the fellow will engage
undergraduates in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.