* 2010826
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Investigating Feedbacks Between Guppy Host Behavior and Gyrodactylid Parasite Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jason Walsman, Walsman, Jason
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research investigates the interactions
between animal social behavior and parasite adaptation. When animals socially
interact often, parasites (such as viruses or worms) transmit between animal
hosts more easily. Faster transmission may lead parasites to change and become
deadlier to hosts. In turn, animals may behaviorally avoid infected individuals,
reducing the spread of deadly parasitic infections. This research tests how host
behavior and parasite evolution interact using mathematical models and
laboratory experiments with a fish host and worm parasite. The results of this
research may prove important for fish aquaculture where the worm parasite
annually causes a great deal of economic damage. Further, this research
addresses fundamental scientific questions of how host behavior interacts with
parasite evolution. Answers to these questions are important for the health of
many species, including humans. Students at multiple academic levels will
participate in this research. Particularly, the fellow will train high school
students from underrepresented groups in the Pittsburgh area to help with the
research. This valuable research experience and the fellow’s mentoring will
improve students’ prospects for college admissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research advances theoretical and empirical understanding of the interactions of
host contact behavior and parasite evolution. The co-sponsor will train the
fellow in mathematical theory. Specifically, theoretical models will link the
individual host-level course of infection to the population-level epidemic
dynamics, an emerging area of epidemiological theory. This framework will
predict the interactions of plastic host contact behavior and parasite
deadliness (virulence) evolution. The sponsor will train the fellow in empirical
work with Trindadian guppies and their flatworm (gyrodactylid) parasites. This
system is particularly suitable since guppies alter their social behavior to
avoid other guppies infected with flatworms. In addition, flatworm numbers on
individual guppies can be measured non-invasively to track the individual-host
course of infection in addition to population-level epidemics. The researchers
predict that more social contact between hosts will select for deadlier
parasites. In turn, deadlier parasites should cause a greater host response to
decrease social contact. These interactions are hypothesized to lead to cycling
of host social behavior and parasite evolution. As part of this work the fellow
will train undergraduate and high school students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.