* 2010972
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Abdel Halloway, Halloway                Abdel
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The goal of
their project is to determine the ecological and environmental contexts which
lead to the evolution and persistence of mutualisms. Mutualisms, interactions in
which each species benefits (e.g., pollination), are quite prevalent throughout
the natural world especially among plant species and play a significant role in
many ecological systems. One key mutualism is that between mycorrhizal fungi and
plants. In this mutualism, individual plants trade sugars and other carbon
compounds for nitrogen, phosphorous, and other minerals from the fungus. The
availability of resources (environment) and competition from other individuals
(ecology) should influence whether or not a plant is better off trading their
resources and engaging in the mutualism. The fellow will experimentally and
mathematically explore how environmental and ecological conditions determine the
evolution of the plant-fungal mutualism. This work will not only explain the
evolution of mutualism but also give greater predictive power as to how
ecosystems will change with increased nitrogen
deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will run a greenhouse experiment in
which two varieties of peas, one that can and one that cannot form mutualisms,
are grown with each other along gradients of nitrogen concentration and
competitor density. In conjunction, they will develop and analyze an
evolutionary game theoretic model of plant-fungal mutualism. Evolutionary game
theory can aid in explaining this mutualism’s evolution as it frames the trade
between plant and fungus as a strategy to obtain resources and the evolution as
the exclusion of non-mutualist strategies. This work will empirically test the
predictions of evolutionary game theory, thereby integrating theory and
experiment. The fellow will learn techniques to run a greenhouse experiment,
develop their statistical repertoire, and hone their mathematical skills. Beyond
scientific work, the fellow will also work to increase participation of groups
underrepresented in ecology, particularly those with disabilities. Firstly, they
will directly mentor graduate and undergraduate students with disabilities by
including them in the research. Secondly, they will develop digital and
interactive media on game theory and ecological processes. Lastly, they will
host graduate workshops on evolutionary game theory and mathematical modelling
and undergraduate activities where students dissect a topic in ecology and
evolution, analyze it mathematically, and create a game from
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.