* 2010931
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Samuel Borstein, Borstein, Samuel R
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Certain traits are thought to promote the diversity of
organismal groups. These traits act as evolutionary innovations that allow
species access to new biological niches, fueling diversification. Within ray-
finned fishes, the most diverse group of vertebrates, a classic example of such
a feature is the formation of a second set of jaws that are called pharyngeal
jaws. Some species have unique configurations of these jaws, a phenomenon known
as pharyngognathy; this condition promotes diversification by allowing access to
more types of foods. Pharyngonathy promotes the evolution of the oral jaws for
prey capture and the pharyngeal jaws for prey processing. The study will use
X-ray computed microtomography (microCT) to capture the complex anatomy of the
bones and muscles of the oral and pharyngeal jaws to understand this phenomenon.
Scans resulting from this research will be used to generate educational
(laboratory) materials that will be used to teach about the diversity of jaws
among different fish species. Undergraduates from diverse backgrounds will be
recruited to conduct research activities that will also inform the creation of a
public museum exhibit at the University of Michigan Museum of Natural
History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pharyngognathy, a classic example of an
evolutionary innovation, occurs in ray-finned fishes; the pharyngeal jaws of
some clades are modified into a second set of highly functional jaws within the
throat. It is thought that the decoupling of the oral jaws for prey capture and
pharyngeal jaws for prey processing has allowed pharyngognathous fishes access
to unique dietary niches, sparking their diversification. This project will
train the Fellow in utilizing X-ray computed microCT to capture the complex
musculoskeletal morphology of museum specimens as inputs for modelling their
functional properties. This research will test if the oral and pharyngeal jaws
are functionally decoupled as previously hypothesized and if pharyngognathy
provides unique functional benefits that may promote phenotypic and diet
evolution by utilizing phylogenetic comparative methods. The Fellow will have
the opportunity to work in association with one of the largest fish collections
in the world. This will allow the Fellow to develop valuable insights into how
evolutionary innovations generate novel functional performance; these findings
will be conveyed through research with undergraduates and outreach activities to
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.