* 2010830
* FoMR: IPC-MASTA: Boosting IPC with Microarchitectural Support for Tightly-Coupled Accelerators
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mikko Lipasti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 269,888.00

Over fifty years of advances in high-performance microprocessors have enabled
countless benefits to society, including unprecedented advances in many
scientific disciplines and healthcare delivery, improvements in economic
efficiency and productivity, new forms of entertainment, and the creation of
entirely new industries and business models. However, both the computing
industry and semiconductor technology are at a cross-roads, and new approaches
are needed to sustain the historical trend of performance increases and overcome
the barriers faced by conventional approaches to improving processor
performance. A promising approach employed in recent designs has been to
integrate function-specific hardware accelerators next to the processor,
enabling efficient and high-performance offloading of common, coarse-grained,
compute-intensive operations—such as decoding of video data—from the general-
purpose CPU. This project will explore an emerging variant of this approach,
where the accelerators are designed to perform frequent, fine-grained
operations, are coupled tightly to the processor core, and are expected to be
more flexible, broadly applicable, and easier to integrate into the software
development model familiar to the vast majority of today’s programmers. This
research is expected to lead to several practical artifacts along with
scientific and conceptual advances that will enable designers of future
microprocessors to more easily integrate such accelerators, as well as
preparation and training of graduate students with potential for direct
technology transfer through their future employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to conduct a detailed study of tightly-coupled accelerators
(TCAs), uncovering the trade-offs and complexities of integrating them into
modern processors. To date, little has been done to characterize and optimize
the many design considerations that can have critical impact on overall
processor performance and power consumption. The project will approach this
problem in three phases. The initial phase will develop an analytical model for
assessing the impact of integrating TCAs in high-performance CPUs. Next, a
comprehensive study of the microarchitectural implications of TCAs will uncover
key design challenges, opportunities, and novel solutions for integrating TCAs.
The final phase will investigate reconfigurable TCAs, which are intended to
achieve the seemingly contradictory goals of specialized acceleration as well as
broad applicability. The project will investigate several avenues for general-
purpose acceleration using our reconfigurable TCA architecture, showing that it
is possible to reap the best of both worlds of specialization and generalization
without dedicating significant hardware real estate nor design
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.