* 2010979
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Diet and the microbiome as  drivers of host tolerance and resistance to parasites
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Ashley Love, Love, Ashley
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research investigates how diet and the
gut microbiome (microbes that live and play essential roles in the digestive
track of animals) influences host defenses against parasites. Many factors can
influence the diet of wildlife, including shifts in nutritional resources due to
seasonality, habitat alteration, and supplemental feeding by humans. Shifts in
dietary nutrients, such as proteins and fats, can affect the immune system and
influence an animal’s ability to defend against parasites. The effects of diet
on immunity could be mediated by changes in the composition and function of the
gut microbiome. The goal of this research is to determine how dietary nutrients
and the gut microbiome affect interactions between box-nesting eastern bluebirds
(Sialia sialis) and the parasitic nest fly (Protocalliphora sialia). This
research will shed light on how nutritional resources influence host immunity
and will yield predictive insight into how organisms and their parasites will
respond to environmental shifts in diet. The project will also promote the
education of high school and undergraduate students through training in research
and professional development.

Box-nesting birds offer an ideal system to explore relationships between
nutrition, immunity, gut microflora, and parasitism as nests are commonly
parasitized and parasite load can be non-invasively quantified through the
collection of nests after offspring fledge. This system also offers strong
experimental capabilities in a field setting, where nestling diet can be
manipulated by feeding nestlings and dosing offspring with an oral antibiotic
can experimentally disrupt nestling gut microflora. Using a factorial design,
diet macronutrient content and the gut microbiome will be manipulated in
nestling bluebirds and then nestling immunity, gut microflora, and parasite
abundance will be characterized. Additionally, the research will determine
whether gut symbionts produce immune-modulatory metabolites that shape host gene
expression and host-parasite interactions. The project will facilitate the
fellow’s training and growth in transcriptomics and metabolomics. The proposed
work will also include broader impacts through the direct involvement of high
school and undergraduate mentees in data collection, public educational
programs, and the development of K-12 activities related to the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.