* 2010875
* Probe and Control Opto-Electronic Transport in Single Molecular Junction Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Bingqian Xu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 465,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moore’s Law is famously known for projecting
an increase in computing performance, with the number of transistors in an
integrated circuit doubling every two years. As the size of transistors
approaches the ultimate limits, new concepts are needed for performance
breakthroughs. Molecular electronics aims at developing devices that will
complement and eventually supersede current semiconductor technologies.
Molecular transport junctions have unique advantages, due to their hybrid solid
state-molecular nature and novel interface properties. The variety of possible
combinations of molecules and electrodes also permits tailoring the transport
properties. Electrically gating charge transport was key to the electronics
revolution, but no mechanism currently exists to effectively gate molecular
transport junctions. This project will address that gap through a systematic
probe of the factors related to electric transport. This will improve the
fundamental understanding of these novel devices and enable a new gating
mechanism to control electric transport with an unprecedented level of control.
This will allow for integration of specific functions into molecular junctions
that will enable practical applications. These include bio-photonics and
optoelectronic device such as solar cells and LEDs at the single molecule level.
This project will train for undergraduate and graduate students in
interdisciplinary nanotechnologies that span physics, chemistry and engineering.
An introductory course in nanoelectronics will be updated to include the new
materials from the project. The PIs will recruit students of different
scientific, ethnic, and nationality backgrounds to study science and engineering
to foster our next generation scientists and engineers through this project.
Students can also participate in related university programs, such as Summer
Undergraduate Research Program (SURP), UGA-Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
participation (LSAMP) Program, and the Nanotechnology and Biomedicine REU
Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop enabling technologies that allow for integration of our recently
developed and patented MTBJ systems with optics to probe and control opto-
electronic transport in biased single molecule MTBJs through three tasks. The
PIs will develop a measuring platform by integrating optical designs into our
patented SPM MTBJs that allow the molecule to connect covalently to two
electrodes with linker groups, which enables the controlling of the molecule-
electrode coupling and aligning the orbitals of conjugated molecules away from
the electrodes. Then, they will conduct a systematic study to measure
photoconductance where charge carriers in the MTBJs are excited by radiation
energy HOMO to LUMO and by the surface plasmons and determine the effect of
molecule-electrode contact and molecular conformation on the carrier injection
barrier and photon-induced electronic conduction properties. Finally, they will
demonstrate a viable single molecule field-effect Raman scattering (FERS)
device, a double gated single molecule MTBJ device, with a second
electrochemical gating added to the plasma gating. This project will establish a
revolutionary new approach using double gating to effectively gate the
electrical transport in MTBJs device by exploring the origins of the most
important interactions, such as photon-electron, molecule-electrode
interactions, being studied in molecular electronics today. The proposed studies
are imperative to advancing research in single molecule devices by providing not
only the basic knowledge but also necessary skills to develop novel
applications. It will also lead to new insights into the interplay between
electron transfer and optical properties in single molecule devices, which is
critical to many areas, such as photosynthesis and bio-
photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.