* 2010188
* Opening Pathways into Engineering Through an Illinois Physics and Secondary Schools Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Timothy Stelzer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,639,828.00

This project will conduct research and teacher professional development (PD) to
adapt university-level instructional materials for implementation by high school
teachers in their physics courses. Access to high-quality, advanced physics
instruction in high school can open pathways for students to attain university
STEM degrees by preparing them for the challenges faced in gatekeeping
undergraduate physics courses. Yet, across the nation, access to such advanced
physics instruction is not universally available, particularly in rural, urban,
and low-income serving districts, in which instructional resources for teachers
may be more limited, and physics teacher isolation, under-preparation and out-
of-field teaching are most common. The Illinois Physics and Secondary Schools
(IPaSS) Partnership Program responds to these disparities in student access by
bringing together Illinois high school physics teachers from a diverse set of
school contexts to participate in intensive PD experiences structured around
university-level instructional materials. This program will help teachers adapt,
adopt, and integrate high-quality, university-aligned physics instruction into
their classrooms, in turn opening more equitable, clear, and viable pathways for
students into STEM education and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IPaSS
Partnership Program puts education researchers, university physics instructors,
and teacher professional development staff at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign (U of I) in collaboration with in-service high school physics
teachers to adapt university physics curricula and pedagogies to fit the context
of their high school classrooms. The project will adapt two key components of U
of I’s undergraduate physics curriculum for high school use by: (1) using a web-
based “flipped” platform, smartPhysics, which contains online pre-lectures, pre-
labs and homework and (2) using research-based physics lab activities targeting
scientific skill development, utilizing the iOLab wireless lab system – a
compact device that contains all sensors necessary for hundreds of physics labs
with an interface that supports quick data collection and analysis. The program
adopts two PD elements that support sustained, in-depth teacher engagement: (1)
incremental expansion of the pool of teachers to a cohort of 40 by the end of
the project, with a range of physics teaching assignments and work
collaboratively with a physics teaching community to develop advanced physics
instruction for their particular classroom contexts, (2) involvement in a
combination of intensive summer PD sessions containing weekly PD meetings with
university project staff that value teachers’ agency in designing their courses,
and the formation of lasting professional relationships between teachers. The
IPaSS Partnership Program also addresses needs for guidance, support and
resources as teachers adapt to the shifts in Advanced Placement (AP) Physics
standards. The recent revised high school physics curriculum that emphasizes
deep conceptual understanding of central physical principles and scientific
practices will be learned through the inquiry-based laboratory work. The planned
research will address three central questions: (1) How does IPaSS impact
teachers’ practice? (2) Does the program encourage student proficiency in
physics and their pursuit of STEM topics beyond the course? (3) What aspects of
the U of I curricula must be adapted to the structures of the high school
classroom to best serve high school student populations? To answer these
questions, several streams of data will be collected: Researchers will collect
instructional artifacts and video recordings from teachers’ PD activities and
classroom teaching throughout the year to trace the development of teachers’
pedagogical and instructional development. The students of participating
teachers will be surveyed on their physics knowledge, attitudes, and future
career aspirations before and after their physics course, video recordings of
student groupwork will be made, and student written coursework and grades will
be collected. Finally, high school students will be surveyed post-graduation
about their STEM education and career trajectories. The result of this project
will be a community of Illinois physics teachers who are engaged in continual
development of advanced high school physics curricula, teacher-documented
examples of these curricula suited for a range of school and classroom contexts,
and a research-based set of PD principles aimed at supporting students’ future
STEM opportunities and engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.