* 2010677
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Integrating the fossil record with  developmental biology to investigate the origin of the avian body plan
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Christopher Griffin, Griffin, Christopher T
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will use biological collections in innovative
ways. Fossils directly record major changes in animal evolution that would
otherwise be lost to time. These changes can be traced back to processes
occurring while the animal is still a developing embryo. Therefore, integrating
data from both embryos and fossils is critical to understanding how evolution
generates new animal forms. This project will integrate the excellent fossil
record of the dinosaur-to-bird transition with new developmental techniques to
image modern-day bird embryos in high resolution in three dimensions, focusing
on the bird pelvis (hips). The fellow’s preliminary data strongly suggest that
the pelvis of early-stage bird embryos has the same anatomy as the dinosaurian
ancestors of birds. The transition from a dinosaur-like pelvis to a bird pelvis
can be seen across 2 days of bird development, showing the striking evolutionary
developmental mechanism that formed the anatomy of modern birds. This project
will integrate 3D models of both fossils and embryos to confirm this initial
finding, illuminating one of the major evolutionary transitions in the history
of life. This project will also allow for the training of students from
underrepresented groups, leveraging the charisma of the study animals to find
broad appeal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow hypothesizes that the early
stages of avian pelvic development resemble ancestral dinosaurian states (a
process called terminal addition), and that the changes undergone by the avian
pelvis during embryonic development may mirror evolutionary history. Preliminary
data strongly suggest that the pelvis of early-stage bird embryos retains
ancestral dinosaurian states and transitions to the classic ‘avian’ anatomy in
later developmental stages. The fellow will integrate data from biomedical
imaging (micro-computed tomography [micro-CT]) of fossils/skeletons housed in
museum collections with data from novel embryological techniques used to
describe three-dimensional embryonic tissues at stages earlier than has been
previously possible. This will allow the evolutionary sequence recorded in the
fossils and the developmental sequence known from avian embryos to be compared
qualitatively and quantitatively (with 3D geometric morphometrics). The fellow
will then use the development of ‘soft’ (non-skeletal) tissues to reconstruct
the evolution of muscles and nerves during the transition from non-avian
theropod dinosaurs to birds. This will illuminate one of the most iconic
transformations in vertebrate history by using new embryological methodologies
grounded in natural history collections. To broaden the impact of the work, the
fellow will train students from underrepresented groups in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.