* 2010714
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sarah Westrick, Westrick, Sarah E
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Most of our understanding of parental behavior
comes from research on maternal care in mammals. As a result, we know very
little about parental care in fathers, especially in cases where fathers alone
care for offspring. Filling this gap is critical, as fathers vary in their
expression of parental care, often with important consequences for their
offspring. South American poison frogs show all three types of parental care:
mother only, father only, and biparental care. These species therefore provide a
unique opportunity to learn more about the causes and consequences of parental
care. The goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms driving variation
in parenting behavior by investigating hormone levels, neural activity, and
brain gene expression. This research will add to our understanding of male
parental behavior and the origins of individuality in behavior. In addition to
innovative research involving students from diverse backgrounds, the project
will expand an existing outreach program to bring hands-on learning of a wide
range of biological topics to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the
Dendrobates tinctorius (poison frog) study system, the mechanisms underlying
individual variation in paternal behavior will be investigated by combining data
from multiple hierarchical levels of biological organization. The Fellow will
characterize individual variation in parental care in fathers and link this
behavioral variation to hormone levels at time intervals, neural activity across
brain regions, and gene expression specifically in neurons active during
parental care. The work will also include conducting hormone manipulations and
the use of gene editing techniques to modulate gene expression. Taken together,
the project will address fundamental questions about the mechanisms underlying
parental behavior and how individual variation propagates across levels of
biological organization, from genes to behavior. Through the project the Fellow
will gain research, mentoring, and professional skills for an independent
research career. The Fellow will also participate in collaborative projects to
mentor undergraduates and community college students, as well as to expand
hands-on learning opportunities to K-12 classrooms through the Froggers School
Program. The Froggers School Program will broaden the Fellowâ€™s science
communication skills and bring more STEM outreach to the traditionally
underserved region of central Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.