* 2010124
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Tonya Smith-Jackson, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,952,352.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North Carolina
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (NCLSAMP) project proposes to
utilize "promising practices" as well as new program initiatives to achieve the
following goals: 1) Increase the pool of competent underrepresented graduates
with STEM bachelor's degrees; 2) Promote retention and baccalaureate degree
attainment in STEM academic programs, and; 3) Increase the number of students
who matriculate into STEM graduate programs. The NCLSAMP STEM Pathways and
Research Alliance project's expected outcomes at the end of the project are to
(1) maintain an overall retention rate of seventy-five percent (75%) of program
participants in STEM baccalaureate programs within the Alliance; (2) increase by
10%&lt;br/&gt;the pool of competent historically underrepresented minority
graduates with STEM bachelor's degrees; and, (3) increase by 10% the number of
NCLSAMP participants who matriculate into STEM graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon its successes in the implementation
of cohort-based learning,collaborative instructional approaches and block-
scheduling, the Alliance will help its members institutionalize and maintain
high impact practices engaging a larger population of underrepresented students
into STEM-learning communities. Best practices that will continue and expand
include facilitated study groups, research skills development workshops, and
mentored research experiences for undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed
methods study will be conducted by the University of North Carolina-Charlotte
leveraging the NSF-funded Roots of STEM project. This project helps identify
institutional factors that drive students away from STEM fields. The results of
the study will be published in scholarly journals and disseminated
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.