* 2010657
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Suction feeding in the pharyngeal jaw apparatus
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Corrine Avidan, Avidan, Corrine
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Fish have the remarkable ability to capture and swallow food
underwater without the help of hands, fingers or tongues, yet the biomechanical
mechanism of swallowing in fish is entirely unknown. Most species of fish have a
secondary set of pharyngeal jaws located in the back of their throats that may
help suck the food back for swallowing and provide fine control for the movement
of particles suspended in water. This research uses museum collections and
approaches from biology and physics to discover how fish use pharyngeal jaws to
control food movement in water. This work is important because it will
illuminate a critical function, swallowing, in fish and may have applications to
robots designed to manipulate particles suspended in water. Through this
research, the fellow receives training in using museum collections with
interdisciplinary methods from physics, engineering, and biology. To advance the
fellow’s expertise while promoting teaching, training, and learning, the fellow
acts as a key advisor for individuals from underrepresented groups in the Marine
Biology Science Club for a public high school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research proposes the novel hypothesis that an intra-oropharyngeal suction flow
can be generated with the opening movement of the pharyngeal jaws and that this
flow contributes to food transport toward the esophagus and precise positioning
of the food for chewing and swallowing. For this research, museum specimens
belonging to a diverse groups of fishes are used to quantify these pharyngeal
jaw morphologies, and coupled with X-ray Reconstruction of Moving Morphology
measurements of the pharyngeal jaw movements and fluid dynamics within the mouth
during feeding, will be united to determine how morphological variation changes
the flow manipulation and prey processing. The fellow utilizes computational
fluid dynamics as functions of morphology and kinematics to allow for a better
understanding of how the variation of pharyngeal jaws across teleost influences
the flow produced, potentially unlocking key information about performance
matrices such as handling time of prey. The fellow will inspire high school
students to pursue options in STEM fields buy increasing conceptual knowledge of
the marine sciences, promoting the use of technology for scientific inquiry, and
preparing students for careers in these fields by nurturing scientific curiosity
and reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.