* 2010615
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Local adaptation of wild bees to  human-dominated landscapes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Laura Figueroa, Figueroa, Laura Lucia
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The world has
experienced drastic human-driven changes to the landscape, which include mass
conversion of natural habitats to agriculture. These changes are a primary
driver of global biodiversity loss and altered ecosystem function. In the
tropics, deforestation is largely a product of land conversion to pasture for
cattle grazing and ranching. This landscape-level simplification has
implications for the quantity and quality of the habitat available for wildlife.
However, not all species are equally vulnerable to human disturbance and
landscape simplification. Accounting for differences in how organisms respond to
stressors enhances the effectiveness of management and conservation plans. This
project asks how pasturelands versus natural areas affect how stingless bees, a
key pollinator group of the Neo-tropics, respond to pesticides that are
currently widespread in the environment. A foundational component of this
research is capacity building and training for under-represented students both
in the US and Colombia, with a focus on future Latinx researchers and leaders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will evaluate whether the stingless bee
Tetragonisca angustula is locally adapted to different landscape contexts and
whether this influences its response to an acute stressor. To address these
questions, the fellow will conduct a fully factorial reciprocal-transplant of
wild-caught bee colonies in Colombia from simplified landscapes, dominated by
pastureland, and complex landscapes, characterized primarily by natural areas.
Before deployment, bee colonies will be divided, with half experimentally
exposed to pesticides at field-realistic concentrations, while the other half
receive a pesticide-free control solution. The foraging patterns of each colony
will be monitored in terms of what plants are being visited, the quality of the
pollen they collect, and the concentration of additional pesticides they
encounter in the field. Additionally, the fellow will evaluate whether the
landscape context, both in terms of origin and destination, influences bee
behavior and pollination services. These findings will inform policy makers
about the impact of landscape simplification on bee health and pollination
services, and determine the need for context-dependent management plans.
Furthermore, the fellow will train underrepresented minority undergraduate
researchers on experimental design and execution, as well as conduct a series of
one-day workshops aimed at breaking down myths and misconceptions that
frequently dissuade underrepresented minority students from pursuing graduate
school in the sciences. Video footage from the workshops will be developed into
a short publicly available video both in Spanish and English to further broaden
participation in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.