* 2010236
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: The effect of land use change  on Caribbean hawkmoth pollination behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Gordon Smith, Smith, Gordon P
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will use biological collections in innovative
ways. For this project, the fellow will use pollen taken from insects in
biological collections to assess how the pollination behavior of these insects
has changed in response to habitat loss. Pollination is critical to both natural
and agricultural ecosystems, but land use changes can cause both the loss of
pollinator species and changes in pollinator behavior that affect the quality of
pollination they provide to plants. Documenting changes in pollinator behavior
is necessary to accurately predict changes in the future but is limited by the
difficulty of inferring species interactions in the past. This research will
help resolve this difficulty by being the first use of pollen carried by
historically collected moths, and one of very few studies to use historical
collections to reconstruct plant-pollinator interactions. To broaden the impact
of the work, the fellow will mentor undergraduate students in research, conduct
public outreach and classroom demonstrations related to the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the study system, the fellow will investigate
plant-pollinator network change over the past 75 years in the Caribbean, which
has experienced significant but variable habitat loss over this time period. The
fellow will focus on the pollens carried by hawkmoths (Lepidoptera: Sphingidae),
which are prolific pollinators that accumulate less biased pollen loads than
other pollinator groups and are well represented in collections. As a modern
comparison, the fellow will also collect pollen loads from wild hawkmoths in
Jamaica. The fellow will non-destructively remove the pollen from pinned
hawkmoth specimens by locally rehydrating proboscises, then identifying the
pollen loads via DNA meta-barcoding. This technique will allow for reliable,
standardized identifications that do not rely on pollen reference libraries from
historical plant communities. Using this pollen, the fellow will test the
competing hypotheses that hawkmoths will either specialize on plants they match
morphologically or opportunistically visit a wider range of flowers. In the face
of habitat loss, higher specialization will reduce the overall resilience of
plant-pollinator networks but will likely maintain rare and threatened plants.
During this project, the fellow will learn cutting-edge molecular and network-
analysis techniques. The project activities will also allow the fellow to engage
in outreach and scientific mentoring opportunities both at their host
institution and with local scientists in Jamaica during field
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.