* 2010210
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* John Shropshire, Shropshire, John Dylan
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Wolbachia bacteria are maternally transmitted
and infect the cells of nearly half of all insect species, and often hijack host
reproduction to increase their spread. For example, many Wolbachia cause
cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI) that results in embryonic death when infected
males fertilize uninfected eggs—infected eggs are rescued from this lethality,
providing a relative fitness advantage to infected females. Several CI-causing
Wolbachia that infect Drosophila also protect their host from viruses. In recent
years, researchers have leveraged CI to transform mosquito populations with
virus-blocking Wolbachia to successfully reduce the spread of Zika and dengue to
humans on several continents. The strength of CI can vary greatly, from very
weak to near complete embryonic death, but little is known about the genetic and
cellular basis of this variation. Understanding this variation is crucial to
explain the global Wolbachia pandemic in natural insect systems, and to improve
the efficacy of Wolbachia biocontrol in transinfected-mosquito
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Fellow’s PhD work revealed the genetic basis
of CI, but the causes of pervasive CI-strength variation remain unknown. This
postdoctoral research will determine the relative contributions of
transcriptional and genetic diversity of CI-causing genes to variable CI
strength. To achieve this goal, the Fellow will use a combination of genomics,
transcriptomics, microscopy, and machine learning tools to rigorously dissect
CI-strength variation across Drosophila. This project will identify the basis of
CI strength diversity, enhance our understanding of the population genetics of
this powerful drive mechanism, and inform vector control programs that leverage
CI. During the fellowship period, the Fellow will also lead multiple broader
impact initiatives including the development of workshops to teach Native
American middle-school students about topics spanning biodiversity to molecular
biology, and the introduction of a science club event for children in Missoula,
Montana, to learn science through scientific games and
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.