* 2010012
* Collaborative Research; RUI: Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access Pricing for Wireless Multimedia Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Kazem Sohraby, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,989.00

Since its inception, the global internet traffic has been increasing and is
projected to increase even more in the future. A significant portion of the
internet traffic is expected to be due to wireless video. Such aggressive data
traffic growth and additional high volume of multimedia content pose significant
challenges in designing wireless communication protocols which meet the Quality
of Experience requirements of mobile multimedia users. This project aims to
explore new solutions leveraging economic theories to redesign wireless
communication strategies for mobile multimedia users. The evolution to Non-
Orthogonal Multiple Access at lower layers brings both opportunities and
challenges to support wireless multimedia communications. In particular, this
project will investigate pricing mechanisms for Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access
wireless multimedia communications at lower layers. The outcome of this project
will advance the discovery of new frontiers in wireless communications, jointly
leveraging profit-centric economic pricing, quality-centric multimedia services,
and Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is
to test the hypothesis that the traffic challenge of wireless multimedia
communication could be partially solved by jointly leveraging high level pricing
models and low level Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access resource allocation
policies. This research project will establish a theoretical foundation for a
novel Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access Pricing framework, which exploits
application layer economies in designing lower layer Non-Orthogonal Multiple
Access wireless multimedia communication algorithms. The project consists of
three essential thrusts: (1) creating a content-centric pricing mechanism, being
aware of the importance of multimedia data carried within a specific Non-
Orthogonal Multiple Access resource block; (2) designing an orthogonality-
centric pricing model similar to Uber/Lyft rideshare service, being aware of the
shared Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access and exclusive Orthogonal Multiple Access
pricing differences; and (3) developing an incentive-centric Non-Orthogonal
Multiple Access relay auction mechanism, leveraging the naturally cached content
at relay nodes during successive interference cancellation. Research findings
will be seamlessly integrated to education activities at Utah Valley University
(RUI - Research in Primarily Undergraduate Institution) and San Diego State
University (Hispanic Serving Institution).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.