* 2010312
* Anchoring High School Students in Real-life Issues that Integrate STEM Content and Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Nancy Singer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,089,924.00

The STEM Literacy Project sets out to support student learning through
developing teacher expertise in collaborative integration of STEM in student
writing and literacy skills development. Facilitated by teachers, students will
read, discuss, and then write about real-world STEM scenarios, such as water
quality or health. The project will build on and research a professional
development program first developed through a state-supported literacy program
for middle and high school science and math teachers to improve literacy-
integrated instruction. The goals of this project include the following: (1)
Create a community of practice that recognizes high school teachers as content
experts; (2) Implement high quality professional development for teachers on
STEM/Literacy integration; (3) Develop assessments based on STEM and literacy
standards that inform instruction; and (4) Conduct rigorous research to
understand the impact of the professional development. The program is aligned
with state and national standards for college and career readiness. Project
resources will be widely shared through a regularly updated project website
(stemliteracyproject.org), conference presentations, and publications reaching
researchers, developers, and educators. These resources will include scenario-
based assessment tools and instructional materials. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through the integration of STEM content and literacy, the project
will study the ways teachers implement project practices integrating literacy
activities into STEM learning. Teachers will facilitate instruction using
scenarios that present students with everyday, STEM-related issues, presented as
scenarios, that they read and write about. After reading and engaging with math
and science content, students will write a source-based argument in which they
state a claim, support the claim with evidence from the texts, and explain the
multiple perspectives on the issue. These scenarios provide students with agency
as they craft an argument for an audience, such as presenting to a city council,
a school board, or another group of stakeholders. Project research will use a
mixed methods design. Based on the work completed through the initial designs
and development of scenario-based assessments, rubrics, and scoring processes,
the project will study the impact on instruction and student learning. Using a
triangulation design convergence model, findings will be compared and contrasted
in order for the data to inform one another and lead to further interpretation
of the data. project will analyze the features of STEM content learning after
program-related instruction. Data collected will include pre-post student
scenario-based writing; pre-post interviews of up to 40 students each year; pre-
post teacher interviews; and teacher-created scenario-based assessments and
supporting instructional materials. Student learning reflected in the
assessments paired with student and teacher interview responses will provide a
deeper understanding of this approach of integrating STEM and literacy. The use
of discourse analysis methods will allow growth in content learning to be
measured through language use. Project research will build knowledge in the
field concerning how participation in teacher professional development
integrating STEM content in literacy practices impacts teacher practices and
student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by pre-K-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.