* 2010634
* Co-Learning Math Teaching Project: Collaborative Structures to Support Learning to Teach Across the Professional Teaching Continuum
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Ruth Heaton, Teachers Development Group
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 10/31/2024
* USD 2,104,010.00

An ongoing challenge for the preparation of new mathematics teachers is creating
quality experiences in classrooms for student teaching. The project will design
and study an innovative model of collaborative learning for pre-service and
experienced secondary mathematics teachers. Multiple pre-service teachers will
collaborate in the same secondary mathematics teacher’s classroom for their
field placements. The partnership between the school and the university will
allow for professional development for the pre-service teachers and the
experienced teachers. A particular focus of the project will be equity in
mathematics teaching and learning. Developing equitable mathematics teaching
practices includes better understanding students’ knowledge, math
understandings, and experiences they bring to the classroom. Improving the
student teaching experience may improve retention in the teaching profession and
help pre-service teachers be better prepared for their first years of
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an exploratory project about mathematics
teaching and teacher development in field experiences for pre-service teachers.
The project introduces collaborative learning structures for pre-service teacher
education that focus on equitable mathematics teaching practices. The
collaborative learning structures include both the cooperating teacher and
multiple pre-service teachers working in the same classroom. The project will
use a design-based research model to systematically study the process of co-
learning and the critical features of collaborative learning structures as they
are designed to support co-learning between novice and experienced teachers.
Multiple universities are included in the project in order to compare the model
in different settings. The project will use Math Studio as a model for the
teachers to focus on a lesson taught by one teacher but the group plans,
observes, and reflects about the lesson together. A facilitator or math coach
supports the group’s work during the Math Studio process. The project has two
research questions. First, how do pre-service teachers and cooperating teachers
co-learn? More specifically, what vision, dispositions, understandings and
practices of justification and generalization does each teacher develop during
their time together? How does each teacher’s vision, dispositions,
understandings, and practices of mathematics teaching shift during their time
together? Second, what are the design characteristics of the collaborative
learning structures that support or inhibit pre-service teachers and cooperating
teachers in learning? The qualitative study will collect video recordings and
artifacts from the Math Studio, assessments of math teaching practices, and data
from the leadership team in order to compare the model’s implementation at
different sites. The data analysis will occur iteratively throughout the project
to refine the coding framework to describe learning and shifts in teacher
practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.