* 2010986
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Alexandria Igwe, Igwe, Alexandria
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Plant-microbe
associations impact plant phenotype, distribution and biodiversity and range in
their effects on a spectrum from costly parasitic to beneficial mutualistic
interactions. The relationship between nitrogen-fixing bacteria and plants is
especially important ecologically because these bacteria are able to convert
atmospheric nitrogen (N2) into plant-available ammonia (NH3). The Fellow aims to
understand how microbes help plants access nitrogen in extreme soil environments
like serpentine soil. These soils are naturally high in heavy metals and low in
essential plant nutrients. The project will use a serpentine ecosystem to
explore the relative influence of soil chemistry and plant type on beneficial
plant-microbe associations and plant development. This research is important
because it can help society preserve the biodiversity it knows and loves and
improve food production by decreasing reliance on artificial fertilizers. In
addition to the research, the Fellow proposes to broaden participation in
biology by preparing a diverse STEM workforce and integrating research with
education. Specifically, she will continue to mentor undergraduate students and
work with communication and digital media experts to create an educational game
centered on environmental remediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
explore the impact of strong selective soil pressures on microbial local
adaptation and mutualism using free-living nitrogen-fixers and non-legumes.
Culture-based isolation techniques, qPCR, whole-genome sequencing, and
manipulative greenhouse and field surveys will be used to: (1) quantify the
abundance of Microvirga spp., a free-living nitrogen-fixing bacteria, in
serpentine and nonserpentine soils and explore the relative influence of edaphic
factors, elevation, and climate on bacterial abundance; (2) identify the
presence of ecotypic variation in serpentine- and non-serpentine-isolated
Microvirga spp. using functional assays and genome-wide sequencing; and (3)
determine the effect of Microvirga spp. on non-leguminous plant survival and
development. Through the completion of this project and by working closely with
Dr. Michelle Afkhami, students and professors in the Cinema and Interactive
Media Department at the University of Miami, the Fellow will: (1) refine her
training in microbial ecology; (2) gain skills in whole-genome-sequencing and
analysis, (2) further develop her experimental design and analysis skills; (3)
begin to understand and apply effective technology, education and research
integration practices; and (4) develop as a mentor and
mentee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.