* 2010145
* Collaborative Research: WOU-MMA: Extreme Quantum-Electrodynamic and General-Relativistic Plasma Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Alexander Philippov, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

This project will study the physics of atmospheres of neutron stars and black
holes with very strong magnetic fields. Observational discovery of compact stars
in our galaxy that are extraordinarily strong magnets, called magnetars, brings
modern science into an uncharted territory of enormous magnetic fields. This is
where quantum mechanics, rather than everyday physics, describes objects as
massive as our Sun. At the same time, detection of gravitational wave signals
from merging black holes and neutron stars opened a new observational domain for
studies of objects governed by extremely strong gravity. Magnetars, neutron
stars and black holes are astrophysical multi-messenger laboratories for studies
of the interplay of electromagnetic, quantum, and gravitational effects. The
primary goal of this project is to better understand such systems by developing
a comprehensive description of collective non-linear behavior of matter in
super-strong magnetic and gravitational fields; by doing so, it will also
directly contribute to the goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big Idea. This collaborative project will serve to
train graduate students and to promote diversity by recruiting students from
underrepresented minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetars -- neutron
stars with magnetic fields exceeding the critical Schwinger field, merging
neutron star and black hole binaries, and collapsing neutron stars are the
primary astronomical sources where quantum electrodynamic (QED) and general
relativistic (GR) effects strongly affect the properties and behavior of plasma.
This project aims to understand the dynamics of collisionless pair plasmas in
such environments. Moreover, recent advances in laser technology allow state-of-
the-art high-intensity laser systems to approach regimes relevant for studies of
plasma under such extreme, super-critical field conditions. Upcoming laser-
plasma experiments and multi-messenger astronomy observations will allow one to
probe into extreme plasma and astrophysical phenomena that were previously
inaccessible; and this project will create theoretical and numerical modeling
foundations for interpreting results of such laboratory experiments and
astronomical observations. The specific questions to be addressed are: (i) What
are the plasma properties, collective plasma modes and instabilities in a
supercritical magnetic field? (ii) How do GR and QED effects change the dynamics
of magnetic reconnection? (iii) How does a black hole formed in the collapse of
a magnetized neutron star dissipate its magnetic field? (iv) How do rotating
black holes produce electron-positron plasmas? These questions will be answered
using a combination of analytical and numerical
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.