* 2010726
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Investigating maternally-mediated developmental plasticity and the role of the microbiome in wild red squirrels
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lauren Petrullo, Petrullo, Lauren
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project aims to identify how the
microbiome—the community of bacteria living in and on a host—connects ecological
change and developmental differences in wild red squirrels. An individual’s
microbiome is inherited in part through maternally-transmitted microbes and can
shift in response to environmental changes. How do these shifts in the
microbiome relate to variation in development, and are these changes an
advantage or disadvantage? The fellow will address these questions using long-
term data collected on wild red squirrels living in the Yukon, Canada. Red
squirrels are highly territorial and experience exreme fluctuations in food
availability, making them an excellent model to examine how the microbiome
responds to ecological and social change. This research will provide critical
insight into how microbes contribute to the evolutionary processes that allow
animals to adapt to changing environments. The fellow will include first-
generation and underrepresented students in various aspects of this project and
disseminate primary research findings through various existing institutional
mechanisms aimed at engaging local communities in the scientific process. This
research synthesizes theory and methods from multiple fields, combining high-
resolution genomics with noninvasive hormone analyses while situating the data
within an eco-evolutionary framework. This study will use experimental
manipulations of population density and food availability to 1) probe
interactions between hormonal responses to ecological change and the microbiome,
2) investigate the vertical transmission of microbes from mothers to offspring,
and 3) test whether microbial changes predict variation in offspring growth
rates. This project will then assess the adaptive value of microbial changes by
4) testing how the microbiome relates to territory acquisition, survival to
first breeding, and longevity using both existing longitudinal data and a novel
cross-fostering experiment. The fellow will receive integrative training across
the fields of genomics, endocrinology, evolutionary biology, and ecology and
data will be generated and archived for maximum reproducibility and
accessibility. Underserved communities and first-generation students will be
engaged in this research through hands-on mini-projects, institutional
mentorship programs, and a citizen science community outreach program on red
squirrels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.