* 2010748
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Bridging genomics, physiology, and behavioral ecology to uncover mechanisms driving incipient speciation in an island bird
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Elsie Shogren, Shogren, Elsie H
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Combining studies of behavior and physiology
with genomic data, the research will enhance understanding about new species
arising in isolated habitats. The project focuses on a group of birds, Monarcha
flycatchers, found only in the Solomon Islands in the South Pacific. On the
smaller islands of the archipelago, previous research uncovered repeated
evolution of all black (melanic) coloration from chestnut colored ancestors. In
most populations where this occurred, all birds are now melanic and mate only
with other melanic individuals, resulting in a new species. The reasons for
color differences across islands are unknown. To determine what is underlying
the evolution of black coloration, the fellow will study an island population in
which both melanic and chestnut colored birds still exist and mate with each
other. This will provide insight into processes that drive evolution of novel
traits and the origin of species. Knowing how behavior, physiology, and genetics
interact to influence species evolution will facilitate appreciation and
preservation of the world’s remarkable biodiversity. To broaden the impact of
the project, a case study will be designed for high school students about how
species evolve. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how and why visual signals
change in the context of incipient speciation is crucial to discerning drivers
of population divergence. In a population polymorphic for two distinct visual
signals – melanic and chestnut coloration – this project tests three alternative
hypotheses explaining repeated evolution of melanism in the Monarcha clade.
Melanism may be under indirect selection due to pleiotropic effects of the
melanocortin system, and associations with testosterone and/or aggression.
Alternatively, interaction and competition with conspecifics may drive social
selection for melanism. Finally, melanism may arise through genetic drift via
small populations and minimal negative pleiotropy. Testing predictions of these
hypotheses involves three aims: (1) determine effects of plumage color on
aggressive behavior through mount presentation experiments; (2) characterize the
evolutionary processes mediating and genetic architecture underlying melanism
using whole-genome resequencing data; and (3) measure alpha-Melanocyte
Stimulating Hormone and testosterone in melanic, chestnut, and plumage-
manipulated birds. The fellow will benefit from in-depth experience integrating
whole-genome analyses with phenotypic, behavioral, and physiological responses.
In addition, this study will be featured in a case study designed to educate
high school students about speciation, convergent evolution, and the scientific
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.