* 2010800
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Biodiversity and a High-Resolution Recovery of Fossil Plant-Insect Associations Across the Cretaceous-Paleogene Boundary
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Sarah Maccracken, Maccracken, Sarah Augusta
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will use biological collections in innovative
ways. Plants and the insect herbivores that consume them comprise over half of
all described species and their interactions are a cornerstone of food webs. The
fossil record of plants has the marks of insect herbivory, such as holes chewed
into a leaf, and these provide an excellent source of evidence for understanding
ancient forests and how they changed through time. The research fellow will
measure the recovery of plants and insects before, during, and after the
Cretaceous/Paleogene (K/Pg) extinction event, which occurred 66.04 million years
ago. There are many studies on the extinction of the dinosaurs and the
subsequent rise of mammals, but the recovery of plants and insects is poorly
understood and is the focus of this study. This research project will enhance
the fellow’s curatorial skills, data analytical skills, publication record, and
experience in public outreach and mentoring. The outreach will connect citizens
with exciting stories about fossils from the Corral Bluffs site, highlight the
importance of museum collections in cutting-edge scientific research, emphasize
the significance of museums in our communities, and engage the general public
with scientific concepts to increase awareness of the connections with nature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will constitute the most highly-resolved
stratigraphic analysis of plant‒insect associations across the K/Pg boundary to-
date, documenting the extinction and recovery of plant and insect life into the
first million years following the extinction. This research will utilize the
Corral Bluffs Paleobotanical Collection at the Denver Museum of Nature &amp;
Science (DMNS), under the guidance of Dr. Ian Miller (Curator of Paleobotany,
DMNS) and Dr. Ellen Currano (University of Wyoming). By analyzing the diversity
and intensity of plant‒insect associations at the Corral Bluffs study site, the
fellow will generate one of the largest data sets of plant–insect interactions
for the terminal Cretaceous and early Paleocene, and the highest quality
plant‒insect associational dataset collected from across the K/Pg boundary. The
statistical analyses for this research will include building bipartite networks
linking plant species. The fellow will be trained on paleobotanical
identification, taxonomic descriptions, and will learn new statistical analyses.
Broadly anticipated results include more diverse and specialized insect damage
during the Cretaceous, very little insect damage immediately after the
extinction, and a step-wise increase of plant and insect diversity in the
following one million years. Broader impacts will include public outreach
through the Denver Museum of Nature &amp; Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.