* 2010772
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Genomic insights into  plant-insect coevolution
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jay Goldberg, Goldberg, Jay Keche
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow
will conduct research on the interactions between jimson weed (Datura wrightii)
and tobacco hornworms (Manduca sexta) and receive training in bioinformatics
techniques. The research project will generate a wealth of genetic data on
species of interest that can be used by the Fellow, future students, and the
field of evolutionary genetics to generate and test hypotheses regarding the
evolution of plant-insect interactions. One of these species is a major crop
pest, thus, this research will also contribute to the development of novel pest-
control methods. The Fellow will engage in outreach activities with Native
American communities and students, to exchange modern and traditional
agricultural practices with Native American communities on multiple reservations
throughout Arizona in addition to providing Native students with hands-on
research experience. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will work towards two
research goals: 1) produce a high-quality reference genome for D. wrightii for
comparison of that to M. sexta, and 2) re-sequence individuals of both species
from across the Southwest to conduct a population genomics analysis of the
coevolutionary dynamics. In comparing the reference genomes of D. wrightii and
M. sexta the Fellow will test for the presence of synchronized gene duplication
events, a molecular signature of antagonistic coevolutionary history. The
approach used in the second objective will allow the Fellow to distinguish among
four coevolutionary models of mutualism – mutual matching, sanctions, partner
fidelity feedback, and signaling and recognition – to understand if and how
mutualistic coevolution between D. wrightii and M. sexta has shaped their
interactions. Together, these results will illuminate the relative importance of
antagonistic and mutualistic pressures in shaping plant-insect interactions. It
is possible for both forms of coevolution to act simultaneously, individually,
or not act in this system (if traits evolved in response to other environmental
pressures). As such, this study will provide broad insights into the
coevolutionary dynamics of a multifaceted plant-insect interaction. The impact
of the work will be broadened through student mentoring, and public and
educational outreach through programs that serve Native American students and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.