* 2010563
* Building Environmental and Educational Technology Competence and Leadership Among Educators: An Exploration in Virtual Reality Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Jodi Morton, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 05/31/2024
* USD 384,558.00

Many of the nation's most vulnerable ecosystems exist near communities with
scant training opportunities for teachers and students in K-12 schools. The
Louisiana wetlands is one such example. Focusing on these threatened natural
environments and their connection to flooding will put science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) concepts in a real-world context that is
relatable to students living in these areas while integrating virtual reality
technology. This technology will allow students in rural and urban schools
lacking resources for field trips to be immersed into simulated field
experiences. This exploratory project will support the professional growth and
development of current middle and high school STEM teachers by providing
multiyear summer training and school year support around three specific areas:
(1) environmental sciences themed content; (2) implementing virtual reality (VR)
in the classroom, and (3) development of a support community for the teachers.
Findings from this project will advance the knowledge of the most effective
components in professional development for teachers to incorporate new knowledge
into their classrooms. This project will bring locally relevant VR experiences
to teachers and students in areas where there is historically low participation
of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM. Through new partnerships
formed with collaborators, the results of this project will be shared broadly in
informal and formal education environments including public outreach events for
an increase in public scientific literacy and public
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand the understanding of
the impact that a multi-layered professional development program will have on
improving the self-efficacy of teachers in STEM. This project will add to the
field’s knowledge tied to the overall research question: What are the
experiences of secondary STEM teachers in rural and urban schools who
participate in a multiyear professional development (PD) program? This project
will provide instructional support and PD for two cohorts of ten teachers in
southeastern Louisiana. Each summer, teachers will complete a two-week blended
learning PD training, and during the academic year, teachers will participate in
an action research community including PD meetings and monthly Critical Friends
Group meetings. A longitudinal pre-post-post design will be employed to analyze
whether the proposed method improves teacher’s self-efficacy, instructional
practices, integration of technology, and leadership as the teachers will deploy
VR training locally to grow the base of teachers integrating this technology
into their curriculum. The findings of this project will improve understanding
of how innovative place-based technological experiences can be brought into
classrooms and shared through public engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in
the Directorate for Education &amp; Human Resources. DRK-12 seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.