* 2010803
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Microplastics in the Marine Food Web
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jessica Valenti, Valenti, Jessica Lauren
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an
NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020, Research Using
Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research and training of the
fellow that will utilize biological collections in innovative ways.
Microplastics (plastic particles smaller than 5 mm in size) are a prevalent
pollutant in the marine environment that can accumulate in predators when they
consume prey items that have ingested microplastics. Larval (young) fishes are
important prey for many marine predators such as the fishes and invertebrates
that humans rely on for food. Thus, the intake of microplastics by larval fishes
has implications for the entire marine food web, fisheries and aquaculture
sectors, and human health. Yet, little is known about the ingestion of
microplastics by larval fishes. Using a larval fish collection spanning the last
30 years, the fellow will investigate microplastic ingestion in larval fish from
past and present to better understand the potential for microplastic
accumulation in larval fish predators and examine larval fish characteristics
that may influence microplastic ingestion. In addition, the fellow will help
improve methods commonly used to identify microplastics, mentor undergraduate
students on independent research projects, and create a microplastics education
and outreach activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will utilize the Rutgers
University Marine Field Stationâ€™s 30-year (1989-2019) larval fish collection to
elucidate (i) if abundances and characteristics (type [primary vs. secondary],
chemical composition, color, size, form [fiber, fragment, etc.]) of
microplastics entering lower trophic levels of the marine food web have changed
over time and (ii) whether organismal ecological traits (developmental stage,
spawning location, feeding strategy) influence microplastic intake. In order to
address these research questions, select Anchoa mitchilli (Bay anchovy),
Brevoortia tyrannus (Atlantic menhaden), Menidia menidia (Atlantic silverside),
and Micropogonias undulatus (Atlantic croaker) from all thirty years of the
collection will be chemically digested following a standardized protocol that
efficiently digests organic material, but not plastics. Pyrolysis-gas
chromatography-mass spectroscopy (py-GC-MS), Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy, and Raman spectroscopy will be used to determine the chemical
composition of any isolated microplastics. In addition to addressing these
research questions, the fellow will work with industry scientists to develop
methods to lower microplastic size detection limits for py-GC-MS, mentor two
undergraduate students through research internship programs that promote
diversity and inclusion in STEM, and create a research-based microplastics
activity that helps the public conceptualize the size of microplastics and the
expansive scale of the microplastics problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.