* 2010904
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Vibrio Cholerae: An old disease with new tricks
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Andrea Ayala, Ayala, Andrea Josefina
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The objective
of this study is to understand the role that wild birds play in transmitting
Vibrio cholerae, the bacterial species that causes cholera. Vibrio cholerae is
one of the most important human pathogens, however little is known concerning
how V. cholerae interacts with its environment outside of the human host,
specifically how, and when, it infects other species. Traditionally, studies on
V. cholerae have focused on how it causes disease in humans, however there is
growing evidence that V. cholerae are able to infect waterfowl, and that
waterfowl species may be capable of transmitting the bacteria. This study will
examine whether waterfowl are ‘competent’ hosts for V. cholerae, e.g. whether V.
cholerae is simply consumed by waterfowl and the infection is transient, or
whether V. cholerae is now becoming a natural part of the intestinal bacterial
community in avian species. In addition, this study will examine the
evolutionary strategies that bacterial species, such as V. cholerae, use in
adapting or re-adapting to new hosts. In addition to this research, the fellow
will promote the greater inclusion of diverse and under-represented groups
through the hands-on mentorship, career development, and educational support
while performing research at Yale University and at the University of Central
Florida. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibrio cholerae remains one of the most prominent
pathogens in human history. Recent findings suggest birds are playing an
increasing role in the dissemination of the pathogen. However, whether this
represents an unexplored pathway of pathogen mobility, or bacterial re-emergence
into a host-pathogen system, .e.g. waterfowl, is yet to be determined. The
fellow will investigate how interactions between this opportunistic microbe and
anthropogenic processes influence pathogen re-emergence within a natural avian
system. Specifically, this study will focus on free-ranging, peridomestic
Mallards naturally exposed to V. cholerae among anthropogenically associated
aquatic habitats of eastern Florida. Given the rising incidence of isolates from
birds, the warming Gulf coast, and the paucity of human hosts, it is expected
that V. cholerae are now alternatively colonizing southeastern U.S. waterfowl.
Through this research, the fellow also seeks to continue a model of outreach
both at Yale and at UCF, through additional personnel funding acquired to
provide research opportunities for under-represented groups at both
universities. The fellow will also increase outreach to community college
students, who have the fewest opportunities to integrate research into their
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.