* 2010889
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Genevieve Mount, Mount, Genevieve G
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Many animals attract mates using showy behavior or
characteristics to grab the attention of a potential mate. Frogs and toads are
classic examples, with males producing exceptionally loud calls to attract
females and defend their territory. Vocal sacs are required for males to produce
these loud sounds, however, both vocal sacs and calling behavior have been lost
in a number of species. This research aims to understand the evolutionary
pattern and ecological correlates of the loss of a sexually selected trait.
Focusing on True Toads, the Fellow will collect genetic data and 3-D scans from
museum specimens to understand how loss of this sexually selected trait has
affected the cladeâ€™s biodiversity. Detailed research into the evolution and
biodiversity of frogs and toads is especially important due to an alarming rate
of species decline and loss, ~40% are at risk, while another ~25% are still
classified as having unknown status. To increase broader participation in
science, the Fellow will provide accessible research opportunities to students
from underrepresented groups by focusing on those with hearing and communication
difficulties.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The evolutionary drivers and consequences of
sexually selected trait loss are relatively unknown compared to trait gain, with
our limited knowledge derived from a few model systems. The Fellow will test for
evidence of proposed causes of vocal sac loss in True Toads, Bufonidae, and
determine how the loss of this sexually selected trait affects the evolutionary
trajectory of a lineage. Using comparative methods the Fellow will identify the
number and distribution of vocal sac losses in Bufonidae, along with multiple
traits that have been previously associated with call loss. From these data the
Fellow can understand the rate and frequency that calls are lost within the
Bufonidae and begin to identify what environmental and ecological factors
contribute to vocal sac loss. Additionally, the Fellow will test the impact of
vocal sac loss, a sexually selected trait, on diversification in this speciose
family. In addition to receiving important training in microCT scanning and
comparative genomics, the Fellow will engage students from underrepresented
groups in hands-on work with museum specimens and provide them with
comprehensive research experiences that include data collection and the use of
cutting-edge genetic and morphological techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.