* 2010136
* The Dynamic Onset of Magnetic Reconnection
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Nuno Gomes Loureiro, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 302,354.00

Plasma is the most common form of matter found in the visible universe. Plasmas
occurring in space and in astrophysical environments, as well as in laboratories
on Earth, often carry magnetic fields. The interaction of the plasma with the
magnetic field that pervades it is highly nonlinear and complex: the magnetic
field affects the plasma dynamics and, conversely, the plasma can change the
magnetic field. One of the most spectacular examples of such interaction is the
process of magnetic reconnection: a plasma-driven reconfiguration of the
magnetic field that threads it, which results in an explosive release of energy.
The most popular manifestation of this phenomenon are solar flares; but
reconnection occurs ubiquitously throughout the universe. The goal of this
research is to advance the understanding of how the process of reconnection is
triggered in a magnetized plasma; by doing so, it will contribute to the goals
of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic reconnection is a two-step process: an
initial, slow stage of energy build-up and current-sheet formation, followed by
the sudden, often explosive stage of energy release. Reconnection studies
largely tend to focus on the latter, driven by attempts to solve the critically
important problems of reconnection rate and energy partition. In this regard, a
prominent feature of the last decade of reconnection research has been the
plasmoid instability, whose key role in addressing those questions is now widely
appreciated. However, the existence of this, and other, current sheet
instabilities implies that the onset and the energy release stages cannot be
trivially decoupled, since such instabilities set specific conditions on the
parameters of the current sheets that are physically realizable; for example, a
system-size Sweet-Parker current sheet in large systems can never dynamically
arise because a tearing instability will inevitably disrupt the forming sheet
much before it attains the Sweet-Parker ratio. The aim of this research is to
develop the theoretical (analytical and numerical) understanding of the
conditions imposed on the energy release stage by the build-up stage, thus
paving the route for self-consistent studies of magnetic
reconnection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.