* 2010819
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Anat Belasen, Belasen, Anat
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Wild amphibians have experienced die-offs partly due to the
fungal pathogen, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd). Bd exhibits a wide range
of effects, with some amphibians showing high vulnerability to Bd infections
while others appearing to be resistant. Why this is the case remains unknown and
hampers efforts to protect amphibians from such die-offs. Previous research
suggests a genetic basis for this variation and that wild amphibian populations
could be genetically screened for susceptibility to the fungus, and then later
selectively introduced from captivity as Bd-resistant amphibians into vulnerable
populations. Previous studies have attempted to understand this vulnerability by
comparing laboratory-based infection patterns with Differential Gene Expression
(DGE). However, these have had two major shortcomings: (1) they do not
distinguish between general pathogen responses and Bd-specific responses and (2)
they have not isolated Bd-response genes while also demonstrating that Bd
affects the evolution of those genes. Without this information, amphibian
genetics cannot be confidently linked to vulnerability or resistance to this
fungal pathogen. The Fellow will create educational outreach and research
opportunities to the public and students on these topics; these will
specifically pertain to disease ecology and bioinformatics as disseminated both
online and in zoological settings within the USA and/or Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate the ability of DGE to identify Bd-resistance genes in
amphibians, an infection experiment will be performed on Brazilian frogs from a
population that rebounded following a Bd decline in the 1980s. This experiment
will include three treatments: (1) control, (2) Bd infection, and (3) bacterial
infection (Mycobacterium marinum). Comparing frog performance in the Bd vs.
control treatments will reveal whether the population is Bd resistant. Comparing
DGE results across Bd and bacteria treatments will identify Bd-specific genes.
These genes will then be sequenced from ethanol-preserved museum specimens
collected prior to the 1980s outbreak. Gene sequences before and after the
outbreak will be compared to assess whether an evolutionary response to Bd has
taken place. In the process, the Fellow will receive training in experimental
work, DNA sequencing, and other professional training from sponsoring
scientists. The Fellow will also mentor students at Cornell and in Brazil,
produce bilingual (English and Portuguese) disease ecology resources, and engage
in educational outreach at the Smithsonian National
Zoo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.