* 2010667
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Pavitra Muralidhar, Muralidhar, Pavitra
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Sex chromosomes are a unique part of the
genome of many organisms because, by definition, they spend more time in one
biological sex relative to the other. They therefore have distinct evolutionary
pasts compared to the non-sex chromosomes (autosomes) and play a
disproportionately more important role in processes ranging from speciation to
sexual selection. However, their role in intragenomic conflict between males and
females remains unclear. Conflict between males and females arises because males
and females are often under divergent selection for traits ranging from behavior
to morphology but cannot evolve independently because they share the majority of
their genome. Exploring how sex chromosomes influence the evolutionary dynamics
of antagonistic conflict between males and females is therefore fundamental to
understanding the extraordinary diversity among the sexes as observed across the
tree of life. The Fellow will involve undergraduate students of diverse
backgrounds in the research as well as providing educational gatherings at the
host institution to broaden participation of undergraduate and graduate students
in theoretical biology and population genetics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will take an integrative approach to investigate how the unique genetic
interests of sex chromosomes influence sexual antagonism across evolutionary
scales, from within populations to across taxa. Specifically, the project will
involve (1) modelling the population and quantitative genetics of sex
chromosomes under sexually antagonistic selection; (2) investigating the role of
sex chromosomes in the short-term dynamics of sexual antagonism using human
population genomics; and (3) determining whether different heterogametic systems
(XX/XY or ZW/ZZ) impact the long-term resolution of sexual antagonism across
amphibians, a vertebrate clade with great variation in both heterogametic system
and degree of sexual dimorphism. The Fellow will undergo training for this
project in quantitative modeling and comparative phylogenetics via intensive
courses offered at the host institution as well as draw upon background in
theoretical biology for recruitment and inclusion of students in this field;
this includes undergraduate research as well as workshops and a small, multi-
class seminar series to teach the use of evolutionary simulation software and
other germane topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.