* 2010178
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Equity and Strengthening Teaching with Elementary Mathematical Modeling
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Erin Turner, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 04/30/2024
* USD 615,616.00

Students bring many mathematical assets to the classroom from their life
experiences in their cultures and communities, particularly with respect to
being able to model real-world situations in their everyday lives with
mathematics. Many equity-related challenges in students' communities can be
understood through the use of mathematics and specifically the use of
mathematical modeling (the analysis of complex real-world situations using
mathematical resources and tools). Supporting teachers to make use of
mathematical modeling in the elementary classroom to advance issues of equity
will require targeted teacher professional development (PD). Advancing Equity
and Strengthening Teaching with Elementary Mathematical Modeling is a teacher PD
project focused on strengthening K-5 teaching with mathematics modeling.
Building on previous foundational work around mathematics modeling and equity,
this project will bring together equity oriented teaching practices and
mathematical modeling to design and research the impact of a blended PD program
on teacher practice. The project will include video-enhanced reflection and
online mentoring in addition to face-to-face components of PD. Using five
pivotal spaces for elementary mathematics modeling as a framework, the project
will explore the ways in which tools and structures that support practices
aligned with pivotal spaces in mathematics modeling lessons can help teachers
advance equitable participation and develop student competencies in mathematics
modeling. The project will engage in cycles of design-based implementation
research (DBIR) to study the relationships between features of the PD and
changes in teacher practice, understandings, and
dispositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will deploy a blended PD model
that includes face-to-face sessions, coaching, and video-based reflection. Three
DBIR cycles will be undertaken, starting with case study-based design cycles,
focused PD cycles facilitated by project staff, and full-scale PD cycles
facilitated by teacher leaders. Sites in four states have been recruited that
represent a wide range of contexts and student demographics. Six professional
learning modules related to elementary math modeling will be created. The
project will use the lesson observation protocol known as M2C3-Scan to assess
changes in teacher practice, conduct student pre and post assessments of
mathematical modeling competencies for students in grades 3-5 and formative
assessments of mathematical modeling competencies for all students, and assess
beliefs and confidence of teachers teaching mathematical modeling. The project
team will also interview teachers, collect implementation logs, and use a
teacher-annotated video reflection platform to analyze changes in classroom
practice. Repeated measures analyses will be conducted on student learning data,
with cycles of qualitative analyses related to understand changes in teacher
practices, competencies, and beliefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.