* 2010137
* Understanding the Role of Lesson Study in K-12 Mathematics and Science Teacher Education
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Kelly Chandler-Olcott, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2021
* USD 89,285.00

This conference will shed light on how mathematics and science teacher educators
are currently using lesson study to prepare pre-service teachers. Lesson study
is a structured process for teachers to study content and curriculum, carefully
plan lessons to test a researchable question about student learning, teach the
lesson in front of other professionals who help gather data, and use that data
to evaluate the efficacy of the instruction for the students. With its focus on
researching the connection between lesson enactment and student learning, lesson
study contains structures for connecting practice-based teacher education to
schools and classrooms. By evaluating the efficacy of the instruction, the
outcomes, positive or negative, can be applied to other relevant instruction.
The use of lesson study in college classes for pre-service teachers is
relatively new in the United States, but it is becoming more popular. Because
lesson study has been used primarily for in-service professional development of
teachers, little is known about how it can be optimally employed for pre-service
teacher education. This project will improve teacher educators' understanding of
how lesson study can be optimized to teach pre-service teachers which will help
bring this technique to the future teachers in their programs. When pre-service
teachers are better prepared, high quality mathematics and science instruction
may be expanded to more schools, giving more K-12 students improved
opportunities to learn these subjects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support twenty-four mathematics and science teacher educators to collaborate in
identifying their pedagogical goals for using lesson study and the enabling and
constraining factors for its implementation that they perceive. Given that
universities and schools have variance in their structures and focus, teacher
educators will identify any modifications they have made to the lesson study
process considering their context. By collaboratively identifying pedagogical
goals, enabling and constraining implementation factors, and evidence-based
adjustments to the lesson study process, this project will clarify the lesson
study practices of the participants. The project will yield an edited book for
other teacher educators to deploy lesson study in their teacher education
programs, building from what is currently known and setting a trajectory for
future pre-service teacher lesson study and research. Additionally, the project
will establish a baseline network of teacher educators using lesson study within
teacher education that can be built upon in the future. The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students
and teachers, through the research and development of new innovations and
approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.