* 2010550
* Broadening Participation in Mathematics for English Learners with Mathematics Difficulties: A Multi-Site Impact Study
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Eric Knuth, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 5,011,392.00

Success in mathematics has major implications for student success at the public
school and postsecondary levels, as well as contributing to the nation’s STEM
workforce and economy. While building mathematics literacy is important for all
learners, it is especially critical for students most vulnerable for academic
risk. Among these at-risk subgroups are English learners (ELs). By definition,
ELs are not yet proficient in academic English and often come to school
unprepared for the linguistic demands of disciplinary learning. Authentic and
engaged content learning activities, such as early mathematics, may comprise the
ideal context for acquiring the language and literacy skills ELs need. Research
suggests ELs represent the fastest growing subgroup in U.S. schools. Currently,
U.S. classrooms serve over five million ELs and estimated projections suggest
that up to one in four students in 2025 will be an EL. Considering the rising
presence of ELs, there is an urgent need to advance equity and eliminate
disparities in STEM education among this group of learners who are often
underserved by current practice. Overwhelming evidence suggests that ELs place
well short of their non-EL peers in the area of mathematics. Therefore, the
purpose of this 5-year Impact Project is to rigorously test the efficacy of the
Precision Mathematics First-Grade (PM-1) intervention on the mathematics
outcomes of ELs who face mathematics difficulties (MD). PM-1 is an innovative,
first-grade, English-based, mathematics intervention focused on state-of-the-art
technology and hands-on problem-solving activities, the PM-1 intervention is
designed to support students with or at risk for MD in developing a robust
understanding of the underlying concepts, problem-solving skills, and vocabulary
of early measurement and statistical investigation. This study will examine
student response to the PM-1 intervention based on variables such as students’
initial mathematics skill levels and proficiency in English, and explore how the
rate and quality of mathematics discourse opportunities for ELs may predict
gains in mathematics outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DRK-12 Impact study
will investigate the efficacy of the Precision Mathematics First-Grade (PM-1)
intervention through a methodologically rigorous randomized controlled trial.
The study will utilize a randomized block design, blocking on classrooms and
randomly assigning first-grade English learners (ELs) who face mathematics
difficulties (MD) within first-grade classrooms to one of two conditions: (a)
PM-1 intervention or (b) control (business-as-usual). Approximately 900 ELs from
150 first-grade classrooms will participate. Three research aims will guide this
study. Aim 1 will systematically evaluate the average effect of PM-1 on student
mathematics achievement; while Aim 2 will investigate differential response to
the intervention based on student-level variables, including ELs proficiency in
English and pretreatment mathematics performance. In Aim 3, researchers will
explore whether the frequency and quality of mathematics discourse opportunities
for ELs predicts gains in mathematics achievement. Although random assignment
will take place at the student level, students will be assigned to small
instructional group formats for intervention delivery. Therefore, the design
employs a partially nested mixed-model Time × Condition analyses to evaluate the
effect of PM-1 on pretest to posttest gains in mathematics achievement (Aim 1)
and differential response to PM-1 based on student characteristics (Aim 2). A
random coefficients analysis that nests repeated assessments within students and
PM-1 intervention groups will explore whether the rate and quality of
mathematics discourse opportunities predicts ELs’ gains in mathematics
achievement (Aim 3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DRK-12 Program seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research
and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.