* 2010584
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Understanding Interfacial Mechanisms to Design and Manufacture High-Performance Biodegradable Ionic Liquid Lubricants
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ashlie Martini, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 06/30/2024
* USD 272,514.00

Room-temperature ionic liquid (RTIL) lubricants derived from bio-based feedstock
are environmentally benign and can offer lubrication performance superior to
that of petroleum-based lubricants. However, the broad application of RTILs has
been limited by the lack of a fundamental understanding of their lubrication
mechanisms. Importantly, the ability of RTILs to provide adequate lubrication is
determined by the preferential adsorption of RTILs on the surfaces of machine
components, which in turn is affected by the interplay between surface roughness
and RTIL size and structure. It is expected that, by changing the molecular
structure of RTILs, the desired adsorption layer can be engineered on a given
surface. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
award will support the modeling and experimental research needed to achieve this
goal. The project brings together PIs from academia with experience in tribology
and tribocorrosion, biofuel and biochemical synthesis, molecular-scale
simulation, and materials characterization with an industrial partner who will
evaluate the RTILs in machine components and develop commercialization plans.
Together, the team will achieve a new understanding of the lubrication
mechanisms of RTILs that will enable design and manufacturing of bio-based
lubricants with superior performance that are viable alternatives to petroleum-
based products. The new RTILs will benefit industry, increasing national
competitiveness, as well as society by enabling a cleaner, healthier
environment. In parallel, this project will provide interdisciplinary education,
research, and training opportunities for the next generation of engineers and
scientists in both academic and industrial settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this integrated experimental and computational project is to understand
the mechanisms of RTIL lubrication for sliding surfaces with variable roughness
and topography to enable design of sustainable lubricants from bio-based
feedstock. The RTILs will be evaluated in terms of both their performance as
lubricants and their biodegradability. Through this fundamental study, the
following key scientific questions will be answered: (1) How do RTILs adsorb
(form lubricating layers) on surfaces of varying roughness? (2) What
tribological (friction and wear) and tribocorrosive (synergistic wear-corrosion)
mechanisms are exhibited by RTIL-lubricated surfaces of varying roughness? (3)
How do changes in surface topography influence RTIL lubrication mechanisms? (4)
What is the role of molecular structure in the biodegradability of RTILs?
Answering these questions will provide the foundational knowledge needed to
overcome the current barriers to adopting RTILs as lubricants in industrial
settings. This research will contribute to: (a) an in-depth understanding of the
interplay between electrochemical and mechanical processes that affect material
and lubricant degradation; (b) design criteria for RTIL-lubricated systems with
improved tribocorrosion resistance; and (c) environmentally benign RTILs that
can ultimately replace existing petroleum-based
lubricants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.