* 2010784
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Defining lineage functional types to improve earth system model predictions via inclusion of phylogeny and physiology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* William Hammond, Hammond, William
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2023
* USD 0.00

Life on Earth relies on forests. Providing more than just timber to humans,
forests play an important role in the water and carbon balance of the planet.
Forests, covering nearly a third of the planet’s continents, support more
biodiversity on land than any other type of ecosystem. However, global forests
have experienced wide-spread die-off in recent decades, largely in response to
drought and increasing temperatures. Due to their tremendous economic, social,
and ecological value—identifying where and when forests are threatened by global
change remains a top priority for science. Data collected during the research,
will be used to improve state-of-the-art models called the Earth System Models.
By improving Earth System Models, this project will increase the ability to
predict how forests will fare in future climate conditions. To increase the
broader impacts of the work, the fellow will incorporate the research into
teaching and workshops and share results with forest managers and other
stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will sample over 30 conifer
species in the Klamath Mountains ecoregion of SW Oregon/NW California. The
fellow will collect branch material from each species in the field and return to
the laboratory for paired physiological-spectral measurements. Combining
advanced imaging techniques (hyperspectral, thermal-infrared, chlorophyll
fluorescence) with plant ecophysiology measurements (gas exchange, water
content, vulnerability to embolism), this research will investigate spectral and
physiological trait aggregation at various depths of conifer phylogenies. This
work will result in the development of lineage functional types (LFTs), where
evolutionary relatedness will be included in the functional diversity of
conifers for improving models of the Earth System. The fellow will compare
predictions of Earth System Models using existing plant functional types (based
on form and biome), with the newly developed LFTs at different aggregation
levels. During the project, the fellow will receive training in new areas,
including Earth System Modeling and conducting phylogenetic analyses. Through
annual outreach seminars at the US Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research
Station, this project will inform foresters, land managers, and citizens of
advances made during the research. Additionally, this research will include
hands-on undergraduate training in methods of plant ecophysiology, as portions
of the project will be embedded in courses as research experiences for the next
generation of plant scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.