* 2010038
* Enhancing Rational Number Instruction for Students with Math Disabilities and Difficulties: Designing Professional Development for Teachers Who Provide Math Intervention
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Amber Wang, RG Research Group
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,896,207.00

The project will develop and study a professional development program focused on
fraction for interventionists who work with grades four and five students with
mathematics disabilities and difficulties. Mathematics interventions for
students with mathematical disabilities are provided by a variety of educators
in elementary schools including classroom teachers, special education teachers,
mathematics specialists, and paraprofessionals. However, professional
development and training to address the needs of students with mathematics
disabilities and difficulties varies. This project addresses a need in
elementary schools for improved fraction instruction and the professional
development for interventionists who work with students. The project would
create resources usable by other professional development projects for
interventionists. The project will also provide guidance about professional
development for other mathematics topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The professional
development will be focused on fractions concepts, use interactive and hands-on
methods for learning, and be relevant because fractions are a critical topic in
upper elementary grades. The participants in the student are interventionists
who work with grades 4 and 5 students. The project includes a design phase
followed by a randomized controlled trial to measure teacher-level outcomes.
Measures of instruction, student knowledge and teacher outcomes will be used to
understand the promise of the intervention. Interventionist teaching practice
and fractions knowledge will be used as the proximal outcomes and will be
analyzed using ANCOVAs with the pretest measures serving as the covariates. For
distal outcomes related to fourth- and fifth-grade students’ fractions
achievement, a multi-level model including students and interventionists will be
used. As an early stage design and development project, the design is being
tested in multiple districts in different states. The project relies on prior
research about students’ learning of fractions and related teaching approaches.
The results should inform professional development for interventionists for
students with mathematical disabilities and difficulties. The results also
support understanding of professional development that develops teachers’
knowledge of content and teaching practice simultaneously.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and teachers, through the
research and development of new innovations and approaches. Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.