* 2010940
* Dynamic Matching Problems with Application to Kidney Allocation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Itai Ashlagi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 517,105.00

This award will contribute to the Nation's welfare by investigating improved
strategies for online matching platforms, with a particular focus on kidney
exchanges. The shortage of kidneys for transplants has created a demand for
kidney exchanges, where incompatible patient-donor pairs swap their donated
transplants. The quality of an organ match is determined by a number of factors,
including blood-type and antibody status, age and health condition of patients
and donors, and waiting time of the recipient on the exchange. Kidney exchange
platforms, responsible for arranging these matches, face trade-offs between
forming matches as soon as a feasible donor-recipient pair is identified and
waiting for additional pairs to arrive in order to increase the quality of
matches. A similar trade-off arises in other online service platforms, such as
ride-sharing and job matching, where matching algorithms seek to balance between
serving as many as possible by pooling customers, which may reduce congestion,
and responding quickly to individual passengers' requests. This project will
investigate models and data to better understand these tradeoffs and provide
guidance to policy makers who manage these exchanges. This project will
contribute to improving exchange platforms by studying unexplored, but
practically important, models that can illuminate essential ingredients of good
policies more generally. The project will support graduate students who will
gain experience in using operations research methods that have the potential to
significantly improve healthcare policy in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates a dynamic queueing model for
matching where agents arrive and are matched immediately or placed in a queue
(waiting list) for a potentially better match. A match involves several agents
and results in reward; a delay (the wait in queue) can result in agents'
departure or other disutility, such as deterioration in health condition. At
each point in time the matching policy determines if and which of the feasible
matches are to be executed. Departures (abandonments) and delays in queue
complicate these calculations, as matching opportunities expire, and foregone
matches may also foreclose future opportunites as conditions of those waiting
may degrade. The project will rigorously study dynamic matching policies that
perform well in real networks by (1) identifying the essential ingredients of
good policies and determining the degrees of freedom in designing implementable
exchange protocols; (2) understanding the effect of abandonments and change in
condition over time; and (3) testing potential protocols with transaction-level
data from two American exchange platforms. Mathematical models, to remain
tractable, cannot fully capture all sources of friction. The high-fidelity data-
driven simulations developed for this project will reveal which frictions have a
first order effect on performance and will inform adjustments to the queueing
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.