* 2010869
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Mechanisms of sensory  reception in the hydrodynamically-adapted skin of cetaceans
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Sherri Eldridge, Eldridge                Sherri         A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

&lt;p&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology
for FY 2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project is designed to reveal mechanisms
underlying tactile (touch) reception in cetaceans (whales and dolphins). Many of
these protected species are endangered and elusive, making it difficult to study
how their sensory systems support feeding and other critical behaviors. As
descendants of land mammals, their skin nerves evolved in response to the
aquatic motion of waves, vibrations, pressure changes, locomotion and prey fish.
Using skin samples collected from Megaptera novaeangliae (humpback whales), the
Fellow will use molecular markers that identify nerves by their type.
Interestingly, multiple nerves combine to form thread-like bundles. The Fellow
will use cutting-edge microscopy to analyze the structure of these unusual nerve
bundles. This investigation will show how mammalian nerves have reconfigured
into hydrodynamic sensors, a critical transformation for cetaceans' mastery of
the marine environment. To broaden the impact of the project, the Fellow will
mentor student scientists who have had limited research opportunities, offering
training in observing whale behavior and experimental neurobiology.&lt;/p&gt;
&lt;p&gt;The project goal is to decipher the physiological implications of
cetacean somatosensory anatomy. The fundamental structure of this system is the
heterogenous axon bundle. By performing immunohistochemistry on humpback whale
skin sections, the Fellow will quantify each bundle's A-beta, A-delta and
C-fiber axons, as each of these higher-order combinations constitutes a tactile
phenotype. It is predicted that the function of different types will be
correlated with the skin depth of the receptive terminals, the signals they are
tuned to detect. Descriptive analyses will also compare morphological features,
axonal components and inter-axonal relationships. This work is designed to
uncover a cetacean multimodal mechanoreceptor that converts aquatic stimuli into
electrical signals. A dataset of images will also be annotated at the tissue,
cellular and ultrastructural scales, and made publicly accessible for other
studies on the Woods Hole Open Access Server. To broaden the scientific impacts
of this work, the Fellow will mentor students, develop an online educational
module for cetacean tactile sensation, and coordinate an international workshop
in marine mammal sensory ecology.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
&lt;/p&gt;