* 2010466
* Continuous-Wave Laser Thomson Scattering Diagnostic for Low Temperature Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Azer Yalin, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project will aim to develop a novel diagnostic to quantitatively study
electron populations in a low temperature plasma. Plasma, often referred to as
the fourth-state of matter, is a gas that contains charged species such as
electrons and ions. Low temperature plasmas that also contain energetic atoms
and molecules, referred to as radicals, can enable many technological
applications. The properties of low temperature plasmas are largely governed by
electrons and an ongoing challenge in plasma science has been to develop
diagnostic techniques to measure the temperature and number density of
electrons. The present project addresses this need through the development of a
diagnostic, referred to as continuous-wave Laser Thomson scattering (CW LTS), to
quantitatively measure the electrons. With CW LTS, a high-power laser beam
illuminates the plasma to be studied and the laser light photons are elastically
scattered by the plasma electrons (like colliding billiard balls). The scattered
photons are then detected allowing one to infer electron properties of the
plasma. The project will benefit basic investigations of low temperature plasmas
as well as technological applications including processing plasmas for the
semiconductor industry, plasma thrusters for space exploration, and atmospheric
pressure plasmas. The project will also aim to attract students from
underrepresented groups to participate in the development of a CO2 laser
demonstration for outreach to local K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to develop a new paradigm for Laser Thomson scattering (LTS) based
on using continuous-wave (CW), high-power (&gt;kW) light sources to achieve
higher scattering counts and improved detection limits as compared to
conventional systems with pulsed lasers. Since the signal stream is continuous,
the CW LTS approach will attempt to advance LTS from measuring time-average
electron parameters to capturing temporally resolved dynamics up to ~10-100 kHz.
This would represent an unprecedented and powerful advance of LTS towards
studying plasma dynamics such as ionization and recombination in pulsed
discharges, plasma waves, and oscillations such as the breathing mode in Hall
effect thrusters. The diagnostic advances will be shared in publications and
conferences and will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses at
Colorado State University. Students from underrepresented minority groups will
be sought to work on the project both for graduate thesis research and for
undergraduate research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.