* 2010014
* CNH2-L-RUI-Collaborative: Undoing Legacies of Inequality in Urban Tree-Human Dynamics: From redlining to equitable and resilient urban socio-ecological systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Todd Rosenstiel, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,545,780.00

Urban forests provide an abundance of goods and services to human communities,
and human actions determine urban tree wellness and distribution. This tree-
human relationship is at the heart of the urban socio-ecological system, where
most of us will reside in the future, and it is critical for creating
sustainable and equitable urban environments. However, a history of
discriminatory housing policies and other forms of marginalization have
systematically excluded trees and their ecosystem services from lower income and
non-white neighborhoods. To address these socio-ecological inequities within our
cities, we need a better understanding of the dynamics and connections that
govern the urban tree-human relationship. This research will meet this need
through an integrative and interdisciplinary research agenda combining novel
measures of tree health with assessments of socially biased policies and
practices. This information will aid the development and testing of new models
that describe the tree-human relationship across US cities and will bring
together researchers, students, decision-makers, and community members to begin
undoing legacies of inequality and building more equitable and resilient urban
environments for all. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project aims
to understand how historical legacies of discrimination are reflected in preset
social-ecological dynamics in urban environments and how to develop effective
strategies for promoting healthy, equitable, and resilient urban socio-
ecological systems. The research team will develop novel indicators of urban
tree and ecosystem health by integrating recent advances in plant physiology and
remote sensing (e.g., ultra-high-resolution hyperspectral imagery, and LiDAR).
Current urban forest extent and vulnerability will then be examined at multiple
spatio-temporal scales and in specific historical contexts to elucidate the role
of socially-biased policies and practices that set the stage for inequitable and
non-resilient urban tree-human dynamics. Finally, structural equation models
will be developed to describe how social and ecological health flow in
intertwined ways from the socio-ecological structure, function, and dynamics of
major US cities. These models will provide a means to forecast future urban
forest health and resilience given possible ecological, social, and climatic
change. The bulk of the detailed natural and human subsystems work will be
completed in Portland OR, an urban socio-ecological system with an extensive
past of redlining and readily available datasets on social and biophysical
characteristics. Structural equation modeling will then be applied to several
dozen major cities throughout the US and North America across thirteen
ecoregions to identify city-specific and generalized principles that determine
equity and resilience in urban socio-ecological systems. Overall, this project
advances research and theory in urban social-ecological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.