* 2010983
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020:Courting death or reproductive success? Analysis of interactions underlying rapid evolutionary change in crickets
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Zonana, Zonana, David Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Living organisms constantly navigate a web of
interactions with mates, competitors, and enemies. Over lifetimes, the outcomes
of these diverse interactions shape an individual’s likelihood of survival and
reproduction. However, strategies that are successful in one type of interaction
may be catastrophic in other contexts. For instance, producing a flashy
courtship display may gain the attention of potential mates, but can also alert
nearby predators and parasites to their next meal. Understanding how such
tradeoffs shape the evolution of traits and behaviors will improve the ability
to predict how organisms will respond to a rapidly changing world. This project
will capitalize on the rapid and ongoing evolution of acoustic courtship songs
in the Pacific field cricket (Teleogryllus oceanicus) to test how key
characteristics evolve in concert with changes to mating behaviors and
ecological interactions with natural enemies. To increase the impact, this
project will engage K-16 students to increase participation in the sciences
through close one-on-one mentoring, an immersive course-based undergraduate
research experience (CURE), and the generation of open-source online evolution
teaching materials.

The fellow will combine three empirical approaches to investigate how
evolutionary fitness emerges through both fine-scale social interactions between
Pacific field crickets and their ecological interactions with a fatally
parasitic fly, Ormia ochracea, that hunts by listening for singing male
crickets. Using leading-edge molecular techniques, the fellow will first
identify regions of the genome that underlie variation in cricket wing
morphology that produces courtship song—a phenotype involved in both mating and
susceptibility to parasitism. Second, the fellow will generate social networks
using video-based tracking methods to characterize mating behaviors used by
crickets with different wing morphologies and signals, and to estimate the
strength of mate selection operating under various social contexts. Finally, the
fellow will conduct field-based selection experiments in the Hawaiian Islands
that manipulate the composition and exposure to parasitism of cricket
populations—while quantifying survival and natural mating patterns—¬in order to
estimate the relative effects of natural and mate selection on fitness and trait
evolution. The fellow will receive training from experts in experimental
approaches with whole organisms, field-based studies, and evolutionary genomics
at both the University of Denver, and the University of St. Andrews (UK). The
fellow will also develop effective science curriculum and will lead immersive
research-based educational experiences at a Hawaiian undergraduate institution
with a diverse student body.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.