* 2010705
* CAREER:A Multidisciplinary Approach to Unraveling the Neural Circuits that Govern Odor Modulation of Locomotion and to Improving Neuroscience Education
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Vikas Bhandawat, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/29/2024
* USD 582,347.00

A simple task like walking to one's favorite coffee shop involves computation
across several timescales. On a short timescale (less than 1 second), one has to
move one's legs on an uneven surface and maintain balance; on a medium timescale
(a few seconds) one has to walk relatively straight on a sidewalk; on a longer
timescale (minutes), one has to follow the street signs or use one's memory to
navigate; and on an even longer timescale decisions such as whether or not to
drink coffee are made. The mission of the principal investigator's laboratory is
to understand neural computations underlying behavior at multiple timescales as
they apply to a given task using novel techniques such as creating mathematical
models of behavior and developing new methods for probing neural activity as it
relates to behavior. The proposed research also has an important educational
mission: Most problems in the world require interdisciplinary thinking, which is
best taught at an early age. In this project, high school students are directly
involved in the investigator's multidisciplinary research program, with the
goals of (1) deepening the students' neuroscience education with a focus on
engineering, mathematics, and technology, (2) exposing them to interdisciplinary
training at a younger and more receptive age, and (3) preparing them well to
think holistically about complex scientific problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objective of the principal investigator's research is to understand
how sensorimotor transformation unfolds in the brain during the performance of
complex behaviors that are part of an animal's natural behavioral repertoire.
The gap in understanding of this process exists because attacking this problem
requires an integrated, multidisciplinary approach that combines neuroscience
techniques, animal behavior, and computational skills- a combination not often
found in one investigator. The central hypothesis of the project is that
flexible behaviors emerge from a modular organization and can be divided into
two neural subtasks: (1) to devise an "action plan" that transforms sensory
responses into actions; and (2) to adapt the action plan to current demands and
thereby generate behavioral flexibility needed for successful task execution.
The project tests this hypothesis in the context of odor-guided locomotion, a
complex flexible behavior, in a relatively simple and genetically highly
tractable model system, Drosophila. A multidisciplinary approach that includes
mathematical modeling, in vivo whole-cell patch clamp recordings, functional
imaging, and quantitative behavioral analysis is employed to address the central
hypothesis.