* 2010483
* Supporting Science Learning and Teaching in Middle School Classrooms through Automated Analysis of Students' Writing
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,066,123.00

This project will develop a novel, automated technology to provide middle-school
students and their teachers with real-time feedback about students’ written
explanations of physics phenomena. The use of evidence to build scientific
explanations is a central practice by which scientific knowledge is generated
and learned. Students often do not understand what a scientific explanation is
and frequently write incomplete, non-causal accounts of scientific phenomenon.
Teachers often have difficulties in helping students write explanations, as it
is complex and time-consuming. Working in groups of three or four and
experimenting with designing a roller coaster, students will learn about key
principles in physics such as the conservation of energy and the laws concerning
forces and motion. Each student will be provided with a digital journal. The
prompts and information in the journal will structure the roller coaster
activities (supported 6-8 weeks of instruction) and provide the students with a
place to record their written ideas and explanations. At the close of several
rounds of experimentation and analysis, students will write causal explanations
for their current design. Through the use of the wise crowd automated assessment
system, students will receive feedback on their writing. (The automated wise
crowd model uses a content assessment of the explanations of experts as the
foundation for analyzing and providing feedback to students.) Teachers will also
use information from the system to facilitate full class discussions and
individualized support. Project research and development activities will result
in a fully developed and tested mechanism for providing feedback for students’
science explanations. Through automated support of the content analysis of
student writing across multiple assignments, the project innovations will allow
teachers to more fully integrate writing into their assignments. Ultimately, the
project can help students understand how scientific explanations are developed
and justified and make them more critical consumers of scientific knowledge so
they can make better informed decisions about scientific issues in everyday
life.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will use a design-based research
approach in developing the automated system using wise-crowd analysis and in
assessing the impacts of the system on student learning and teacher classroom
practices. Four research questions will guide the research: (1) How does
feedback from the wise crowd system affect students’ written explanation of
scientific phenomenon?; (2) How do students with different levels of prior
knowledge and reading comprehension benefit from automated feedback and teacher
scaffolding?; (3) How do teachers use automated assessment and aggregated
summaries of students’ explanations during instruction?; and (4) In what ways
does scaffolding from the wise crowd system and feedback from teachers support
students’ written explanations of learning? Through the four-year project, an
iterative development process will include the design of the system and testing
of two iterations of the system; research of student responses across the
progression of roller coaster design and written assignments; and use of some
validated and custom instruments to assess student understanding of key forces
and assessment of student abilities to use data to evaluate claims. Classroom
studies will use video data and researcher field notes to help understand how
teachers facilitated the use of the wise-crowd system. Research will culminate
in testing of the final version of the wise crowd system. Using a quasi-
experimental design, classes will be randomly assigned to the treatment or
comparison conditions. Findings will advance knowledge in the field about the
best ways to integrate content assessment and feedback from the automated system
with classroom and individual support from teachers to optimize learning for
students. Materials and results generated from the project will be broadly
disseminated, resulting in significant impacts for researchers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.