* 2010604
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Joshua Atkinson, Atkinson, Joshua T
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research will integrate approaches from
many disciplines including biology, engineering, and physics to analyze and
quantify the function of biological molecules important for long-distance
electron transfer (LDET) in microbial communities. This research will span
hierarchical scales studying how genes and proteins enable the assembly of
filaments of bacterial cells that electronically interact with materials present
in the environment. Insight into the genetic rules governing microbial LDET has
implications for designing multicellular communities to maintain and regenerate
nutrient cycles to address global scale challenges in agriculture and
sustainability. Knowledge gained during this effort will also enable the
construction of novel microbial electronics where cells with modular genetic
programs can be coupled to electrodes using LDET through conductive cellular
filaments. Additionally, the Fellow will develop an interactive Paper-based
Organism Waste Energy Recovery (POWER) device to enable high school and
undergraduate students to electronically interact with microbes. The POWER
device will allow students to interrogate how different genetic programs alter
electricity production and illustrate electrochemical and electrical engineering
principles.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Microorganisms contribute to Earth-scale
biogeochemical processes by regulating electron transfer across a range of
spatial scales. Recently, bacteria living in aquatic sediments were discovered
that perform LDET by forming filaments of thousands of cells spanning
centimeter-scale redox gradients found in these environments. Thus far, it has
not been possible to isolate and grow these ‘cable bacteria’ in pure culture.
This challenge has limited the throughput of research on understanding the
genetic rules governing this unique LDET phenotype. Using recently acquired
cable bacteria genomic information and synthetic biology approaches, the Fellow
plans to reconstruct cable bacteria phenotypes in a lab-tractable organism,
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, to begin testing the genetic components underlying
this unique multicellular microbial phenotype. The Fellow will use synthetic
biology approaches to program filament formation and train in electrochemical,
scanning-probe, and spectroscopic techniques to examine intercellular electron
transfer in these synthetic cables. This transformative, systems-based research
project will establish the first sequence-function relationships of cable
bacteria genes and will be the first step toward decoding the Rules of Life
governing long-distance electron transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.