* 2010176
* I-Corps: A novel vaginal dynamometer for evaluating pelvic floor health in  women
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Robert Hitchcock, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new device to take accurate measures of pelvic floor strength
to provide with physicians with a reliable and repeatable assessment of pelvic
floor health. One in every four women in the US will experience a pelvic floor
disorder in their lifetime. Physicians still rely on digital palpation, a
finger-squeeze test, to assess the pelvic floor, which has marginal clinical
reliability. This device can detect small changes in pelvic floor strength and
help physicians diagnose a pelvic floor disorder before symptoms arise. This
project will not only focus on the development of this diagnostic device, but
also begin assessing the need and commercial opportunity for other products
focused on pelvic floor care and rehabilitation. Pelvic health is a largely
underserved market and has only recently gained attention through the
commercialization of several mobile health training aids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is to explore the development of a
vaginal dynamometer, based on a reusable speculum coupled with a removable
sensor to assess pelvic floor strength. The results from this device showed that
a removable sensor design provides accurate results while reducing the cost-per-
use to an acceptable level for routine use. The major limiting factor of current
pelvic floor assessment technologies is the cost of use. Perineometers,
ultrasound, and MRI are prohibitively costly for routine use in regular
gynecologic checkups. The removable sensor design allows the patient-contacting
portion of the device to undergo standard reprocessing protocols, such as
autoclave, while the fragile sensor and electronics are removed and reused. We
believe that such a design would become accessible for routine gynecologic use
and could become a vital sign of pelvic health, much like blood pressure is for
cardiovascular health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.