* 2010658
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Micah Freedman, Freedman                Micah          G
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Insects that eat plants comprise the vast
majority of terrestrial animal species, and most specialize on a small number of
plant species. Understanding host specialization in insects is thus important
for understanding the diversity of life on Earth. One hypothesis for the
prevalence of host specialization is that it allows insects to incorporate toxic
host plant chemicals into their own tissues. This process is known as
sequestration and helps to confer chemically-mediated protection against
predators and pathogens. Sequestration in insects is best-known from the monarch
butterfly (Danaus plexippus), whose larvae feed on milkweed plants containing
toxic chemicals (cardenolides) that make them distasteful to predators. Although
monarch sequestration has been studied, the genes involved in cardenolide uptake
and transport remain unknown, and it is also unclear whether the monarch’s
ability to sequester cardenolides is a cause or a consequence of specializing on
milkweed host plants. This research will answer these basic questions about
monarchs while involving undergraduates from underrepresented groups in this
investigation; educational workshops will encourage the citizen science
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approaches below will link variation in
genes (ATPα1 binding domain, transporters) to variation in a phenotype
(sequestration ability) that affects the way that monarchs interact with their
environment. In the first approach, the Fellow will leverage natural variation
in cardenolide content of two milkweed species and natural variation in the
ability of monarch populations to sequester cardenolides. Using experimental
rearing and gene expression analysis, the Fellow will determine the genes
involved in the process of cardenolide transport and storage, and how these
genes differ in expression across hosts, monarch populations, and developmental
stages. In the second approach, the Fellow will use “evolution-in-reverse” to
understand which evolved first: the monarch’s target site insensitivity to
cardenolides or the ability to sequester cardenolides. The Fellow will use gene-
editing techniques (CRISPR-Cas9) to introduce a series of stepwise mutations
into the cardenolide target site (the Na+/K+-ATPase) to determine whether
sequestration is still possible on a cardenolide-sensitive background. The
Fellow will gain valuable training in molecular biology, chemical ecology, and
bioinformatics as well as in outreach by expanding the Monarch Larvae Monitoring
Program to Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.