* 2010695
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Conflict Resolution: How to  Train your Inherited Bacteria
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Karissa Cross, Cross, Karissa Lynn
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Animals live in a world dominated by
microorganisms, and many insects live closely together with bacteria that can
harm them or provide advantages in their environments. However, little is known
about how animals and bacteria work together to ensure stability in these
tightly intertwined relationships. The Nasonia wasp genus and the Wolbachia
bacteria that infect their reproductive tissues are an excellent model for
investigating how a system evolves to resolve conflict between a host and its
resident microbes. This proposal will characterize the host genetic system that
controls the densities of this intimate relationship. Investigations in this
system will explore general rules for how host-microbe interactions have evolved
in the animal kingdom. To broaden the impact of the work, the Fellow will work
with diverse student organizations to mentor students and advertise open
positions in the laboratory and offer teacher workshops on the international lab
series Discover the Microbes Within! The Wolbachia Project
(www.vanderbilt.edu/wobachiaproject).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nasonia genus is
comprised of closely related species and each species has unique types of
Wolbachia bacteria. Notably, the Wolbachia of one wasp is found only in their
reproductive tissues and is maintained at low densities. When this Wolbachia
bacterium is transferred to a different related wasp species, Wolbachia levels
increase and expand into other tissues. To identify the genes that together
control symbiont inheritance, transmission, density variation, and ensuing
tissue tropism, the Fellow will generate Nasonia segmental introgression lines
to isolate the genetic regions responsible for controlling low Wolbachia
densities. Second, fine-scale mapping and transcriptomics of these lines will
determine the candidate genes that regulate Wolbachia densities which will be
validated by disruptions to gene expression via RNAi and CRISPR. Third, in vivo
immunohistochemistry and co-immunoprecipitation with the gene product(s) will
determine the key host, or Wolbachia, proteins that interact with the proteins
of interest. The Fellow will learn integrative tools bridging genetics,
evolutionary biology, immunohistochemistry, and biochemistry to address timely
questions in biology. The Fellow will also enroll in a 10-week course to obtain
a Certificate in College Teaching to enhance and refine their teaching skills.
To increase the impact of the project, the Fellow will collaborate with local
institutions and programs to broaden participation of underrepresented students
at the high school and undergraduate level by providing opportunities for
research and lab training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.