* 2010088
* A Theoretical Framework for Photoionization and Photodetachment Rate Calculations in the Lower Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Victor Pasko, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 05/31/2024
* USD 351,219.00

This award will support the development of a modeling framework for
photoionization and photo-detachment rates of metallic species generated by
meteoric ablation events. The sources are multiple EUV, UV, and visible systems
of O2 and N2 molecular band emissions that might be generated by transient
luminous events (sprites, elves, lightning), auroral activity, and meteor
trails. These results would make possible specific calculations for the D-region
and lower thermosphere sporadic layers of possible localized effects upon
ionospheric composition or ionospheric dynamics featuring spatial scales a few
kms in extent. A graduate student and summer undergraduate students would be
supported in this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is based primarily upon
the fact that the photo-ionization thresholds of metallic species is quite low
relative to the ionization thresholds of other atmospheric constituents such as
N2 or O2. Thus, the illumination sources of TLE, aurora, and meteor trails would
be sufficiently energetic to achieve the ionization of neutral metallic species
or the detachment of electrons from any ionospheric negative ions present within
the region affected by meteors or precipitating electrons or TLE
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.