* 2010766
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Proportional assembly of intracellular structures
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Shane McInally, McInally, Shane G
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Every cell must measure and control specific
aspects of its size, and the size of its internal components, yet how this is
achieved remains an unsolved problem. Proper function of different cellular
structures, including mitochondria, which produce energy, and components of the
cytoskeleton, a rigid internal structure that helps cells keep their shape,
depend on different aspects of their size. These structures are also dynamic, as
they continuously replace their molecular components. To understand how cells
control the size of these structures, the fellow will explore new mechanisms of
size control by developing quantitative models that describe these aspects of
cellular design. This research will uncover the mechanisms cells use to control
and scale the sizes of their internal parts, which is a universal engineering
challenge faced by all living systems. Another major goal of this project is to
expand interdisciplinary scientific education of graduate and undergraduate
students through the Quantitative Biology Research Community (QBReC) at Brandeis
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand how
cells assemble subcellular structures that are proportional to their linear
dimensions. Current models of cellular size control cannot explain this critical
aspect of cellular behavior. To address this problem, the fellow will perform
research that is broken down into two aims. In the first aim, quantitative
microscopy methods will be used to compare the scaling of actin cable lengths in
yeast cells with natural and genetically induced changes to cell size. The
fellow will also test the role of cell shape in determining actin cable lengths
in mutant cells with elongated morphologies. In the second aim, quantitative
measurements will be made of the different rates that govern actin cable
assembly. The fellow will acutely deplete or activate different cable assembly
proteins, while at the same time perturbing cell size and shape. A key goal will
be to determine which rate(s) confer scaling of actin cable length with cell
size. In both aims, the fellow will use super-resolution microscopy and develop
new quantitative image analysis methods. In conjunction with the experimental
work, the fellow will be building and testing biophysical models of self-
organization of actin cables in yeast. The models will in turn fuel new
experimental work on the cables, as well as provide mechanistic insights into
the scaling of other self-assembling structures in cells. In addition to the
formal training in theoretical modeling, the fellow will receive training in
grantsmanship, project design and interpretation, manuscript writing, teaching,
and scientific communication. The fellow will also mentor students from a range
of scientific backgrounds through the Quantitative Biology Research Community
(QBReC) at Brandeis University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.