* 2010781
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Untangling the Environmental and Genetic Drivers of Phenological Timing in Red Oak (Quercus rubra) to Improve Predictions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Meghan Blumstein, Blumstein, Meghan
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2023
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Meghan Blumstein is "Untangling the Environmental and
Genetic Drivers of Phenological Timing in Red Oak (Quercus rubra) to Improve
Climate Predictions". The host institutions for the fellowship are the Center
for Functional Ecology and Evolution (Montpellier, FR) and the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. David Des
Marais and Isabelle Chuine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forests absorb a large
proportion of carbon emissions each year via photosynthesis, making them a key
player in mitigating global change. Thus, knowing when trees start and end
photosynthesis each year is essential to predicting future warming. Extensive
research has shown that the timing of leaf-out in trees is governed by both
genetics and environment. However, no study to date has combined our
understanding of these two drivers and their interaction into one framework.
This study will address this need by elucidating how environment and genetics
interact to alter leaf-out timing in the North American species red oak (Quercus
rubra). Broader impacts include broadening participation of students from
underrepresented groups and the generation of new genomic and phenotypic
resources that will improve the ability to predict leaf-out timing and provide
guidance for setting up assisted migration conservation programs aimed to speed
the movement of locally adapted individuals northward in pace with environmental
change. Training objectives for the Fellow include genomics, gene expression
profiling, ecophysiology, and process-based modeling. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage a wide-spread system of phenological
cameras (phenocams) in a novel way to quantify the genetic and environmental
drivers of leaf-out variation in red oak and integrate this into a process-based
model. Specific objectives include: 1) genetically sequencing red oak
individuals growing in phenocam "viewsheds". These sequences will be used to
derive population structure and develop a set of candidate loci associated with
phenological timing; 2) experimentally manipulating twigs collected after budset
from a subset of individuals to parse out the environmental versus genetic
drivers of variation; 3) collecting gene expression data via transcriptomics to
further refine candidate loci; and, 4) modifying existing process-based model
structures to test hypotheses regarding how the inclusion of population
structure, genetic variation, and local adaptation can improve model performance
and alter our predictions. This project will provide a broad array of mentoring
and research training for graduate and undergraduate students via summer and
term-time programs aimed at increasing diversity in STEM fields. In addition,
the Fellow will participate in public outreach via the U.S. and French National
Phenological Networks' citizen science programs, civic engagement via the MIT
Policy Lab, and mentoring All genomic data will be made publicly available on
the Hardwood Genomics Project open-source database
(https://www.hardwoodgenomics.org/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: Rules of
Life, predictive modeling, genomics, genotype x environment interactions (GxE),
image acquisition using phenological cameras, red oak (Quercus
rubra)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.