* 2010588
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Grammar and Social Practice of Arapaho Storytelling: Stories in Conversational and Social Context
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* J. Andrew Cowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2022
* USD 3,712.00

This project builds on the extensive linguistic research of the Arapaho language
of the Algonquian family in North America to examine the role of grammar in the
social practice of storytelling and story initiations. Previous studies in this
and other Native American languages demonstrated value in exploring the
conversational data for understanding the language and its social role. Such
conversational habits as telling a story, complaining, reminiscing are the core
principles of the linguistic repertoires observed in the Arapaho speech
community. Thus, the proficiency to correctly tell a story or to produce a
complaint without outing the main offender is as important as knowing one's
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining the contemporary conversational
practices of the native Arapaho speakers, the research asks how stories are
initiated and what these initiations entail for the conversation. This research
analyzes data collected in previous studies of the language, relying on the
video recordings. The analysis will create a model of story initiations by
annotating the grammatical nuances, auditory cues, and conversational patterns
in the corpus. To test the viability of the model and the quality of
annotations, the researchers will interview the native Arapaho speakers in the
Wind River Indian Reservation. The interviews will be conducted using real-time
communication technologies on mobile devices with cellular internet, which is
the main reliable internet service available on the reservation. The inclusion
of the native community is crucial for this project. It emphasizes the value of
the language to the indigenous traditions. Lastly, this research will contribute
to the language reclamation efforts in which this community is engaged. The
grammatical and interactional aspects relevant to story initiations will inform
the creation of language learning materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.