* 2010361
* Bridging Science Teaching and Learning in Title 1 Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Nancy Schafer, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 12/31/2022
* USD 449,981.00

This project addresses a long-standing challenge in science education centered
on a national commitment to and interest in advancing the prosperity and welfare
of young learners who have been historically underrepresented in science. It
addresses challenges with broadening participation in science by providing
equity and access to quality science instruction at Title 1 elementary schools
in metro Atlanta, Georgia. Title 1 schools are schools with large concentrations
of low-income students that receive supplemental funds to assist in meeting
educational goals and educational needs of students living near poverty levels.
Opportunities to learn science in elementary school are particularly limited;
especially in those schools that serve racially and ethnically diverse children
and children suffering from poverty. Interventions aimed at broadening
participation have been limited in both impact and scope. This project is
addressing this challenge through the development, implementation, and
evaluation of a professional development model that will prepare teachers to
effectively utilize science education practices grounded in culturally
responsive pedagogy. It provides a new science instruction model that intersects
the best practices in science education with the theoretical principles of
culturally relevant/responsive pedagogy found to influence students from low
economic, diverse communities. By focusing on both in-service and preservice
teachers, the project will make a valuable contribution to the understanding of
teacher education across the trajectory of educatorsâ€™ careers and deepen an
understanding of how to prepare teachers to adopt and effectively utilize
effective practices in their everyday classrooms, particularly in relation to
science teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve 30
preservice and 20 in-service teachers participating in a summer academy and
workshops introducing them to instructional features of the model that will
later be used during instruction with the students. Instruction provided by the
teachers will impact approximately 1,420 students. The goal of the project is to
design and test an innovative science instruction model that intersects the best
practices in science education with the principles of culturally responsive
pedagogy. The two-year design and development project incorporate mixed methods
to examine the three components of the model hypothesized as critical for
improvements in teacher practice: culturally responsive classroom management,
discourse, and anchoring. Use of qualitative and quantitative methods and
measures during exploration provides critical information on how to support
instruction in Title 1 STEM schools in ways that are feasible, yet effective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.