* 2010880
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Assessing Changes in Microbial  Metabolisms Across Environmental Gradients in the Deep Biosphere
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Andrew Montgomery, Montgomery, Andrew
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Microorganisms represent a significant portion
of life on Earth and are responsible for an array of activities across a wide
range of habitats. Microbes play a pivotal role in driving geological and
environmental processes that help shape the natural world. Understanding the
functional capabilities of microorganisms can advance knowledge about global
carbon (a key building block of life) cycling and may help elucidate the limits
of life across environmental gradients. Relatively few studies have been done
that directly link specific microorganisms with active chemical (metabolic)
processes in real time. This research will use new technology to directly link
microbial types to their functional roles in deep subseafloor environments. This
will provide insight into how microbes survive and contribute to ecosystem
processes in extreme environments. The fellow will broaden participation in
science by developing a science communication program with a local Native
American tribal college and by engaging diverse undergraduate students in
environmental research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sediment biosphere supports a
significant portion of Earthâ€™s biomass in one of the largest ecosystems on the
planet. The environmental roles of microbes in the deep biosphere are largely
uncharacterized, but the range of redox conditions in this ecosystem presents a
unique opportunity to explore how microbes respond to changes in environmental
stimuli. This research aims to characterize the active microbial populations in
the deep biosphere and link these active taxa with metabolic function across
environmental gradients to correlate the genetics, physiology, and ecology that
drive deep sea carbon flow. The fellow will use biorthogonal non-canonical amino
acid tagging (BONCAT), fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS), single cell
genomics, metagenome and metatranscriptome sequencing, direct activity
measurements, and geochemical approaches to identify active microbial
populations and decipher the genes involved in their metabolisms. Characterizing
linkages between metabolic potential and activity will contribute directly to
the understanding of the Rules of Life governing changes in metabolic function.
Additionally, the fellow aims to broaden science participation by organizing and
implementing a science communication program that provides students from diverse
backgrounds with opportunities to be exposed to and participate in deep sea
research. This program will be designed specifically to connect students from a
local Native American tribal college with cutting-edge research, thus increasing
inclusion of a population underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.