* 2010237
* Collaborative Research: Design Talks: Building Community with Elementary Engineering
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jessica Watkins, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 164,969.00

Inclusion of engineering design activities in elementary classrooms has become
increasingly common, and teachers are becoming more comfortable with the basics
of teaching engineering. There is now a need and an opportunity to understand
different approaches teachers can take to support students to deepen their
understanding of engineering design content knowledge and engineering practices.
While many existing approaches to preK-12 engineering education emphasize
problem solving and the development of engineering solutions, this project also
explores how classroom conversations can engage children in making sense of the
problems that they are addressing and foregrounding ethics while making design
decisions. To provide children with opportunities to engage in rich classroom
conversations, the project team uses a community-based engineering curricular
approach, where students address problems that affect their local school
communities. The discussion-focused, community-based engineering curricular
approach has promise in providing opportunities for children to practice sense-
making and decision-making skills and also develop a perspective of care as
central to engineering design work. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this
project, the researchers extend an ongoing partnership with two elementary
teachers to implement the discussion-rich community-based engineering curricular
approach and collect video-recordings of the elementary students’ engineering
design conversations. The videos will be analyzed using discourse analysis to
generate evidence-based theory on the characteristics and dynamics of classroom
talk that support elementary students’ knowledge construction in engineering
design contexts, as well as theory on how teachers prompt them and elicit
meaningful participation from all students. By providing additional resources
and an intellectual framework for investigating and prompting meaningful
disciplinary discourse in engineering design, the project will support the two
partner teachers to apprentice eight of their colleagues over three years into
the work of community-based engineering and design talk. This collaboration will
develop resources that will support teachers and students to engage in more
caring, ethical discourse around design. Specifically, the project team will
create an online video library of design talk resources for grade 1-6 classroom
teachers. The “Design Talk” website will enable elementary teachers to see
distinctly different kinds of classroom conversations that make elementary
engineering a site for students not just to build products, but also to build
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.