* 2010756
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Convergent evolution of morphological integration in Indonesian shrews
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jonathan Nations, Nations                 Jonathan
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will use biological collections in innovative
ways. To answer the question “why are there so many species?”, biologists have
developed an interest in 1) how closely related species living in a community
share resources, 2) how shape and size reflects how a species moves and eats,
and 3) whether species in different places that use similar resources evolve
similar body plans. The fellow will use 3D images of shrew skeletons from
different Indonesian islands to test for differences in the feeding behavior and
locomotion of species that live together in diverse communities, revealing how
species compete for, or share resources. The research will then test for
physical similarities between shrews that live on different islands but use
similar resources, revealing whether these animals have evolved in a repeated
and predictable way to survive in similar habitats. The research will provide
insight on how natural selection and community interactions form the rich
diversity found in the world’s tropical forests. To broaden the impact of the
work, students from underrepresented groups will be mentored in research and an
episode about the project will be produced for the Brain Scoop YouTube
channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although many biological radiations are famous for
their exceptional phenotypic and functional diversity, some “non-adaptive”
radiations, such as Old-World shrews, have rapidly diversified to form equally
rich communities of remarkably similar-looking species. The research will
evaluate the impact of competition in community dynamics by testing for
functional differences in species-rich shrew communities across three islands in
Indonesia’s Malay Archipelago. Using microCT scans of museum collections in a
comparative framework the fellow will test for functional differences in
syntopic species, convergent evolution of putative morphotypes between islands,
and evolutionary covariance between discrete skeletal elements. Results will
either support the role of competition in community assembly by highlighting
functional differences in syntopic species, or, suggest that function, as it
relates to diet and locomotion, does not play a substantial role in the
formation and maintenance of these communities. This research will generate
large amounts of open-access morphological data, develop best practices in 3D
data dissemination, and engender collaboration with researchers in Indonesia.
Two Chicago State University students from STEM underrepresented groups will be
trained in phylogenetic and morphological comparative methods, and a team from
the Field Museum will record a “Brain Scoop” episode focused on this research
that will be accessible to a worldwide audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.