* 2010866
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Genetic and  biological substrates facilitating detection and evaluation of potential mates in a novel mammalian model
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Ehren Bentz, Bentz, Ehren James
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Locating, identifying, and selecting suitable
mates is a fundamental challenge common to all life. These important aspects of
reproduction are often accomplished through chemical communication involving
pheromones. Thus, the chemical sense of smell used to detect pheromones is
important to successful animal reproduction. African giant pouched rats possess
a powerful sense of smell which allows them to communicate using a complex
system of pheromone signals. These pheromones are used to pass detailed
information to one another about gender, age, reproductive features and quality
as potential mates. Despite the importance, little is known about how this
information is passed using pheromones or what physical mechanisms are used to
detect and interpret these signals. This research seeks to answer these
questions and represents the first steps toward establishing a unique rodent
model of reproduction and chemical communication that will advance the
understanding of how appropriate mates are identified. The fellow will broaden
participation within the scientific community by including undergraduate student
researchers at the beginning of their careers and through collaborative
international field research involving students and researchers from Sokoine
University of Agriculture in Morogoro, Tanzania.

Utilizing an integrative approach combining behavioral, physiological and
molecular evidence, this research seeks to describe the genetic and biological
substrates facilitating detection, identification and evaluation of potential
mates in the African giant pouched rat. First, the genetic potential for
expression of vomeronasal chemical receptor proteins will be investigated using
in-silico genomic analyses comparing receptor repertoires of related species to
identify biologically relevant genes and provide insight regarding the relative
biological importance of the vomeronasal chemosensory system of the pouched rat.
Next, high throughout RNA-sequencing will be used to examine expression of
vomeronasal and olfactory chemical receptors and describe variation by gender,
developmental phenotype, or reproductive status suggestive of optimization of
sensitivity toward biologically relevant chemical stimuli. This research
component will be conducted in collaboration with Sokoine University of
Agriculture using animals from natural Tanzanian populations. Lastly, behavioral
assays will determine the specific roles of the vomeronasal and main olfactory
chemosensory systems, and how these systems interact to facilitate chemical
communication and reproduction. Mentoring students and collaboration with
scientists in Tanzania will broaden the impact of this work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.