* 2010699
* Interaction of Low-Energy Positrons with Atoms and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* C. Surko, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 625,230.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on
science with positrons (the antiparticles of electrons). Positrons play an
important role in basic science, including atomic, plasma and astrophysics,
biology and medicine. They also have many technological applications such as new
techniques for mass spectroscopy, the characterization of materials using
positrons, and positron emission tomography (PET) to study metabolic processes
and for drug design. While aspects of positron interactions with matter are well
understood, there are many outstanding questions. When positrons and electrons
collide, they can annihilate with the energy converted to gamma rays. Such
processes are important facets in gaining an understanding of the physics and
chemistry of the interaction of matter and antimatter. This research group has
shown that positrons bind to many molecules (lifetimes before annihilation less
than one hundred millionth of a second). The positron binding studies the group
will be doing are relevant to positron surface states on materials and the fate
of positrons in PET. In terms of scientific education and training, the research
will actively involve students and young researchers at all levels, from the
planning of experiments to the dissemination of research results. The project
involves small-scale experiments that are an excellent training ground for
scientific and technical personnel. The work will be communicated broadly, not
only to physics audiences but also to those involved in plasma, chemical, and
materials science, and gaseous electronics research. Antimatter in the
laboratory is an important new frontier of science. It is regarded with
considerable fascination by lay audiences; and as such, it aids in helping
broader segments of society to appreciate basic research in the physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous research, the group showed that
positrons bind to molecules. Two important intellectual challenges related to
this phenomenon, and the modes of annihilation that result from it, are to
develop methods to treat electron-positron correlations and to better understand
the role of molecular dynamics in positron annihilation processes when a
positron is in the proximity of neutral matter. The research being conducted
under this award speaks to both of these issues. One focus of the project is
gaining a better understanding of positron binding to molecules, the magnitudes
of these binding energies, and what they depend upon. A second objective is
gaining a better understanding of mechanisms for positron annihilation in
molecules, which proceeds by a resonant process in which annihilation rates can
be orders of magnitude greater than expected on the basis of simple collisions.
While it is appreciated that molecular vibrations play an important role in this
enhancement, the details are not understood. The experiments will be conducted
with a state-of-the-art, tunable, high-energy-resolution positron beam that was
developed recently by the research team and is now coming to full capability.
The excellent energy resolution of this new beam is expected to play an
important role in making detailed annihilation spectral measurements as a
function of incident positron energy. This can provide much more precise
measurements of positron binding energies and key insights into the critical
role molecular dynamics plays in producing greatly enhanced annihilation
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.