* 2010769
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020:  Adaptive gene regulation in Mimulus guttatus in locally adapted populations
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Leslie Kollar, Kollar, Leslie M
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Leslie M. Kollar is "Genomic mechanisms driving adaptive
divergence in the yellow monkey flower, Mimulus guttatus". The host institution
for the fellowship is the Michigan State University and the sponsoring
scientists are Dr. David Lowry and Dr. Chad Niederhuth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evolution of gene regulation has long been hypothesized to play a key role in
the rich diversity present in nature. In the short term, gene expression can
change as a result of varying environmental conditions. In the long term
however, the evolution of gene regulation involves changes in the sequence which
ultimately result in diversity and local adaptation. The goal of this research
is to address foundationally important questions regarding the role of adaptive
divergence in the evolution of gene regulation at a mechanistic level. This
approach is only possible in systems with genomic resources and where local
adaptation has been well characterized, such as the yellow monkey flower,
Mimulus guttatus. Elucidating how evolution shapes gene regulation in response
to environmental factors will advance an understanding of the mechanisms of
local adaptation and plant stress responses. Understanding these processes will
be critical for the development of resilient regionally-adapted crops to more
extreme climatic conditions. This research will also promote mentorship for
undergraduate researchers from historically underrepresented groups. The
mentoring component will operate under a continuous improvement model, which
will focus primarily on incorporating previously published and newly developed
methods in universal design for mentoring STEM students in higher education.
These students will take part in molecular laboratory protocols, data analyses,
and project development in direct support of the research aims. Training
objectives for the post-doctoral fellow include building on transcriptomic,
epigenomic, and genomic methods along with bolstering bioinformatic
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how gene expression evolves through
the process of adaption, the fellow will study multiple types of adaptive gene
regulatory divergence between coastal and inland populations of the yellow
monkeyflower, Mimulus guttatus. Objective one will evaluate patterns of
divergence in the regulatory landscape across developmental stages between the
two populations. To establish the locally adaptive differences in development,
chromatin and transcriptional changes as well as regulatory sequence variation
will be evaluated. Objective two will focus on the identification of the gene
regulatory causes of local adaptive differences in tolerance to oceanic salt
spray of coastal and inland populations. Damaging salt spray is a well-studied
environmental stressor in M. guttatus, and these results will build upon this
foundation by identifying underlying regulatory regions and sequence variation.
Finally, for objective three, the fellow will examine how stress memory can
facilitate differential responses to chronic stressors. This is a phenomenon
known as ‘priming’ or ‘acclimation’. The research will focus on whether M
guttatus exhibits priming in response to a chronic abiotic stress, oceanic salt
spray, and identify under what conditions plants employs this defensive
strategy. The fellow will establish the symptoms of priming at the phenotypic
level and compare how different lengths of exposure to salt affect gene
regulatory responses for the coastal and inland populations. All data, analyses,
and biological specimens will be made publicly available to the scientific
community through public repositories. Results of the research will be
disseminated through journal publications and presentations at national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.