* 2010583
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Olivia Cope, Cope, Olivia L
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 60,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The Fellow will investigate developmental
changes in the chemical composition of plant foliage and how these changes
impact communities of plant-feeding insects over time. The project will use
common milkweed, an iconic model plant known for its intimate association with
monarch butterflies, as a study organism. Because climate change will affect the
timing of interactions between species, it is vitally important to understand
how organisms change over time and how that affects their interactions with
other organisms. While performing this research, the Fellow will be mentored in
cutting-edge research methods and contribute to local educational outreach and
the professional development of undergraduate researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will emphasize the interactive effects of
plant ontogeny (i.e. development through life stages), climate variability, and
genetic variation in structuring biological diversity across scales from
molecules to communities. The Fellow will first explore the molecular mechanisms
underlying variation in the timing of milkweed development through ontogenetic
stages, and in ontogenetic changes in foliar chemistry, by linking phenotypic
data with gene expression data. Next, the Fellow will investigate how climate
variability interacts with plant ontogeny and genetic variation to drive
phenotypic diversity within and among individual plants. This second objective
will involve experimental manipulation of spring temperature variability and
tracking of resultant changes in plant ontogeny and trait composition at
population, organismal, and sub-organismal scales. Finally, the Fellow will
determine the relationship between among-plant diversity in ontogenetic stage
and community-scale arthropod diversity and trophic interactions, using
experimental plant populations with different levels of ontogenetic diversity.
The Fellow will receive mentorship from Dr. Will Wetzel and others at Michigan
State University, including training in new molecular and statistical methods,
and will also participate in mentorship of more junior colleagues. The Fellow
will use concepts from this project to develop a professional development module
for elementary teachers, with the aim of improving teachersâ€™ ability to
incorporate outdoor education and classroom-based research projects into their
science curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.