* 2010764
* RAPID: CSBR: Support to Restore the Scientific Collections Damaged in the Bahamas during Hurricane Dorian
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* David Steadman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 70,849.00

On 1-2 September 2019, the most powerful storm ever to strike land in the North
Atlantic, Hurricane Dorian, leveled Marsh Harbour, Abaco, which had been the
third largest community in The Bahamas. This project provides critical support
to restore the unique vertebrate fossil collection that had existed in the
National Museum of The Bahamas in Marsh Harbour. Dorian destroyed the building
housing this collection, which had been assembled over 15 years by Curator Nancy
Albury and scientists from the Florida Museum of Natural History, University of
Florida (UF). Damage from wind and water affects about 40% of the specimens and
about 60% of the specimen labels. Much of the material is from coastal
localities destroyed during Dorian; all that we ever will know about these
prehistoric sites depends on the damaged collections. The project will repair,
curate, and database the collection, thereby restoring accessibility to the
global research community. Ongoing multi-disciplinary research using this
collection has revised concepts of natural and cultural history of Caribbean
islands, including establishing the timing of long-term faunal change
(extinctions, introductions), and placing both living and extinct species
(frogs, tortoises, crocodiles, lizards, snakes, birds, bats, rodents) in
rigorous environmental and cultural contexts. A diverse group of UF
undergraduate and graduate students will participate in all activities involving
the collection, now housed entirely at UF. When the hurricane struck, about 50%
of the collection already resided at UF. Catalogued specimens will be fully
searchable in the UF Vertebrate Paleontology database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will rehabilitate, both physically and digitally, the unique vertebrate
fossil collection that was badly damaged by Hurricane Dorian at the National
Museum of The Bahamas (NMB) in Marsh Harbour in September 2019. This collection
(from 9 cultural and 31 non-cultural prehistoric sites on 14 different Bahamian
islands) had been compiled by Curator Nancy Albury and scientists from the
Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida (UF). No research or
outreach will be possible until the collection is rehabilitated. Much of the
material is from coastal localities destroyed during Dorian; anything that we
ever will know about these prehistoric sites depends on the damaged collections.
The project will repair, curate, and database the damaged specimens and labels,
thus making it available once again to the research community. Multi-
disciplinary research based on this collection has featured genetic (including
aDNA), morphological, stratigraphic, and radiocarbon analyses that have
established the timing of long-term faunal change (extinctions, introductions),
and placed both living and extinct species of vertebrates in rigorous
phylogenetic, environmental, and cultural contexts. At UF, diverse project staff
will clean, repair, and database the specimens, generate new labels, curate them
in new cabinetry, and do web-based outreach. The NMB Excel database will be
converted to Specify software in the UF Vertebrate Paleontology database
(https://www.floridamuseum.ufl.edu/vertepaleo-search). The cultural specimen
records also will be entered in Re:Discovery, the curation and collection
management database for such collections at UF. Through Specify, the specimen
data from the salvaged collections will be shared and made publicly available
through iDigBio.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.