* 2010085
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Caitlin McDonald, McDonald                Caitlin        A
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project investigates the dual and
compounding impact that urbanization can have on disease susceptibility in
wildlife: increased opportunity for contact between domestic and wild animals
increases the likelihood of transmission, while habitat fragmentation can
decrease gene flow and lead to inbreeding, in turn potentially compromising
immune capacity. By focusing on the endangered Florida panther, which continues
to be threatened by habitat loss and inbreeding, this research will further not
only our efforts to conserve an iconic large carnivore, but more broadly, our
understanding of how cross-species disease transmission occurs in an
increasingly urbanizing world. The Fellow will develop a web-based platform to
encourage educational and professional collaborations designed to conserve
panther populations as well as incorporating a successful recruitment preview
event that recruits students underrepresented in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine the link between inbreeding depression and
spillover susceptibility at the wildland-urban interface (WUI). It leverages a
novel combination of in vivo and in vitro sampling to achieve the power
necessary to discover these effects, which would otherwise be impossible in a
highly endangered species with a small population size. Using Feline Leukemia
Virus (FeLV; a common disease of domestic cats that has spilled into Florida
panthers at least twice) as a test case, it will characterize effects of
specific disease risk loci and inbreeding depression via genome-wide association
(GWAS) and runs of homozygosity (ROH) analyses. The Fellow will then determine
the molecular mechanisms underlying variation in disease risk using expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTL) and transcriptomic analyses. Finally, allele
frequencies at disease risk loci will be mapped to the contemporary Florida
panther species range using known sampling locations and spillover events. The
Fellow will gain expertise in whole genome sequencing and quantitative genetics,
while also building interdisciplinary relationships with wildlife managers and
collaborators at four academic institutions. The Fellow will also create active
learning modules, informed by research findings, that involve scientists and the
public in conservation and management activities; an existing and successful
preview process will also be adapted to the host institution in order to better
recruit and matriculate underrepresented minority (URM) graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.