* 2010607
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Zachary Laubach, Laubach, Zachary
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Results from this work will advance a growing
body of evidence that underscores the importance of parental care not only for
offspring nutrition and survival but also how social experiences early in life
contribute to development of offspring stress response and health throughout
life and improve understanding of the proposed Rule of Life, developing a
modeling framework will serve as a road map for future studies. Educational
outreach will be accomplished through public presentations and blog posts while
a statistical modeling workshop will be offered to university students recruited
from groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines. Quantity and quality of
parental care have lifelong impacts on development of offspring stress
phenotypes. For example, in mammals, birds, fish, and insects, variation in
parental care corresponds with substantial and persistent differences in
offspring stress physiology and behaviors. Yet, much remains unknown about the
underlying mechanisms that link experiences early in life with phenotypes later
in life - an especially puzzling question given the long latency between the
initial exposure and the phenotypic outcome. Such questions motivate
investigating the Rule of Life: experiences of parental care early in life have
profound and lasting impacts on an offspringâ€™s stress phenotype. This research
uses North American barn swallows to test the hypothesis that inadequate
parental care leads to a dysregulated stress hormone response in offspring later
in life, and that this relationship is mediated by DNA methylation.
Observational data and a cross-fostering, brood manipulation experiment will be
used to determine the extent to which parental care corresponds to development
of offspring stress phenotype via a DNA methylation mechanism. In addition to
testing this hypothesis, the Fellow will learn advanced statistical approaches
to derive unbiased estimates of association and improve causal inference, with
an emphasis on modeling high-dimensional genomics data. The Fellow will receive
training in innovative areas of research, including genomics and statistical
analyses of big data, in preparation for a productive research and mentoring
career. Finally, the Fellow will lead a series of analytical workshops geared
towards improving participation and programming skills among underrepresented
groups at the University of Colorado and Colorado State University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.