* 2010086
* Preparing Teachers to Design Tasks to Support, Engage, and Assess Science Learning in Rural Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* William Penuel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,979,000.00

Nationally, a third of US students attend rural or remote schools, yet rural
teachers receive fewer opportunities to work together and engage in professional
learning than their suburban and urban counterparts. This, in turn, can reflect
on the opportunities for rural students to learn the high quality, up-to-date
science ideas, practices, and concepts that are required by state standards,
especially those aligned with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). To
advance equitable opportunities for all students to learn science, the project
team will design and provide an online course to support rural teachers who
teach science in grades 6-12. The course will focus on improving classroom
science assessment practices and instruction to meet the unique needs of rural
educators and their students. Too often, science concepts are removed from the
lives of rural students, although their homes, communities and natural
environments are filled with ideas and experiences that can make science come
alive. When teachers link assessment and instruction to students’ everyday
lives, students have enhanced interest in and identification with science. This,
in turn, can lead more students to pursue science and applied science fields
beyond high school, to broaden the STEM pipeline. In addition, students are
better prepared to participate in science in their communities as empowered
citizens. This study focuses on working with teachers to develop assessment
practices that not only focus on the three NGSS dimensions of science ideas,
practices and cross-cutting concepts, it also adds two more dimensions; teachers
will develop assessment tasks interesting to students, and promote the
development of their science identities. The researchers refer to this as 5D
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at Colorado University Boulder and
BSCS Science Learning will use design-based implementation research to
collaboratively design an online course sequence that targets 5D assessment in
science. The study will proceed in three phases: a rapid ethnographic study to
assess the needs of teachers serving a variety of rural communities, a study of
teachers’ use of an online platform for their professional learning, and lastly
an experimental study to research the effects of the online course on teacher
and student outcomes. Researchers will recruit 10 teachers to take the on-line
course for the professional development and collect data on participating
teachers’ implementation of the course ideas through classroom videotaping and
surveys designed to capture their changing practices. In the third year of the
project, researchers will conduct an impact study with 70 secondary science
teachers taking the re-designed on-line course, and compare their outcomes with
a “business-as-usual” condition. The impact of course will be measured by
questionnaires that address their vision for teaching the NGSS and self-reported
instructional practices; classroom observations; and, teacher-constructed
student assessments. Student outcomes will be measured using science interest
and identity surveys, and an examination of student work products that
demonstrate students’ ability to use the science and engineering practice of
modeling, a practice likely to be encountered in all NGSS science classrooms.
The project will identify conditions under which learning about 5D assessment
task design can support instructional improvement, increase student interest in
science and engineering, and enhance students’ opportunities to learn. The
researchers hypothesize that the online program will have a positive impact on
teachers’ vision, classroom practices, and their use of high-quality 5D tasks.
They also hypothesize that teacher participation will result in significant
increases in student interest in and identification with science, and that these
effects will be mediated by teacher outcomes. Finally, the researchers
hypothesize that effects will be equitable across demographic variables in rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.