* 2010906
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Friend or foe: Neural regulation of dynamic social environments
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Ross DeAngelis, DeAngelis               Ross           S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 10/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of life in innovative ways. Social behavior is complex, individuals must
use external information from a continually changing environment in order to
display appropriate behavioral responses. The external social information is
then applied within the current social context. Behavioral responses are thus
dependent on the situation. This response dependency must also be reflected by
predictable patterns within the brain. This research aims to uncover how neural
(nervous system) activity orchestrates behavior in a socially and
environmentally sensitive way. This work will broaden our understanding of how
fundamental social behaviors are coordinated within the brain, while also
providing opportunities in research training for undergraduates and high school
students of underrepresented minorities.

This research utilizes the convict cichlid (Amatitlania nigrofasciata) as a
study system to establish the rule of life that social behavior is facilitated
by predictable interactions of brain areas within the Social Decision-Making
Network, specifically those sensitive to social information and those encoding
reward. The convict cichlid is ideally suited to address this hypothesis, as
this species displays pair bonding and parental care, two behavioral suites
which contain both aggressive and affiliative elements. Parents both provision
and guard eggs, and mated pairs reinforce their bond through affiliative
displays, while also guarding mates against conspecifics. How are both distinct
and shared behavioral displays, occurring within and across behavioral suites,
regulated within the brain? This research implements compartment analysis of
temporal activity by fluorescent in situ hybridization (catFISH) to compare the
neuronal response of temporally isolated social stimulus events across four
comparisons, within and across behavioral suites: (1a.) parental care (brood
provision vs. brood guarding) and 1b.) pair bonding (mate affiliation vs. mate
guarding), and second, compares similar behavioral displays, which occur in
distinct behavioral suites (similar behavioral displays). 1c.) Brood
provisioning vs. mate affiliation (affiliative behavior), and (1d.) brood
guarding vs. mate guarding (aggressive behavior). Finally, brain regions will be
dissected out and behaviorally active neurons will be tagged and selectively
retrieved using ribosomal capture (PhosphoTRAP), in order to uncover the genomic
signatures of neurons active in response to each independent stimulus. Hence,
through integrating neural circuitry and genomics, this work will further our
understating of brain-behavior relationships. The impact of the project will be
broadened by involving high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.