* 2010122
* RUI: Experimental Study of the Interaction of an Electron Beam with a Dusty Plasma and the Emergence of Turbulence
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Paul Voytas, Wittenberg University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 236,406.00

A "dusty" or "complex" plasma is an ionized gas consisting of ions, electrons,
and small particulate matter (dust or ice) that is typically much smaller than
the width of a human hair. In space, examples of dusty plasmas include the
clouds from which stars and planets form, comet tails, planetary rings and
noctilucent clouds in the Earth's ionosphere. Dusty plasmas are also formed in
the chemically active plasmas that are used in industrial plasma processing
devices to create computer chips, contaminating the end product and reducing
overall yield, and the manufacturing of solar photovoltaic cells, where the dust
can increase the overall efficiency of the resulting solar cells. This award
will support a series of experiments aimed at understanding a fundamental
property of this unique state of matter and will also make use of the properties
of these dusty plasmas systems to gain insight into the fundamental properties
of a fluid. The research program will support the training of several highly
talented undergraduate students in a small college environment, providing the
students with a more comprehensive research skills training than at comparable
experiences at larger institutions; experience with state-of-the-art software
and experimental techniques; and a variety of practical problem solving
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program consists of several
experiments that will examine the interaction between an electron beam and dusty
plasma. One series of experiments will leverage the fact that dusty plasmas
behave like a viscoelastic fluid to gain fundamental insight into the precursors
of hydrodynamic turbulence at the particle level at much smaller Reynoldâ€™s
numbers than in a traditional fluid system. A second series of experiments will
make use of a fundamental wave mode that propagates in dusty plasma systems
known as the dust acoustic wave to understand the emergence of a second type of
turbulence known as wave turbulence. A third set of experiments will examine how
the dust grain charge, yielding new insight into a fundamental and open question
in the dusty plasma community: what is the charge on the dust grain. This work
will extend collaborative work done with colleagues at in the Plasma Science
Laboratory at Auburn University, the Center of Astrophysics, Space Physics and
Engineering Research at Baylor University and the Electron Accelerators
Laboratory at the National Institute for Laser, Plasma and Radiation Physics in
Romania. Together, these studies will contribute to the fundamental
understanding of the fundamental process of charging in dusty plasmas and
provide new insight into the emergence of two different types of
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.