* 2010685
* Studies of Black Hole Binary Systems Using Time-Domain Perturbation Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Gaurav Khanna, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2020
* USD 75,393.00

The emergent field of gravitational wave astronomy is undergoing a major
transformation as a result of the now-routine detections of gravitational waves
from a black hole and neutron star binary systems by the US LIGO detector
alongside other international observatories. Observations of these waves from
compact binary systems will be used to obtain additional information about the
most mysterious objects in the Universe. LIGO has also generated significant
spin-off technologies, and helped direct public and youth attention towards STEM
disciplines. This research project aids in the development of the theory-based
science that plays a very critical role in not only LIGO’s mission, but also
that of next generation detectors. The main objective is to understand important
aspects of black hole systems using theoretical and computational techniques.
The project includes support for students and therefore directly contributes to
student mentorship, traineeship and retention in an important STEM area. The
computational skills that students develop are highly “portable”, and therefore
will allow them access to a variety of career options, including in areas of
great national need. Previous research projects by the PI have been discussed in
the general media, and this work also has great potential at being successful
for outreach to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will contribute to a number of challenging and important problems in the area of
gravitational physics. The main objective is the development and application of
an advanced computational model for the gravitational wave emission from a black
hole binary system using point-particle perturbation theory. Significant
contributions will be made to the development of fast and accurate models
(effective-one-body, surrogate and other models) for gravitational waveform
generation, that will positively impact the data analysis capabilities of
current and future gravitational wave detectors (such as LIGO, next generation
and even future space-borne missions, such as LISA). In addition, the planned
work will bring about a much better understanding of the late-stage quasi-normal
phase radiation from black hole binary systems. The project will also contribute
to the gravitational wave data-analysis effort via the open and public
Einstein@Home project. All the research activities in the context of this
project will involve students and collaborations with other US and European
research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.