* 2010127
* Stochastic Thermodynamics of Nonlinear Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Sebastian Deffner, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 305,500.00

This award is being funded by the Condensed-Matter and Materials Theory program
in the Division of Materials Research and by the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical
Physics Theory program in the Division of
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are on the verge of a technological revolution.
Over the last few years, computational hardware has become commercially
available that promises to take full advantage of quantum supremacy. However,
none of the available systems is readily useful for practical application, since
the hardware is still prone to decoherence and the limitations of linear quantum
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevailing theory for studying effects of
thermal noise in quantum systems is Quantum Thermodynamics. This emerging field
has already delivered insights and results of practical consequence for the
design of quantum computers. While most previous research has focused
exclusively on linear systems, nonlinear quantum systems in photonic or
ultracold atom gases exhibit unique and powerful capabilities for computing.
However, to design efficient quantum computers, one has to understand the
thermodynamics of the underlying material, since writing as well as erasing
comes at the expense of thermodynamic work (Landauer's principle). To date, the
nonequilibrium thermodynamics of nonlinear systems has been understood only at a
rudimentary level. Therefore, this project will extend the scope of stochastic
thermodynamics to nonlinear quantum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will help lay the groundwork for 21st-century information technology. By
investigating the ultimate physical limits and tradeoffs of computation, it will
help develop the theoretical foundation essential for constructing post-
Moore's-Law computer architectures and contribute to future engineering and
manufacturing of energy-efficient computer architectures. To achieve these
impacts, the project will involve graduate and undergraduate students in
cutting-edge research, preparing the nation's next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific efforts in classical as well as quantum
stochastic thermodynamics have focused on the description of so-called
information engines, which also have been realized experimentally. An
information engine is a thermodynamic device that operates by processing
information and can thus be considered the thermodynamic paradigm for any
(quantum) computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to this
dynamic field of research by generalizing the theory of quantum stochastic
thermodynamics to nonlinear systems. This research is of topical interest, since
to build a quantum computer in a nonlinear quantum system, one must understand
the interplay of information and entropy production. To achieve this goal, the
project will focus on three main topics: generalizing fundamental notions of
work, heat, and entropy production at the nanoscale from linear to nonlinear
quantum mechanics, studying the interplay of (quantum) information and (quantum)
thermodynamics, and generalizing the quantum speed limit and its applications in
order to identify optimal quantum processes with minimal dissipation or
maximally fast information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this
project will aim at (i) the numerical study of the quantum speed limit, i.e.,
the maximal rate with which a quantum state can evolve under nonlinear dynamics;
(ii) the development of a consistent framework for stochastic thermodynamics in
nonlinear quantum systems, comprising the identification and study of entropy
and information production, and the derivation of generalized fluctuation
theorems; (iii) the theoretical study and design of minimal, yet self-contained,
quantum information engines, which optimally exploit computational advantages
arising from nonlinear dynamics; and (iv) the development of a conceptual
framework and the design of experiments for quantum information engines in Bose-
Einstein condensates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results could impact the design
of quantum computers and the fundamental understanding of quantum
nanotechnology. Moreover, this research will open new avenues for the
understanding of time-dependent quantum-information-processing systems operating
arbitrarily far from thermal equilibrium. Finally, the proposed research is also
of basic theoretical interest, since the methodology, including quantum optics
and quantum optimal control theory, provides conceptually simple models and
tools to describe nano-devices subjected to both thermal and quantum
fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.