* 2010392
* Relativistic Thomson Scattering Investigations with in Situ Electrons in the Focus at the Petawatt Level
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Wendell Hill, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 651,518.00

The development of lasers capable of delivering extreme intensities in a short
time period has placed us at the threshold of a new era for experimental
investigation. As these tools mature over the next few years, they will enable
exploration of phenomena associated with matter and antimatter that could help
with the interpretation of recent astrophysical observations as well as shed
light on a variety of fundamental questions such as the Standard Model of
Particle Physics and Dark Matter. A major roadblock inhibiting their employment,
however, is a reliable way to measure intensities. This project is devoted to
developing an intensity gauge that is straightforward to implement and
transferable to other laboratories. Establishing suitable techniques for
intensity measurement is a long-standing desire of the laser community. A host
of studies ranging from generating novel light sources to probing warm dense
matter to developing laser-based medical applications will also benefit greatly
from this project. Together with the emphasis on international engagement, and
including underrepresented minorities and in this endeavor, this project is
providing a much-needed instrument while training a diverse cadre of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of multi-petawatt lasers of short
duration has placed us at the threshold of a new era. Critical experimental
investigations of nonlinear aspects of electrodynamics -- how light interacts
with matter and itself, -- which largely undergirds our current understanding of
the quantum vacuum, will be possible. A major roadblock inhibiting progress
towards realizing precision measurement at the petawatt level is an ability to
measure the intensity directly. This project is devoted to developing an
intensity gauge that is (i) straightforward to implement, not requiring a major
experimental effort to employ, (ii) minimally intrusive, allowing the primary
experiment to be performed uninhibited, (iii) sensitive to beam characteristic
changes that can degrade the energy in the focus from shot to shot and (iv)
single-shot capable. A promising technique meeting these desires is based on
relativistic Thomson scattering. Details of Thomson scattering are being
investigated by (i) monitoring the fundamental and second-harmonic radiation,
(ii) measuring the angular distribution of the radiation and (iii) measuring the
energy and angular distribution of the Thomson scattered electrons, born in situ
and ejected by the ponderomotive potential of the laser. Correlating the ejected
electron with Doppler-shifted radiation is enabling a model of the Thomson
scattering to be created. The project will include direct engagement with high-
power laser facilities worldwide, including the Extreme Light Infrastructure
(ELI) facilities in Czech Republic and Romania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.