* 2010930
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Elucidating Root Knot Nematode Genetic Resistance through de novo Genome Assembly of Cultivated and Wild Chili Peppers
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Emily Delorean, Delorean, Emily E
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Emily Delorean is " Elucidating Root Knot Nematode
Genetic Resistance Through de novo Genome Assembly of Cultivated and Wild Chili
Peppers" The host institutions for the fellowship are the United States
Department of Agriculture â€“ Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS) and North
Carolina State University and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Amanda Hulse-
Kemp and William Rutter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Root knot nematode infection
threatens vegetable crop production worldwide. Chili pepper is one of the
vegetable crops severely threatened by root knot nematode (RKN) with an
estimated loss of 12.2% of the $898.6 million annual crop in the U.S.A. Due to
the limitations in sustainable field managements controls, genetic resistance
presents a promising avenue to protect crop yields. However, breeding for root
knot nematode resistance in chili peppers is limited by the availability of
genomic and genetic technologies. This project will address this limitation
using cutting edge genomic tools and resources to identify new resistance genes
to an emerging and hypervirulent RKN species in a known resistance gene
"hotspot" in the chili pepper genome. Once identified, the resulting resistance
genes will serve as an important new genetic resource for breeders to use in
developing resistant chili pepper varieties. Training objectives include
technical training in genome assembly, germplasm development and plant pathology
as well as formal training in teaching through the "Preparing the Professoriate"
certification program. Broader impacts include teaching bioinformatics to
undergraduate students in collaboration with the Peer Scholars program and
working with existing outreach programs to recruit young people of
underrepresented groups to the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to use genetic and genomic technologies to identify and introduce new
genetic diversity in RKN resistance into cultivated chili pepper. Specifically,
hybrid plants will be generated by crossing cultivated chili (with resistance to
root knot nematode species Meloidogyne incognita, Meloidogyne javanica, and
Meloidogyne arenaria) and ancestral chili (with resistance to Meloidogyne
enterolobii, a new and highly virulent root knot nematode species). The
resultant hybrids will be sequenced using "trio-binning", a technique that
utilizes a combination of long and short read sequencing, to generate genome
assemblies for all four both parental genomes. Long read sequencing will allow
resolution of the highly repetitive resistance gene "hotspot", improving the
current chili pepper reference genome assembly and providing a pan-genome
representation of this region that is known to have multiple haplotypes for
mapping. Hybrids between ancestral chili (resistant to M. enterolobii) and
cultivated chili (resistant to M. incognita, M. javanica, and M. arenaria) will
be used to "stack" resistance genes to all four species and create a mapping
population for the resistance genes to M. enterolobii. Finally, sequence-based
genotyping markers that are compatible with precision breeding methods such as
marker assisted breeding and genomic selection will be developed using sequence
data generated for the genome assemblies. Data and plant material generated in
this research will be made publicly available through supplements of resulting
peer-reviewed publication (phenotypic data), the National Center for
Biotechnology Information database (de novo genome assemblies and sequencing
data), and the U.S. National Plant Germplasm System (plant material). The
resources, tools and products developed through this research will provide chili
pepper breeding programs with the genetic means to sustainably address the yield
losses due to root knot nematode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: root knot
nematode resistance, chili pepper, Solanaceae, genome sequence and assembly,
trio-binning, introgression, cultivated and wild ancestral lines, mapping
population&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.