* 2010547
* Implementation and Efficacy Study of Preschool Math Activities for Numeracy
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Anna Shusterman, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,868,070.00

Math games and play engage young children’s interest in patterns, numbers and
logic. In preschools, there is a critical need for math instruction and
learning. Early childhood is an important point for children to learn about
mathematics. Children's play-based activities provide natural opportunities for
them to explore and learn math topics. This project explores how teachers can
use activities with young children to develop their knowledge of numbers and
patterns. Part of the study examines how much guidance teachers should provide
to students. The project also explores the design of resources that are the most
likely to be used by preschool teachers and that can be easily incorporated into
their teaching of young children. The study of the use of play-based mathematics
activities will support critical early learning of number concepts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the implementation and
efficacy of the preschool math games for mathematics learning. The research
would study the materials as used in classrooms by teachers in order to
understand how the materials improve early numeracy skills, and whether
children’s improvement is affected by how the activities are implemented in the
classroom. The research questions for the study examine the role of the teacher
in providing guidance to children when engaging in the numeracy activities and
how the materials influence children’s early numeracy skills. The study employs
an experimental design to study different implementation pathways. The design
would examine the impact of two different instructor types and two levels of
guidance for the preschool students when using the activities. Data collected
will include measures of children’s mathematical knowledge and teachers’
pedagogical self-efficacy and content knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by
preK-12 students and teachers, through the research and development of new
innovations and approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for the
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.