* 2010996
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Christopher Torres, Torres, Christopher
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Investigations of brain shape (i.e., neuroanatomical) evolution
provide unprecedented insight to the evolutionary histories of living birds and
shed light on behavioral traits, which do not fossilize in extinct taxa. One
such behavior is powered flight, which has been a critical force driving the
spectacular evolutionary success birds have experienced throughout their &gt;150
million-year history. Nevertheless, flight has been lost in more than 25
distinct lineages of birds. If and how changes in brain shape reflect flying
ability remains unknown, inhibiting our ability to predict locomotory behavior
in extinct species. An ideal model group for filling this gap in knowledge are
the rails, a group of small-medium sized, ground-dwelling birds known from
around the world. The rails are marked by more than 20 independent losses of
flight, including multiple times within the same species, many of which are
recent occurrences. This research will investigate the variation in brain shape
across living and recently extinct rails and estimate how quickly that variation
arose. The Fellow will then identify which parts of the brain change as flight
in rails is lost. Underrepresented (including First Generation) university
students will engage in the aforementioned research to enhance their educational
experience at the host institution. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will scan
the skulls of all rail species using high resolution X-ray computed tomography
(CT). These data will be used to digitally reconstruct the external surface of
the brain. The Fellow will then quantify and localize differences in brain shape
both within and across rail species and estimate rates of brain shape evolution.
Finally, the Fellow will compare these rates to previously estimated rates of
evolution of other life history traits (e.g., flightlessness, speciation,
extinction, and island endemism) to determine how closely changes in brain shape
track flying ability. This project will provide research opportunities for both
graduate and undergraduate students, especially from underrepresented groups.
The Fellow will partner with Ohio University’s (OU) Program to Aid Career
Exploration to engage with First Generation university students. The Fellow will
also work with OU’s Game Research and Immersive Design Lab to use 3D data
resulting from this study to create meaningful educational experiences to foster
the creativity and imagination of future generations of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.