* 2010715
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: From Nanoscale to Global  Scale: Viruses as Drivers of Community Interactions and Ecosystem Function
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Erica Holdridge, Holdridge, Erica Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Viruses that infect bacteria can profoundly
affect the flow of nutrients and energy across the planet by changing the ways
that bacteria process these nutrients (e.g. carbon and nitrogen) and interact
with other organisms. However, there is a lack information about the pathways
that connect these microscopic interactions to impacts on global processes. This
project will use species that live inside carnivorous purple pitcher plants to
study the mechanisms through which viruses alter the role of bacteria in the
ecosystem. The plant’s large native range, from northern Florida to southern
Canada, also provides an opportunity to study the distribution patterns of
viruses and their associated bacterial communities on a continental scale.
Bacteria are a key component of global nutrient cycles, socially and
economically important industries (e.g. waste-water treatment and dairy
production), as well as human, agricultural, and ecological health. This
research will fill critical knowledge gaps in understanding the role that
viruses play in these processes. The fellow will work with Boise State
University and other programs to provide training for undergraduate and graduate
students and develop workshops in microbial ecology for Idaho educators and
coding for young women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate three
mechanisms through which bacteriophages alter microbial metabolisms: host death,
nonlethal effects of prophage, and host interactions with grazers. The study
will integrate observational, experimental, and computational approaches
throughout two phases. First, the fellow will conduct a biogeographic survey of
phage abundance and diversity, as well as that of their host communities,
spanning the purple pitcher plant’s native range. The fellow will compare these
communities with communities from non-native pitcher plants found in
Switzerland, which lack dipteran larvae commonly found in North American pitcher
plants. Viral and host metagenomes will be used to generate taxonomic
assignments, create metabolic profiles for bacterial metagenomes, and predict
host identity for viral metagenomes. Second, the fellow will perform field and
laboratory experiments to test how host death, prophage, and altered
interactions between bacteria and grazers (protists) affect broad microbial
metabolic activity using Biolog EcoPlates, respirations rates using the
MicroResp system, and metabolic processes important for insect decomposition
(e.g. chitinases and proteases) using enzyme assays. The fellow will work with
the Idaho STEM Action Center to develop a workshop on microbial ecology for
Idaho educators and instruct courses on coding and critical-thinking skills at
the All Girls Coding Camp through the Discovery Center of
Idaho.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.