* 2010944
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Irene Liao, Liao, Irene
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Many plants produce nectar, a sugary liquid, as a reward and
food source for animals that protect or pollinate the plant. Nectar is produced
from a tissue called the nectary, which can be found on various parts of the
plant, including leaves and flowers. Despite this important character,
outstanding questions remain to be addressed about the evolution of nectar and
nectaries, particularly in the monocots, a group of plants that include grasses
and orchids and agriculturally important crops, such as corn, wheat, pineapple,
banana, and palm. Most monocots have septal nectaries, a distinctive type of
nectary not found in any non-monocot plant. Hypotheses about the septal nectary
have been proposed, and genetics may provide an additional lens to address these
hypotheses. However, nothing is known about the genetic underpinnings of septal
nectaries. By using living plant collections at the UCLA Mildred E. Mathias
Botanical Garden, the Huntington Botanical Gardens, and California Botanic
Garden, along with advanced imaging and sequencing technologies, insights will
be made into the evolution of nectaries and how the septal nectary may have
contributed to the diversification of monocots. Additionally, these gardens are
invaluable venues for the Fellow to engage the public on the importance of
nectar in agriculture, evolution, ecology, and conservation through educational
outreach activities and public talks to diverse audiences as well as through
social media outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will describe the
morphology and anatomy of septal nectaries across four stages of development for
ten monocot species by using histology, scanning electron microscopy, and
microCT scanning. To identify core genes involved in nectary development and
nectar secretion, the Fellow will sequence the transcriptome from nectary and
non-nectary tissues across development and perform comparative analyses within
and across species. These analyses will determine whether septal nectaries have
similar genetic and developmental programming compared to more well-studied
flowering plants. Resulting data have the potential to explain nectary origins
and persistence in monocots. The multiple training opportunities in this project
will assist the Fellow in building an interdisciplinary research program as an
independent researcher with strong collaborations with botanic gardens. The
Fellow will also mentor students from underrepresented groups and facilitate
workshops for early career scientists to discuss contemporary issues in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.