* 2010075
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Patrick Milligan, Milligan, Patrick Devin
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. In nature, many species form partnerships with
one or more other species. These “mutualisms” are widespread and provide key
services to ecosystems, including many important economic benefits such as crop
pollination. A particularly well studied mutualism is the partnership between a
single “host” plant and multiple insect species. Often the plant interacts with
“good” partners (for example, a bee that spreads plant pollen) but also must
deal with “cheating” partners (such as a “nectar thief” fly that does not move
pollen). In this work, the Fellow will investigate a key question for these
types of partnerships: “How do plants focus investments in good partners while
minimizing interactions with cheaters?” This project will help scientists
understand whether and how a plant can actively maintain stable partnerships,
which is increasingly important as natural habitats become more destabilized by
human development. The study will also become a platform for educational
outreach programs and an international investigation that will involve
collaborations among diverse groups of students and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will address this research topic by performing experiments
in the savannas of Kenya, where “whistling acacia” trees form partnerships with
several ant species that range from “good partners” to “cheaters”. The Fellow
will manipulate the presence of ants on acacias in open savannas and areas that
have been fenced off from large herbivores in order to determine plant responses
to each ant species and then when teamed with other ant partners. With training
from Dr. Elizabeth Pringle (University of Nevada-Reno), the Fellow will measure
resulting changes in acacia physiological traits (related to photosynthesis,
metabolic processes, and water stress). Training with Drs. Bridgett vonHoldt
(Princeton University) and Rebecca Kartzinel (Brown University) will allow the
measurement of genomic methylation changes that influence such physiology. These
investigations will be used in discovery-based international ecology courses and
Kenyan high-school biology courses, thus promoting STEM proficiency for
collaborating American and Kenyan students. The Fellow will also construct a
greenhouse experiment at the University of Nevada-Reno and mentor first-
generation university students in experiments that investigate whether and how
the physiological and genomic adjustments by acacias can be inherited by their
offspring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.