* 2010487
* RAPID: Shared decision models to guide drug allocation during a pediatric chemotherapy shortage
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Jennifer Lobo, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2021
* USD 133,540.00

Drug shortages require decisions on the allocation of essential drugs that are
in limited supply. Vincristine is a chemotherapeutic drug that is central to
many treatment regimens involving the most common pediatric cancers. Currently,
we are experiencing a vincristine shortage in the United States expected to last
through 2020 and there is no drug substitution that has equal efficacy or mode
of action. Children have already been impacted by the current vincristine
shortage and it is expected that cancer drug shortages will continue to increase
at an alarming rate given the lack of profitability and fragility of the supply
chain. Clinicians experience uncertainty in how best to allocate drugs in
limited supply, and communicate status updates across institutions.
Additionally, it is difficult to assess the health and economic consequences of
various shortage scenarios. This study fills an important scientific gap in
understanding how decisions regarding drug shortages are made in real time.
Modeling and simulating shared decision models have implications for not only
the current vincristine drug shortage, but future drug shortages at large,
including those represented by pandemic situations. Modeling the health and
economic impacts may also have policy implications for regulations supporting
the supply chain requirements of critical drugs without substitutions. This
project advances the knowledge of assessments of risk and trade-offs in the
context of a drug shortage. Additionally, this project identifies information
critical to drug shortage communication among clinicians, hospital systems,
patients and families impacted by the shortage, drug manufacturers, regulators,
and society at large. Tis project advances the development of scientific methods
necessary to promote national health and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
testing shared decision models necessary to guide drug allocation, the
investigators will develop a decision framework that can also be applied in
practice. Specifically, this project uses a mixed-modal approach of immersive
qualitative methods followed by decision analytic modeling and Monte Carlo
simulation to (1) evaluate current decision-making processes for drug allocation
given the vincristine pediatric chemotherapy shortage and (2) use stakeholder-
guided decisions and real-world data to model and simulate the clinical and
economic outcomes of various drug allocation shortage scenarios. While the lens
of this award is focused on the current vincristine shortage, the methods and
principles of this work are novel in terms of understanding how decision making
and risk communication processes are occurring in the context of uncertainty and
lack of alternative treatment strategies. This methodological approach is also
used to develop best practices for future decision analysis of drug
shortages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.