* 2010882
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Requirement for N-Acetylglucosamine Transporters in Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Sarabeth Buckley, Buckley, Sarabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Sarabeth Buckley is "Requirement for N-Acetylglucosamine
Transporters in Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Symbiosis" The host institution for the
fellowship is the Cambridge University, UK, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Uta Paszkowski.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research studies how plants and
mycorrhizae, a soil fungus, communicate to form a symbiosis. Mycorrhizae attach
to roots of most plants and help them grow. The plant provides the mycorrhizae
with carbohydrates and the mycorrhizae provides plant roots with nutrients. To
start this relationship, the plants and mycorrhizae communicate by sending
chemical signals to each other, which are not fully understood. This project
studies a protein in plants that is likely the first protein a plant needs to
start communication. If the puzzle pieces of the entire process of communication
can be identified and put together, that knowledge could be used to make plants
grow better by enhancing this connection or introducing pieces of it to other
plants. Increasing plant growth sustainably could help agricultural systems work
with nature to grow more food and use carbon from the atmosphere. This training
will provide critical skills as the fellow transitions from studying
environmental science to plant molecular biology. Results from this research
will be shared with the science community through conferences, but also the
local community through programs such as those that increase opportunities for
young women in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The protein of interest, NOPE1, is
a N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) transporter in plant roots. In mycorrhizae there
is a homologous protein, NGT1. In the absence of NOPE1 a symbiosis between
mycorrhizal fungus and roots cannot be established. This study answers 1. Are
NOPE1 and NGT1 both essential for establishing a symbiosis and where are they
expressed? 2. What is the signaling molecule transported by both? 3. How are
molecules transported? It is hypothesized that: 1. Both NOPE1 and NGT1 are
essential and are expressed close to where colonization occurs. 2. The molecules
transported by NOPE1 and NGT1 are from both plants and fungi and are similar to
N-acetylglucosamine. 3. NOPE1 and NGT1 transport these molecules both in and out
of plant and fungus. Through this study the fellow will learn and use gene
silencing, in situ hybridization, fluorescent tagging, and multiphoton confocal
microscopy to observe gene expression. Relevant genes will be transferred to
xenopus oocyte and to apply electro-physiological techniques in the presence of
candidate molecules. Unknown molecules will be identified using LC-MS and NMR.
RNAseq transcriptome analysis will provide insight into dynamics of downstream
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.