* 2010098
* Electron Distribution in the Solar Wind from the Sun to the Earth
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Stanislav Boldyrev, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 378,850.00

The solar wind is a stream of hot ionized gas, or plasma, expanding from the
solar corona into the interplanetary medium. Since its discovery in 1959, space
scientists have been studying the behavior of protons and electrons in the solar
wind, their interaction with the magnetic fields pervading interstellar space,
and with magnetospheres of planets. At approximately the same time, plasma
physicists were thinking about containing plasma that is a hundred times hotter
than that in the solar corona, to obtain controlled fusion reaction – a
virtually inexhaustible source of relatively clean and safe energy. They came up
with the so-called mirror machine, a magnetic configuration resembling a bottle
with two openings at the opposite ends. However, such a device was not ideal –
hot plasma could leak through the bottleneck openings and stream away from the
confinement chamber. This project establishes the analogy between the plasma
escaping the mirror machine and the plasma expanding from the hot solar corona.
It will use the theoretical framework developed in plasma fusion studies to
explain the behavior of electrons in the solar wind, one of the fundamental
problems of space plasma physics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project studies the
solar wind plasma expanding from the hot solar corona. It addresses the
following question: given the electron distribution function near the solar
corona, what is the resulting distribution function at larger heliospheric
distances? The project establishes the analogy with the plasma mirror machines.
Similarly to the mirror-machine expander, the solar wind electron distribution
function contains a beam of electrons streaming along the magnetic field lines
and a quasi-isotropic core that, on one hand, is related to the electrons
scattered from the beam and on the other, provides scattering for the streaming
electrons. The project develops a new self-consistent theoretical framework for
solving this problem. The outcome of the study will be the electron distribution
as a function of radial distance. This will allow one to understand, in
particular, the radial energy transfer and energy deposition in the background
plasma, the plasma temperature profile in the expansion region, the electron
instabilities and the resulting plasma turbulence. The results will be compared
with available observations, and in particular, may be valuable for the
interpretation of the Parker Solar Probe data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.