* 2010407
* I-Corps:  Edible Plant Leaf Scaffold for 3D Tissue Culture
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Todd Keiller, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the use of
decellularized plant leaves to culture various tissue types in 3D environments.
The proposed research has potential to assist researchers with 3D tissue
pathology studies and the development of grafts for conditions such as
cardiovascular disease and muscle loss. In addition, the proposed research has
potential to develop structured meat products that are environmentally
sustainable and are produced without use of animal slaughter or antibiotics.
These structured meat products can include beef, chicken, pork, or any other
type of meat. Their potential applications lie in the fields of animal feed and
pet food, consumer meat products, space exploration, and meal ready to eats
(MREs) for combat soldiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of 3D tissue culture scaffolds to address one of the major
limitations in current tissue engineering research: the inability to create
vascular networks capable of delivering oxygen throughout engineered tissue.
Without proper vascularization, maximum viable tissue thickness is only 100â€“200
microns. This distance is known as the oxygen diffusion limit and restricts how
far cells can survive from a main oxygen source. Current solutions to creating
vascular networks have shown only limited success. This research proposes
decellularization of common plants such as spinach as a method to develop
scaffolds for 3D tissue culture applications. The process of decellularizing
plant leaves involves the use of detergents available on the GRAS materials list
including sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), bleach, tween (polysorbate) 20, water,
and tris buffer. The decellularization process removes all cellular and plant
material from the leaf, leaving behind a clear, cellulose backbone. Cellulose
has been demonstrated to be a biocompatible material capable of cell adhesion.
Decellularized plant scaffolds are not only cheaper than conventional
decellularized animal-derived and synthetic alternatives, but are edible, easily
accessible, familiar to consumers, and easily
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.