* 2010359
* Next Generation High-Speed Microplasma Three- Dimensional Imaging
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Daniel Adams, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 214,567.00

The goal of this project is a first exploration of computational microscopy for
the study of ionized gasses, called plasmas. Over the last century, scientists
have intensely investigated macro- and microscopic systems composed of plasmas.
Optical investigations of laboratory scale plasmas have been dominated by
several well-known techniques for some time, and stagnation in development of
new techniques has critically limited information accessible to measurements
that use light as a probe. Recently, new and transformative microscopes that
make images with assistance from powerful computer algorithms have led to an
ever-increasing amount of information extracted from physical systems, even for
the same amount of collected data. With these advances, it is now possible to
image the thickness or height of objects, and their material composition all in
three-dimensions using a single, short burst of light. This project will enable
application of the new computational microscopy techniques to the study of
microplasmas. Unlocking the power of light as a nondestructive, noninvasive
probe of harsh environments like plasmas will have immediate impact on a variety
of fields including material science, particle accelerators, and alternative
light sources, all based on laser created
plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental limits of Schlieren imaging, imaging
interferometry, shadowgraphy, and Zernike phase contrast imaging are well known
from analytic calculations. Schlieren imaging is sensitive to a quantity that is
related to the first, directional derivative of the specimen’s refractive index
and shadowgraphy can produce images proportional to the second derivative of the
refractive index under certain approximations. However, this information is
qualitative in nature. Interferometric imaging requires a known reference,
relatively small phase shifts, and is quite sensitive to vibrations; it also
requires careful timing between the reference wave and the interrogating wave
and is therefore more experimentally complicated. Shadowgraphy is the simplest
experimental configuration but is the most complicated method to analyze; and
while Zernike phase contrast imaging is an excellent technique, it is not
capable of producing reference free images with simultaneous phase and
amplitude. Only coherent computational imaging is capable of producing
quantitative, single-shot, reference free images with simultaneous phase and
amplitude contrast -- over a range of frequencies, in three-dimensions. The
development of such truly quantitative simultaneous phase-and-amplitude contrast
imaging technique capable of probing plasmas is expected to be transformative
for both fundamental and applied studies of laboratory
plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.