* 2010892
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: From genomes to geographic distributions: testing the eco-evolutionary mechanisms of species range limits
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* John Benning, Benning, John W
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. One of the central questions of ecology and
evolutionary biology is what limits species’ distributions — given the power of
natural selection to produce adaptations to novel environments, why does every
species occupy only a small portion of the Earth’s habitat? Related to this,
what enables invasive species to rapidly expand their range while many native
species have been in the same place for hundreds of generations? The ability of
a species to expand its range will be determined by how quickly the environment
changes across space and time, and the genetics underlying adaptation to new
environments. This research will use experiments, genomics, and modeling to
uncover the factors that promote and hinder adaptation of populations expanding
across the landscape, while training undergraduates in key research methods and
supporting informal, public science education. When the factors limiting
species’ distributions are known, it will be possible to better manage invasive
species, and more accurately predict how species’ ranges will shift in a
changing climate.

This project will use a complementary suite of approaches to elucidate the eco-
evolutionary dynamics that promote and hinder adaptation across ecological
gradients. First, the fellow will use experimental evolution of the red flour
beetle (Tribolium castaneum) to test the potentially interactive effects of
gradient shape, dispersal potential, and temporal environmental variation on
range expansion and adaptation to novel environments. The research will then use
population genomic data from this experiment to understand the genetic changes
underlying adaptation during range expansion, the genetic mechanisms preventing
adaptation at stable range limits, and how gradient type, dispersal, and
temporal variation influence range dynamics through population genetic effects.
Finally, a novel individual-based simulation model will be built, parameterized
with the experimental data, and extends recent range limit models by including
temporal variation in selective environments. The fellow will recruit
undergraduate students through the Wyoming Research Scholars Program, focusing
on groups underrepresented in STEM fields, and mentor these students through the
proposed research and support of individual projects. Outside the university,
the fellow will bring engaging biology lessons to informal, public venues. Upon
completion of this fellowship the fellow will have extensive, complementary
experience in a range of theoretical, empirical, and genomics approaches.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.