* 2010741
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mary Janecka, Janecka, Mary J
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Hosts and their parasites are locked into an
evolutionary battle: hosts evolve resistance, and parasites evolve to overcome
this resistance. How the complexity of the landscape hosts and parasites inhabit
affects this coevolution is unknown. Rivers are unique, highly complex
ecosystems characterized by branching networks and downstream flow from high to
low elevation. By affecting host and parasite population size and genetic
diversity, these factors could alter the outcome of host-parasite coevolution.
For example, differences between host and parasite in their ability to move
upstream will affect the ability of each to evolve in response to the other and
could generate localized differences in virulence or drug resistance. Parasites
are ubiquitous in river systems, infecting both adjacent human populations and
host species of economic and conservation interest. This research, using a well-
studied fish and an economically important group of parasites, provides unique
insight into the mechanisms shaping parasite ecology, biodiversity and evolution
within rivers. Educational outreach will be accomplished through a citizen
science program that recruits underrepresented students to STEM disciplines; the
study will also inform public health and has direct applications for fisheries
management, aquaculture, and wildlife conservation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research will leverage the Guppy-Gyrodactulus model system in Northern Trinidad
to elucidate the interactions between riverine ecosystem processes and host
behavior that may shape the co-evolutionary potential of parasite subpopulations
across a complex geographic mosaic. At the regional level, the Fellow will use
fine-scale field sampling, parasite population genomics data and geospatial
analysis across four rivers in Trinidad to test how variation in river
architecture and unidirectional stream drift alter the distribution of parasite
genetic diversity and population connectivity within and between rivers. At
finer scales, the Fellow will test how variation in host social behaviors that
differ between upstream and downstream populations can alter the evolutionary
potential of local parasite populations. The Fellow will receive training for
molecular and analytical skills that are applicable in metozoan parasite systems
to address questions at the landscape-host-parasite interface. The Fellow will
also recruit undergraduates and high school students (assisted by the Citizen
Science Lab in Pittsburgh) to participate in these hypothesis-driven research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.