* 2010265
* Assessing College-Ready Computational Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Richard Brown, National Math and Science Initiative, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 238,653.00

Because of the growing need for students to be college and career ready, high-
quality assessments of college readiness skills are in high demand. To realize
the goal of preparing students for college and careers, assessments must measure
important competencies and provide rapid feedback to teachers. It is necessary
to go beyond the limits of multiple-choice testing and foster the skills and
thinking that lie at the core of college and career ready skills, such as
computational thinking. Computational thinking is a set of valuable skills that
can be used to solve problems, design systems, and understand human behavior,
and is thus essential to developing a more STEM-literate public. Computational
thinking is increasingly seen as a fundamental analytical skill that everyone,
not just computer scientists, can use. The goal of this project is to develop
learning progressions and assessment items targeting computational thinking. The
items will be used for a test of college-ready critical reasoning skills and
will be integrated into an existing online assessment system, the Berkeley
Assessment System Software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address a set
of research questions focused on 1) clarifying computational thinking
constructs, 2) usability, reliability of validity of assessment items and the
information they provide, 3) teachers' use of assessments, and 4) relationships
to student performance. The study sample of 2,700 used for the pilot and field
tests will include all levels of students in 10th through 12th grade and first
year college students (both community college and university level). The target
population is students in schools which are implementing the College Readiness
Program (CRP) of the National Mathematics and Science Institute. In the 2020-21
academic year 54 high schools across 11 states (CA, GA, FL, ID, LA, NC, NM, OH,
TX, VA, and WA) will participate. This will include high school students in
Advanced Placement classes as well as non-Advanced Placement classes. The team
will use the BEAR Assessment System to develop and refine assessment materials.
This system is an integrated approach to developing assessments that seeks to
provide meaningful interpretations of student work relative to cognitive and
developmental goals. The researchers will gather empirical evidence to develop
and improve the assessment materials, and then gather reliability and validity
evidence to support their use. In total, item response data will be collected
from several thousand students. Student response data will be analyzed using
multidimensional item response theory models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.