* 2010102
* Laser-Assisted Inelastic Electron-Atom Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Nicholas L.S. Martin, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 264,059.00

Free-free scattering is a fundamental process that is important for the
understanding of various astrophysical phenomena. The process is named for the
fact that when an electron scatters from an atom in the presence of a photon
field, the electron can absorb or emit one or more photons (particles of light),
but the electron is free both before and after the scattering collision. Almost
all experiments to date indicate that the photon interacts only with the free
electron and has no effect on the target atom. However, it has been shown that a
so-called "dressed atom" effect (the interaction of the photon field with the
target atom) can greatly enhance the probability of the free electron absorbing
or emitting a photon for very small electron scattering angles. This project
investigates free-free scattering in the laboratory by using a laser to produce
a well-defined photon beam, an electron gun (similar to those that used to be
found in old TV sets) to produce a well-defined electron beam, with the two
beams arranged to intersect each other and a beam of atoms. An important part of
the project is to look for "dressed atom" effects in helium, for the special
case where the scattered electron also changes the energy state of the helium
atom. This work will have a broad impact on the community by providing
educational opportunities for students at the high school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels in the EPSCoR state of Kentucky and in collaboration with the
exclusively undergraduate institution Illinois Wesleyan
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns fundamental research on
laser-assisted electron scattering. The work will be carried out on two
apparatuses. The first, which is already in use for such experiments, will be
used to measure the effects of the "dressing" of the lowest excited states of He
atoms by 1.17 eV laser radiation during inelastic electron scattering. The
electron gun of this apparatus will be fitted with a monochrometer in order to
resolve the closely spaced He 1s2s and 1s2p singlet levels; only the former is
expected to show dressing effects and it is important to eliminate the effect of
the large scattering cross section of the latter. The apparatus will also be
interfaced with an in-house developed multipass laser system to increase the
free-free count rate; to date such systems have only been used in national labs,
never in "tabletop" experiments. The multipass system uses a Pockels cell to
rotate the linearly polarized laser beam 90 degrees after injection, combined
with a beam splitting cube that then traps the laser beam into a repetitive path
(that includes the now-deactivated Pockels cell). The second apparatus has
recently been fitted with such a multipass laser system. This apparatus will be
used to investigate laser-assisted electron-impact autoionization of helium. The
expected signatures of laser assisted autoionization are sidebands in the
ejected-electron spectrum, one photon energy away from the autoionizing
resonance positions. Such sidebands have been seen by other workers in Auger
decay, but have never been observed for the autoionization
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.