* 2010005
* SIGHT: A compact adaptive optics technology demonstrator for all-sky panchromatic optical/infrared spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Richard Dekany, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,638,321.00

This project will develop a technique to enhance large research telescopes by
improving their sensitivity. Utilizing a laser source to probe Earth's ever-
evolving atmosphere, the project will demonstrate a new way of correcting for
atmospheric turbulence effects. Such effects are related to what people can see
when they look at a star at night and see it constantly changing. To perform
this correction, a novel optical element and algorithms will detect such changes
quickly enough to allow for compensation in real time. Additionally, the system
will be cooled to reduce background infrared radiation. These advantages will
enhance the science for existing and new research
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sharpening Images using Guidestars at the Hale
Telescope (SIGHT) is a laser guide star (LGS) adaptive optics (AO) demonstrator
enabling panchromatic visible-to-infrared image compensation over the entire
sky. SIGHT innovates by, demonstrating a novel high-dynamic-range Open loop LGS
Optical Differentiator Wavefront Sensor (ODWFS), cooling an AO science relay to
-30C for thermal background reduction, automating LGS observations on a 5-meter
telescope, and demonstrating a compact optical design appropriate for many AO
and spectrographic applications. Unlike prior LGS system, SIGHT will sharpen
images over a large range of wavelengths, from the ultraviolet atmospheric cut-
off to the near-IR. The system will optimize panchromatic spectrograph optical
and operational efficiency, providing a factor of up to 4x speed advantage for
visible observations of faint, compact objects. SIGHT thus addresses a need, to
improve rapid, moderate-resolution classification of transient objects
discovered with the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) and the Rubin Observatory
using efficient spectrographs. Applying high-order wavefront corrections based
on LGS sensing, SIGHT sharpens images significantly without needing a natural
guide star (NGS) for tip-tilt correction. However, when an NGS is available,
SIGHT performance is further improved. The applicability of these techniques to
future multi-object spectrographs (MOS) and advance AO architectures for large
telescopes will be demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.