* 2010783
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: A mechanistic approach to how the interaction of ecology and evolution determine the response of communities to temperature
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Anna Vinton, Vinton, Anna Christina
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. To conserve
biodiversity in a changing climate, it is important to understand how species
respond to changing temperatures in both the short and long term. However, this
task is not easy since temperature affects individuals in multiple ways, from
molecules to ecosystems and in how they interact with other species. Recent
scientific progress in genetics, evolutionary biology, ecology, and mathematical
modelling makes possible a comprehensive approach to understanding how organisms
respond to temperature increase. Just as this research takes a broad approach to
address the effects of temperature on biological systems, it is necessary to
take a broad approach to increase diversity in the field of biology. The fellow
will focus this effort on increasing the participation of women of color, who
are underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will combine
laboratory experiments and mathematical models to investigate how increasing
temperature alters individual and generational performance. Furthermore, this
research will investigate how species interactions (via bacterial infection),
and the type of spatial landscape, alter the ability to adapt to temperature
changes. The experimental system is made up of two model species, a well-studied
fruit fly and a bacterial pathogen that is widespread in humans and wild
animals. The fellow will use data from this experimental system to parameterize
a mathematical model of how temperature change alters species dynamics and
extinction probability. Not only will this model be useful to aid in
vulnerability assessments of natural species and communities of interest, it
also will provide useful information about how temperature alters the virulence
of a common pathogen of humans and wild animals. To support women of color in
strengthening their science identities, the fellow will conduct high school,
undergraduate and graduate student outreach. These actions include developing a
module for use in the classroom to allow students to investigate the effect of
temperature on biological communities. Furthermore, the fellow will develop a
web-based international women’s mentoring chain, connecting scientists in
Ecology and Evolution from seniors in high school to university
professors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.