* 2010845
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Individual and population-level  effects of water in a tritrophic system: impacts on pollination, herbivory, and parasitism
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Wilnelia Recart Gonzalez, Recart Gonzalez, Wilnelia
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Plants are
essential in maintaining the food supply and in the conservation of natural
ecosystems. In agricultural and natural systems, plants do not live in
isolation; they are affected by interactions with other species and by physical
conditions. The research will examine how ecological interactions including
pollination and disease combine with water availability to affect a plant
species, a butterfly species, whose caterpillars consume the plant, and a lethal
virus that infects the caterpillars. The results will provide information on how
drought, disease, and herbivorous insects affect the population dynamics of the
interacting species. The broadening participation component of this proposal
aims to promote excitement and curiosity of people for plant biology and shift
current perceptions of scientists. The Fellow will broaden the participation of
underrepresented minorities in the sciences through outreach in the form of the
development and implementation of bilingual (English and Spanish) educational
materials. Educational content will be focused on plant ecology and be used to
reach out to the large Spanish-speaking population of San Diego county.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will manipulate water availability to blue
passionflower plants (Passiflora caerulea) and conduct controlled epidemics and
infections of nuclear polyhedrosis virus (NPV) on the larval stage of gulf
fritillary butterflies (Agraulis vanillae), to document the effects of water and
the presence of NPV on the population dynamics of the interacting species, the
pollination-related traits of the plant (P. caerulea), and the pollination-
related traits of the adult pollinator (A. vanillae). This work will integrate
experimental manipulations (controlled infections and epidemics) and
mathematical models to generate a framework that considers the overarching
impacts that water has on host-pathogen, plant-herbivore, and plant-pollinator
interactions. These experimental manipulations will provide information on how
drought and presence of NPV affect traits of the plants related to how they
attract pollinating insects, such as the size and number of flowers, as well as
traits of the adult butterflies that affect their ability to pollinate plants.
To broaden the participation of under-represented groups in science, the Fellow
will focus on generating outreach activities for the Spanish-speaking population
of San Diego, California with the aim to increase knowledge about the importance
of plant research in everyday life. This will be achieved by working with K-12
students in Spanish dual-language immersion programs and a wider non-academic
Spanish-speaking audience that attends Hispanic-related community events in San
Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.