* 2010988
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Carl Hutter, Hutter, Carl
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Animals living on different continents often have remarkable
morphological and/or behavioral similarities. This pattern could be explained by
convergent evolution, where unrelated species independently evolved these
similar traits. Researchers have often observed that frogs in different
hemispheres share similar-sounding vocalizations or calls, which presents an
exciting opportunity to study convergent evolution. Frog calls could have
independently evolved to sound similar because of adaptation in
auditory/acoustic morphology to generate calls that travel most efficiently
through similarly structured habitats. To understand call evolution, this
research will employ existing natural history museum collections integrating
frog call recordings, tissue samples for genomic data, and high-resolution soft-
tissue CT scans of larynges, ears, and lungs from frog specimens. Studying how
frogs respond to different acoustic habitats is important for conservation, as
human activities and expansion have introduced new sources of noise pollution
that may disturb frog populations. The results of this research will be shared
through scientific publications and all data generated will be made readily
accessible to other researchers. The Fellow will mentor undergraduate and
graduate students with the goal of increasing diversity and representation in
science. Furthermore, this research will be adapted to outreach events at public
education programs reaching K-12, adult and family visitors.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research uses preserved specimens from existing museum
collections with soft tissue DiceCT scanning to visualize and measure frog
larynges and ears to collect acoustic/auditory morphology. These data will be
integrated with acoustic recordings from museum digitization projects and new
phylogenomic data from ~15,000 markers (exons, introns, and ultra-conserved
elements) using existing tissue collections. This study will test if convergent
evolution or phylogenetic conservatism explains the global similarity of frog
calls, and the acoustic/auditory morphology that may generate them among frogs
found in similar habitats on different continents. Importantly, this study will
address whether the convergence of vocalizations and acoustic/auditory
morphology in frogs resulted from adaptation to similar habitats, leading to
correlated evolution of frog communication systems. The Fellow will receive
training in CT scanning and morphological studies of new specimens; multiple
layers of existing and new specimen data will be linked to learn whether
adaptation to similar habitats drives the repeated evolution of similar
vocalizations and the underlying morphology on a global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.