* 2010524
* Dynamical Inference of Forces in Dusty Plasmas using Three-Dimensional Laser Sheet Tomography
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ilya Nemenman, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 599,981.00

This award will enable novel studies of complex "dusty" plasmas using machine
learning techniques on data from laboratory experiments. Some of the most
pressing scientific and societal issues involve the dynamics of complex systems,
such as Earth's variable climate, global financial markets, urban environments,
and the migration of animals. These systems have many interacting components,
yet it is unclear how they are entangled together to produce the resulting
dynamics. In the emerging era of Big Data, these systems and their components
can be measured exceedingly well, resulting in a vast amount of data. In the
pursuit to provide a deeper understanding of such systems, dynamical inference
has emerged as an important field in physics and computer science. However, many
state-of-the-art computational techniques for teasing apart complex dynamics are
tested on simulated data. This award will combine machine learning techniques
from this emerging field with high-resolution data from laboratory experiments
of dusty plasmas, which consist of levitated, micron-sized dust particles
embedded in a plasma of electrons and ions. By simultaneously tracking the
motion of hundreds of particles, the fundamental, nonequilibrium forces that
drive their motion will be "learned" using Artificial Intelligence techniques,
exploring the boundary between physical, human intuition and the limits of what
physics can be uncovered through machine learning. In parallel to this research
effort, the project includes continuation of an after-school science club at a
local elementary school in Dekalb county, which hosts the 3rd largest school
system and is the most diverse county in Georgia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
motion of dust particles in plasma has been studied for nearly 30 years and lead
to the discovery of strongly coupled crystalline structures and nonequilibrium
dynamics governed by gravitational, hydrodynamic, and electromagnetic forces.
Many of the interparticle forces are complex; they can be non-reciprocal, and
non-additive. Deciphering the m√©lange of potential interactions between many
particles is a challenging task, and could open a new paradigm of understanding
in dusty plasmas in extreme environments. This award aims to tease apart both
the known and unknown forces that drive dusty plasmas using high-resolution,
three-dimensional imaging and particle tracking coupled with modern dynamical
inference techniques. This will effectively turn every dust particle into a
local probe of the plasma environment and can be applied in a diverse array of
experimental settings. To accomplish this, a new scanning laser-sheet tomography
technique will be developed that utilizes a single high-speed camera. In systems
of ~100 particles or less levitated above a biased electrode in an rf plasma,
the motion of single particles will be tracked for 30 s or longer. A detailed
analysis of their movement will reveal in-situ information about the plasma
environment, including the plasma sheath, and the local stochastic fluctuations
of charge on the particles. For highly dynamic systems of many particles, the
large quantity of data acquired over long times will be analyzed using a variety
of machine learning techniques. The team will compute quantities such as the
effective pair potential between particles, and more complex, three-body
interactions and non-reciprocal forces will be extracted using neural networks
with varying hierarchies. More broadly, this award aims to test the limit of
what a machine can "learn" from noisy, experimental data, and explore new
physics from complex, big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.