* 2010366
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Machine Learning based Cooperative Perception with mmWave Communication for Autonomous Vehicle Safety
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Honggang Wang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,299.00

By understanding what and how data are exchanged among autonomous vehicles, from
a machine learning perspective, it is possible to realize precise cooperative
perception on autonomous vehicles, enabling massive amounts of sensor
information to be shared amongst vehicles. Such an advance can be extremely
useful to extend the line of sight and field of view of autonomous vehicles,
which otherwise suffers from blind spots and occlusions. The extended field of
view on autonomous vehicles will be beneficial at times when there are
occlusions preventing a complete perception of the environment. This increase in
situational awareness promotes safe driving over a narrow scope and improves
traffic flow efficiency over an extended scope. The proposed research work will
not only change the way people think about the perception system on autonomous
vehicles but could also open up opportunities to design novel systems that were
previously inconceivable. This project offers a wide variety of research
activities from data collection, algorithm design, system development, and in-
the-field evaluation, which will be attractive to students with various
backgrounds and goals. Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved
directly in the research activities as assistants at different levels. The
expected research outcomes from this project will also enhance the current
curricula related to machine learning, Internet of things, and wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research objective of this project
is to understand the sensing and communication challenges to achieving
cooperative perception among autonomous vehicles, and to use the insights thus
gained to guide the design of suitable data exchange format, data fusion
algorithms, and efficient millimeter wave vehicular communications. Results from
this project will include a machine learning based cooperative perception
framework, which will shed light on effectively combining feature maps, derived
from machine learning models on autonomous vehicles, in a distributed manner.
The resulted feature map compression and feature map selection approaches will
significantly reduce the amount of data exchanged among vehicles, enabling agile
and precise cooperative perception on connected and autonomous vehicles. The
proposed scalable feature map transmission mechanism jointly considers the
application requirements, link and physical layer characteristics of millimeter
wave links, enabling sensor data sharing on a massive scale among autonomous
vehicles. The implemented system and evaluation platform will serve as a
convincing proof-of-concept for the proposed solution, thus opening the door to
widespread adoption of cooperative perception applications via millimeter wave
communications in future vehicle networks. The collected dataset from this
project will be made publicly available, serving as a catalyst for enabling
innovative research on cooperative object detection, vehicular edge computing,
and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.