* 2010820
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Mechanisms of Sensory-Motor Coordination in Zoospores of Pathogenic Chytrid Fungi
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Andrew Swafford, Swafford, Andrew JM
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow
will investigate the relationship between detection of a target and movement
towards the target by a pathogen (disease causing organism). These two systems
are important for pathogenesis (disease); understanding how they evolve, and
function together is crucial for creating treatments and preventing future
epidemics. The chytrids are a group of single-celled fungi that have repeatedly
emerged as pathogenic agents in vertebrates, invertebrates, plants, algae, and
other fungi. This project will focus on the infectious life stage of chytrid
fungi – revealing how they locate, navigate towards, and identify hosts.
Currently, two species of chytrids are annihilating global amphibian populations
in an epidemic that represents the greatest recorded loss of biodiversity due to
a pathogen. Understanding how chytrids find and infect hosts will open new
avenues to mitigate their current and future ecological impact while also
advancing the understanding of parasite biology. Furthermore, chytrid fungi
serve as a model for pathogenic epidemics that can destabilize ecosystems
through the loss of biodiversity – potentially leading to increases in carriers
of human disease and loss of normal ecosystem function. In addition to this
research, the Fellow will work with outreach groups at the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst to promote the inclusion and visibility of
underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensory and motor systems
are linked through signal transduction pathways, allowing cells to coordinate
behaviors with the external environment. Chytrid parasites have likely linked
sensory and motor systems to find and identify hosts with devastating results.
This project predicts that chytrid infection relies heavily on integrated
sensory-motor pathways that can be disrupted. Through behavioral experiments,
confocal and super-resolution microscopy, and phylogenetics, the Fellow will
achieve two objectives. 1: determine if chytrids use diffusible chemical cues to
identify and infect hosts. 2: identify the role broadly conserved signaling
components play in guiding chytrid infectious behavior. This project will result
in a deeper understanding of the sensory and motor pathways needed for chytrid
infection and will answer broader questions about parasitism, pathogenicity, and
sensory-motor coordination. The Fellow will collaborate with undergraduates from
underrepresented groups to produce open-source educational material for teaching
how light and vision have evolved and integrated with behavior in different
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.