* 2010445
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020:  Developmental Regulator-Mediated Gene Editing: A Method to Improve Accessibility and Production of Transgenic Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Jon Cody, Cody, Jon Phalen
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 02/28/2022
* USD 100,500.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Jon Cody is "Developmental Regulator-Mediated Gene
Editing: A Method to Improve Accessibility and Production of Transgenic Plants".
The host institution for the fellowship is the University of Minnesota and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Daniel Voytas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the past 30
years, conventional genetic engineering methods have accelerated plant
improvement through the expansion of available traits, leading to an increase in
agricultural productivity and fueling the discovery of new biological
mechanisms. This process, however, requires the use of tissue culture techniques
to select and regenerate edited cells into whole transgenic plants, which can
take 6 â€“ 12 months in many crop species. The presented research focuses on
optimization and translation of recent findings that demonstrate expression of
developmental regulators and hormone biosynthetic genes can promote the
production of de novo meristems in the absence of tissue culture in dicot plant
species. If gene editing reagents are included, transgenic meristems are
produced that transmit edits to the next generation. Establishment of
streamlined methods for this process could broadly impact the field of genetic
engineering by possibly increasing accessibility and efficiency of producing
transgenic and gene edited dicot crop plants. During the course of this study
the fellow will be trained in the disciplines of plant physiology, molecular
biology, genetic engineering, genomics, phenomics and plant transformation.
Broader impacts include the dissemination of findings at scientific conferences,
production of video tutorials detailing the process of creating transgenic
plants using developmental regulators and mentoring undergraduate students at
the University of Minnesota. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the
project is to investigate the possible utility of developmental regulator-
mediated ectopic meristem formation to create an efficient and accessible
genetic engineering method for crop species in the absence of tissue culture.
Preliminary work has demonstrated codelivery of Cas9 editing reagents together
with Wus2 and ipt coding sequences can promote formation of edited de novo
meristems. However, this initial report was a proof of concept and requires
optimization. This project focuses on the following aims to improve efficiency
and translate utility of developmental regulator transformation technology - (1)
Optimization: What is the best strategy for regulator gene delivery and
Cas9-mediated editing? (2) Utility: Is homology directed repair in Nicotiana
benthamiana using a developmental regulator transformation platform feasible?
(3) Translation: Can the established developmental regulator transformation
pipeline be utilized in agronomic crop species, such as tomato and potato? Due
to the widespread application of genetic engineering and the difficulty of the
conventional plant transformation process, the results from the present work
could have a broad impact on research in plant biology. If possible,
developmental regulator-mediated transformation could be used by researchers to
easily create gene edits in agronomically significant crop species. Results and
important observations from this work will be available to the public and
research community through publications and video-based
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.