* 2010908
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Genetic Determinants of Hybrid Decay in Backcross Populations of Teosinte with Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Manisha Munasinghe, Munasinghe, Manisha A
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2018. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Manisha Munasinghe is "Genetic Determinants of Hybrid
Decay in Backcross Populations of Teosinte with Maize". The host institution for
the fellowship is the University of Minnesota and the sponsoring scientists are
Drs. Yaniv Brandvain and Nathan Springer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant breeders
seek to take advantage of useful genetic variants present in wild relatives of
crop species. Genetic incompatibilities between species can work against this
goal, which makes understanding how they emerge and persist in populations
highly relevant. A unique incompatibility between the crop species maize and its
wild relative the Mexican teosinte is thought to be triggered by the
uncontrolled proliferation of repetitive DNA in hybrids. This project is
designed to not only identify the specific genetic variants underlying this
incompatibility but also to use this knowledge to expand evolutionary theory to
better understand how these variants become established in populations. Training
objectives for the Fellow include plant biology, computational biology,
statistical genetics, and analytical modeling. Broader impacts include the
development of two teaching modules in genetics and statistics for undergraduate
students and providing mentoring and training through participation in the
Carpentries (www.carpentries.org) computational training workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a longstanding interest in understanding the
genomic basis of reproductive isolation as it can both inform how speciation
occurs and the evolutionary forces occurring within lineages. The uncoupling of
selfish repetitive DNA, such as transposable elements, and the molecular
machinery that epigenetically silences their proliferation is a potential cause
of hybrid incompatibility that has received comparatively little attention. This
project explores an unusual case of hybrid incompatibility between the crop
species maize and its wild relative Mexican teosinte thought to be caused by the
uncoupling of repetitive DNA from the variants that halt their proliferation. No
abnormal phenotype in the F1 hybrids, the persistence of the incompatibility
despite recurrent backcrossing to maize, and epigenetic changes in hybrids
distinguish this case from others. This project will characterize the genomic
basis of this epistatic incompatibility, estimate its frequency in nature, and
model its impacts on genome-wide patterns of introgression. Long-read, whole-
genome sequencing will allow the fine-scale characterization of changes in
repetitive DNA between the parental species and hybrids. Additional teosinte
samples will be collected to perform population-level analyses to identify
regions under selection, which will likely include repetitive DNA repressor
systems. Finally, the consequence of uncoupling repetitive DNA from its
repressor system will be modelled to characterize its effect on population
divergence. All computer pipelines and codes will be shared publicly so other
researchers may adapt these tools to their needs. Raw data/code will be released
through public repositories, such as GitHub or NCBI. Processed datasets will be
released through CyVerse Data Commons, Dryad, or DRUM
(www.lib.umn.edu/datamanagement/drum). All processed data and any files that may
be of interest to the broader community will be made publicly available through
CyVerse or GitHub and will also be shared with
MaizeGDB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.