* 2010987
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Andre Naranjo, Naranjo, Andre Alexander
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Understanding biodiversity is critical for the proper
conservation of an ecosystem that is experiencing extreme stress from global
change during the modern age. Few other ecosystems are at such high risk of
disappearing, especially due to logging and agricultural activities, as the
Chaine de la Selle/Sierra de Bahoruco mountain range in Haiti and the Dominican
Republic. This proposal will use novel approaches of examining genetic and trait
diversity from herbarium specimens to better understand this region. The
ultimate goals of this project are to (i) emphasize the dire need to protect the
remaining natural areas from further damage and (ii) highlight suitable methods
for understanding the evolutionary biology of critically endangered ecosystems.
Identifying patterns across the vastly different ecosystems in this endemism
hotspot will highlight important areas and plants requiring conservation efforts
for future preservation, allowing conservationists to tailor protocols specific
to remaining habitats to ensure the well-being of what remains of the mountain
ranges’ ecosystems, leading to collaborations with conservation organizations
and policy makers. The Fellow will also mentor students from groups
underrepresented in STEM disciplines in scientific investigation as well as
creating educational opportunities for K-12 students through summer workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide insights into factors that
formed and maintained habitats with high levels of endemicity, in addition to
understanding the role microclimates have on species functional traits across
communities. A well-resolved phylogeny will allow us to elucidate the
evolutionary history of the vascular plants in this region and determine whether
paleo-endemism or neo-endemism led to the current pattern of species richness,
in addition to discovering endemism hotspots within the mountain range.
Herbarium specimens will be crucial to understanding historical phylogenetic and
functional trait diversity across the mountain range. The Fellow will
collaborate with the UF Biodiversity Institute and the RISE Precollege Summer
Educational Program to organize summer workshops to educate middle and high
school students about the anthropogenic impact on our tropical forests. Training
goals for the Fellow include learning methods in biological informatics,
ecological modeling, and educational outreach including both undergraduate and
pre-collegiate teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.