* 2010860
* Broadening Participation Research Center: Collaborative Research: Center for Research on Identity and Motivation of African American Students in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Cynthia Winston, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,648,093.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
has identified research in broadening participation in STEM as one of its
priorities and is committed to funding innovative models and research to enhance
the understanding of the barriers that hinder and factors that enhance our
ability to broaden participation in STEM. The project presented by Howard
University, Winston-Salem State University, Coppin State University, and
Morehouse College has been designed to initiate the implementation of essential
research that will set the foundation for the development of the theoretical
models that pertain to the research on identity and motivation of African
American students in science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields.
The project consists of the requisite research, education, knowledge transfer
and outreach components. It is uniquely poised to transform current psychology
theories on STEM learning while engaging participants from a minimum of 30
HBCUs, thereby giving voice to the diverse contexts that may enhance our
understanding of STEM learning and STEM pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
three overarching project research questions: (1) What is the nature of
identity-based motivation among African American undergraduates in STEM at
HBCUs?; (2) How is identity-based motivation interrelated with engagement,
persistence, and achievement of undergraduate African American students in STEM
at HBCUs?; (3) How can artificial intelligence machine learning [AIML] increase
understanding of the nature of identity-based motivation among African American
undergraduates in STEM at HBCUs? The primary objectives of the proposed BPRC:
Center for the Development of Identity and Motivation of African American
Students in STEM are as follows: (1) to develop, implement, and evaluate a
partner operational plan that informs the development of a larger scale BPRC;
(2) to expand and sustain the research capacity at four institutions (Howard
University, Winston-Salem State University, and Morehouse College, Coppin State
University) to conduct mixed methods psychology broadening
participation&lt;br/&gt;research on HBCU undergraduate STEM education; (3) to
partner with existing HBCU research labs and the University of Michigan National
Center for Institutional Diversity to develop a robust strategy to transfer
knowledge about identity-based motivation of African American students in STEM
through multimedia and varied forms of dissemination and outreach; and (4) to
develop a mixed methods psychology broadening participation research training
curriculum to produce the next generation of scholars in the psychological
science of broadening participation. The project is aligned with the
strategic&lt;br/&gt;priority of the National Science Foundation to make
investments that enhance both research capacity and excellence in research at
HBCUs. Knowledge generated about psychological experiences in HBCU learning
contexts can inform future practices at HBCUs, while also informing how other
institutions that are not HBCUs can cultivate psychologically enriching
environments that promote learning and success among African American
undergraduate students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.