* 2010686
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020:  Reconstructing spatial-temporal responses to drought in Arabidopsis and rice using time series single-cell transcriptomics
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Trevor Nolan, Nolan, Trevor M
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2023
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2020. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Trevor M. Nolan is "Reconstructing spatial-temporal
responses to drought in Arabidopsis and rice using time series single-cell
transcriptomics" The host institution for the fellowship is Duke University and
the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Philip N. Benfey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drought
is a devastating environmental stress that causes billions of dollars in damages
and contributes to weather-related instability in crop yield. A great deal of
research has been devoted to identifying strategies that can improve plant
survival during drought; however, the majority of factors that have been shown
to promote drought resistance are associated with decreased plant growth and
productivity. To engineer plants that grow well and withstand drought, it is
important to understand when and where drought responses occur and how plants
recover once drought subsides. This project will address this challenge through
the use of innovative technology that allows gene activity to be monitored in
individual cells. The Fellow will receive training in developmental biology,
single-cell genomics, bioinformatics and lab management from this project. To
increase broader participation in science, the Fellow will also mentor students
from underrepresented groups at the host-lab
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to define the spatio-temporal
responses to drought and recovery the Fellow will use an integrated approach
involving single-cell genomics, computational modeling, and phenotyping. First,
gene expression will be profiled at single-cell resolution at different times
after drought stress and recovery. This will allow construction of spatially and
temporally resolved gene regulatory networks that will be used to prioritize
genes involved in drought resistance and recovery. These predictions will be
tested at several levels of biological organization including cells and tissues
via confocal and light sheet microscopy, whole plant drought phenotypes using
time lapse imaging, and across two species: Arabidopsis and rice. The inclusion
of a model plant, Arabidopsis, will allow predictions to be quickly and
comprehensively tested. Parallel analysis of rice, an important crop plant, will
enable the direct application of the identified genes to improve crop
performance during drought. The resulting datasets, predictive models and plant
lines will be made publicly available and serve as a valuable resource to guide
future studies on drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.