* 2010041
* Prototyping a New Telescope Design for Unprecedented Survey Speed in the Infrared
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Roger Smith, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 02/29/2024
* USD 946,372.00

Our Universe is full of fireworks. Events like colliding neutron stars are not
only spectacular but can explain how heavy elements like gold were created.
However, like fireworks hidden by their own smoke, scientist can only “hear”
their gravitational waves. Astronomers in addition need to “see” the flash of
light to know exactly where these explosions are, their colors and their
secrets. Fortunately, infrared light penetrates the obscuring material. To catch
these events before they fade, we need an infrared camera that records larger
sections of the sky in one image than what is available at present. In the
system being developed under this award, the entire telescope will be
cryogenically cooled so that it doesn't emit a glow in infrared light. This
project will build a quarter-scale prototype of a 1m diameter telescope that is
planned for use in the Antarctic where the infrared sky is much darker. Such a
system will be an infrared complement to the Vera Rubin Observatory. The team
will integrate education and research by supporting undergraduate engineering
and astronomy students working directly on this technology development. Graduate
students will conduct demonstration science under the supervision of the project
scientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new infrared
telescope that will utilize a pair of fused silica meniscus lenses placed
symmetrically about the pupil to correct for the aberrations introduced by the
spherical primary. This geometry achieves low chromatic aberration to deliver
diffraction limited images at focal ratios as fast as f/1.2, without requiring
dissimilar glasses. The convex fused silica second element is strong enough to
support atmospheric pressure, enabling a fully cryogenic optical path through
its use as the dewar window. The only warm surfaces seen by the detector are the
transparent first element and a thin annulus at the pupil stop, which is
configured as a low emissivity narcissus mirror. Key goals of the prototype are
to confirm the predicted low thermal background, high throughput and good image
quality at f/2 using a 250 mm aperture. A 2.5 μm cutoff Teledyne H2RG detector
will cover a 17.8 deg2 field of view with 7.4 arcsec/pixel sampling. Three
undergraduate students will be involved in demonstrating key technologies. These
include measures to keep the entrance window above dew point, high precision
focus and tilt control via thermal expansion of the primary mirror support
bipods, and a novel detector readout mode for higher observing efficiency and
enhanced dynamic range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the goals of
the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.