* 2011689
* Targeted Infusion Project: Workforce Development for a New Generation of Cyber Security Systems
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Sasan Haghani, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 01/31/2024
* USD 388,351.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The University of the
District of Columbia aspires to support the nation’s efforts to strengthen its
cybersecurity workforce by enhancing the institution’s computer science
curriculum and providing more opportunities to train more students to enter said
workforce. The institution is well-positioned to impact large numbers of
students from underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Successful implementation
of the project will establish a model for other analogous programs at peer
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project promises to: 1) strengthen the
learning experience of UDC undergraduate students by developing three new
cybersecurity courses that will be part of an interdisciplinary cybersecurity
minor; 2) stimulate the undergraduate students’ participation in cybersecurity
research by launching a summer cybersecurity research program; and 3) increase
student enrollment and retention at UDC by implementing outreach activities
related to cybersecurity, and by engaging existing and potential UDC students,
recruited from local high schools and community colleges. It is expected that at
least 600 students will be directly impacted, and benefit from, the proposed
activities during the period of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.