* 2011770
* Collaborative Research: LSC Center for Coatings Research
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Hai-Ping Cheng, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark Coles
* 08/31/2024
* USD 529,789.00

The detections of gravitational waves from coalescing black holes in 2015
launched the field of gravitational wave astronomy. The NSF-funded “A+” upgrade
to Advanced LIGO is designed to achieve an order of magnitude increase in
detection rate for black hole coalescences, and enable detection of fainter
objects like binary neutron stars, greatly increasing their value for multi-
messenger astronomy. The A+ upgrade and all 3rd generation detector designs
depend on the development of mirrors with low coating thermal noise. The coating
thermal noise is reduced, primarily, by lowering the mechanical (elastic) loss
of the mirror materials. The core research focus of the LIGO Scientific
Collaboration (LSC) Center for Coatings Research (CCR) is the development of
mirror coatings with low mechanical and optical losses for use in A+ and 3rd
generation detectors. The research mission of the CCR includes: understanding
and reducing mechanical loss in amorphous metal-oxides, the most widely-used
materials in mirror coatings; and developing and testing crystalline (AlGaAs)
coatings, which have demonstrated low losses for small mirrors. On a longer
time-scale, the CCR is developing mirrors compatible with the proposed 3G
detectors’ cryogenic operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The residual noise visible
in the time-domain gravitational waveforms of black hole mergers first recorded
by Advanced LIGO is mostly due to quantum noise of the light and thermal noise
due to the mirror coatings. Since that first discovery much progress has been
made in reducing quantum noise and the coupling from seismic, scatter and jitter
noise, leaving coating thermal noise as the dominant barrier limiting
gravitational-wave astronomy in the most sensitive observation band. Reducing
this noise source for future generations of detectors requires reducing the
mechanical dissipation in the mirror coatings on the test masses, and forms the
main goal of the CCR. The CCR combines groups working on computational modeling,
coating deposition, and characterization of atomic structure and macroscopic
material properties. These components are often performed by four diverse
communities that work in relative isolation from each other. The strength of the
CCR and its promise of accelerating discoveries arises from close integration of
these communities focused on a unified research goal. In its first two years of
operation, research in the CCR has identified different structural motifs
associated with room-temperature vs cryogenic mechanical losses, which led to
synthesis of germania (GeO2) films giving rise to the lowest-loss amorphous
oxide film other than silica. Going forward, this structural guide will serve as
a paradigm informing the development of high-refractive index amorphous coatings
with lower elastic loss. In addition, thermo-optically-optimized AlGaAs
crystalline coatings have demonstrated a coating thermal noise well below the
requirements for A+, and the CCR has generated a development schedule to scale
up these coatings to LIGO mirror sizes and will continue investigations into
these materials. Other research paths include: exploring deposition techniques
to produce “ultrastable glasses” using amorphous metal-oxides; and stabilizing
amorphous coatings against crystallization in order to allow elastic loss
reduction via high temperature annealing either with nano-layering or with
different doping materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.