* 2011005
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marion Donald, Donald, Marion
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Given the ongoing global decline of pollinators and increased
abundance of managed honeybees, understanding and predicting how plant-
pollinator networks are impacted by honeybee invasion is paramount. The research
will use emerging, cutting-edge approaches to investigate persistence in core
network structure and shifts in species’ roles over long periods of time and
under invasion by honeybees. The Fellow will develop new technical skills by
working with museum and herbarium specimens, novel molecular and statistical
methods, and open-source data analysis. The Fellow will also develop leadership
skills through academic and governmental collaborations, international and
multi-disciplinary networking opportunities, formal leadership training, and
mentoring. In addition, the Fellow will extend the research findings beyond the
realm of academia by transforming this new scientific knowledge to inform
honeybee management practices. Further, conducting this project in New Zealand
is of particular importance, as there is growing pressure to place honeybee
hives in natural areas, yet honeybee impacts on network structure and on plants
and pollinators outside of the northern hemisphere are poorly understood. This
research project will advance the fields of community ecology and pollination
biology and inform management strategies for conservation and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the Fellow will use historical
insect pollinator visitation data and specimens collected in the 1970s from four
sites on the South Island of New Zealand and re-visit these sites to collect
present-day data. The Fellow will use pollen DNA metabarcoding to enhance the
pollinator visitation data and construct new, highly resolved plant-pollinator
networks. Using statistical algorithms for detecting a core structure and
characterizing species’ roles within networks, the Fellow will test for the
persistence of a core structure within and across these plant-pollinator
networks spanning nearly 50 years, and test for shifts in species’ roles
following honeybee invasion. Further, this project will focus on key activities
designed to: (1) Increase participation of underrepresented minorities in
biology; (2) Inform honeybee management strategies for industry and
conservation; (3) Share modern uses of historical collections through museum
outreach events; (4) Donate new pollinator specimens and a pollen DNA reference
database to NZ museums and herbaria; (5) Disseminate findings through
conferences in the US and abroad and open-access publications; and (6) Develop a
GitHub site to serve as an open-source teaching tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.