* 2011291
* Collaborative Research: Defining the role of skin microbiomes in defense against chytridiomycosis in frogs with seasonal infections
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Louise Rollins-Smith, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 474,972.00

Microbiomes are a ubiquitous part of all ecosystems including the skin. Although
the idea that “good” microbes can defend against pathogens is widely accepted,
it is still unclear how microbial communities provide benefits to the host under
variable climates. This research will examine the defense mechanisms against a
lethal skin fungus that has been associated with global amphibian declines. The
studies will investigate the links between natural skin microbes and frog
immunity to understand seasonal changes in disease outcomes using a species of
frog that can die of infection but can survive under optimal environmental
conditions. This project addresses the interplay between disease susceptibility
and immunity for species that do not have a free-living tadpole stage but
instead are direct-developing frogs. Considering the current changes in weather
patterns, seasonality is expected to shift over time, adding more instability to
host-pathogen relationships. To address how microbiomes in skin interact with
the immunological response to this pathogen, the researchers will study frogs in
natural populations and perform controlled laboratory experiments. The results
will allow better predictions about the impact of seasonal variations on species
interactions that can influence defense against emerging diseases. The
researchers will develop and disseminate course materials for a college-level
Disease Ecology course that integrates fundamental concepts from ecology and
evolution and from the molecular level to ecosystem impacts. In addition, the
researchers will work with the Florida Museum of Natural History to develop
outreach travel exhibitions targeted to middle schoolers about amphibian disease
ecology and microbiomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amphibians are globally
threatened by chytridiomycosis, a fungal disease caused by Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis, and hosts often live under dynamic cycles of low and high
pathogen risk. This proposal will focus on the direct-developing frog,
Eleutherodactylus coqui, a species that persists in the wild with infections
modulated by abiotic factors and microbial communities. The researchers will
test if host immune defenses interact with skin microbiome by regulating the
presence/absence of certain bacterial members, in turn influencing
susceptibility to fungal infection. The researchers will assemble sets of
microbial consortia (i.e., groupings of putative symbionts with different
community structures) to quantify host immune defenses including constitutive
immunity and adaptive responses in the field and in the lab. The proposal
includes three research objectives: 1) characterize population-level seasonal
consortia of skin bacteria, immune defenses in the skin secretions, and their
interactions, 2) test for the redistribution of host defenses under contrasting
backgrounds of bacterial diversity, and 3) measure life-stage variability in
putative symbionts, host skin defenses, and resulting pathogen burden. The
project will leverage individual-level data from host defenses and
microbiological assays, microbiome amplicon sequencing, and functional genomics
to evaluate the timing and magnitude of responses. Integrated studies of skin
microbiomes seen through the lens of host skin defenses under different
environmental conditions will shed light on the role of the environment,
immunity, and microbiome in resistance and tolerance to
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.