* 2011360
* Structures, Dynamics, and Thermodynamics of Atomic Boson-Fermion Mixtures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* CHIH CHUN CHIEN, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 178,505.00

Atomic mixtures are ubiquitous in our daily life. For example, air is a mixture
of nitrogen, oxygen, and other ingredients. Cooling down the air leads to
liquefaction, showing a typical example of structural transitions in multi-
species mixtures. The microscopic world governed by quantum physics contains
mixtures of quantum particles that exhibit many exotic phenomena awaiting our
exploration. There are two types of atoms in the universe, bosons and fermions.
They differ by their peer-interactions: bosons tends to congregate in the
quantum regime while fermions stay away from each other. Questions about the
physics of a quantum mixture of both bosons and fermions have fascinated
scientists for decades. Helium atoms have offered a platform for exploring
quantum mixtures, however, the systems are complicated by the complex atomic
interactions and challenging experiments. Nevertheless, recent advances in
cooling, trapping, and manipulating atoms have successfully produced boson-
fermion quantum mixtures and renewed research interest in such systems. The
proposed research will investigate the structures, thermodynamics, and dynamics
of the novel atomic boson-fermion mixtures. Explicitly, the research will
deliver (1) a full theory of the of quantum boson-fermion mixtures, allowing a
detailed analysis of the system in and out of equilibrium, (2) a description of
how bosons and fermions push each other to form a homogeneous mixture like air
or a separation like oil in water, and (3) an exploration and prediction of the
dynamics of quantum boson-fermion mixtures driven across the different
structures. Moreover, while the quantum mixtures realized by different
experimental research groups are confined in different geometries, the proposed
research will extract the universal behavior and elucidate the underlying
mechanism. The results will reveal the novel structures and dynamics of quantum
boson-fermion mixtures and advance our understanding of the many-body physics
behind composite quantum systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid developments
of trapping and manipulating multi-species atomic mixtures have made the
investigation of boson-fermion mixtures an important and urgent task, and the
research will deliver a timely description of the structures and dynamics of the
mixtures. The phase diagrams of atomic mixtures in uniform or harmonic
potentials from the framework developed in the research based on quantum field
theories will explain the current and future experimental data and guide the
investigations of critical phenomena in multi-species quantum systems. The
simulations and analysis of the spatial structures of the mixtures will
demonstrate the extraction of critical exponents from a phase-separated
structure in equilibrium, and the analysis of the quantum dynamics will reveal
the influence of the fermions on the vortex formation in the bosonic superfluid.
The breakdown of the scaling behavior in boson-fermion mixtures will reflect the
first-order structural transition, and a comparison with the conventional
analyses across a second-order phase transition will reveal the size of the
critical regime. The research will establish collaborations with experimental
groups to characterize the structures, thermodynamics, and dynamics of atomic
boson-fermion mixtures across structural transitions in different trap
geometries. The theoretical framework, simulations, and results will guide and
explain experiments of atomic mixtures. To promote the research and advocate
public learning, the PI will present public lectures to the local communities
that have high populations of under-represented minorities and will recruit
minority and women students to participate in the research and increase
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.