* 2011829
* Quantum/Classical Boundaries in Matter-Wave Solitons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Randall Hulet, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 536,352.00

General audience abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physicists have found that
quantum mechanics works perfectly to describe the micro-world of single or small
numbers of electrons, protons, or atoms. Quantum correlations in these small
systems, known as “quantum entanglement,” are the primary attribute driving the
quest to realize quantum computation. For a quantum computer to exhibit an
advantage over an ordinary classical computer, however, the number of entangled
particles must be large, thus presenting obstacles, both technical and
fundamental, to their implementation. NSF-funded graduate student researchers
will perform experiments that explore the limits of quantum entanglement in the
largest systems to date using self-stabilizing wavepackets of atoms, known as
solitons. Although large for a quantum system, containing as many as 10,000
atoms, solitons confined to a one-dimensional line are bestowed with a special
robustness that makes them ideal for exploring how far quantum physics may be
extended into the macro-world. These experiments will help us understand the
quantum/classical boundary, and how it may be extended to even larger systems.
By performing these experiments, graduate students, several from
underrepresented groups, learn the methods of experimental atomic physics in a
state-of-the-art laboratory, gaining expertise that will follow them in their
careers in academia, government, or industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solitons are dispersion-less excitations
that arise in nonlinear systems. They are found both in classical and quantum
wave phenomena, such as waves propagating in water, plasmas, optical fibers, and
in matter waves to name just a few examples. Solitons are one of the few non-
trivial systems that are described by an exactly integrable model. The
researchers will continue their experimental investigation of bright matter-wave
solitons produced from Bose-Einstein condensates with attractive interactions,
and specifically, they will explore the role of integrability in determining the
quantum/classical boundary. Recent theory predicts that integrability will
protect a macro/mesoscopic object from decoherence, and can lead to the
observation of effects that are manifestly quantum in objects expected to be
best described by mean-field theories. By harnessing integrability, the effects
of quantum fluctuations and quantum entanglement may be extended to systems with
a large number of degrees of freedom, and which are large in physical size. The
research team has two specific goals: 1) to observe the integrability-breaking
effect of quantum fluctuations on the binding of a higher-order soliton breather
and 2) to study the fast and slow collision regimes of a fundamental soliton
interacting with a repulsive barrier made from a light sheet, and to exploit
this geometry to realize a matter-wave soliton
interferometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.