* 2011002
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Robin Rohwer, Rohwer, Robin Rebecca
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Ecology and evolution are the frameworks
through which scientists understand how organisms adapt to a changing
environment. Ecology describes the abundance of different species over time,
while evolution describes the abundance of different genes within a species over
time. However, for microbes the definition of a species is unclear. Scientists
hotly debate the criteria that should be used to group microbes into the same
species, and shifting these criteria will determine whether observed changes in
abundance reflect changes among species (ecology) or changes within species
(evolution). This uncertainty around a microbial species blurs the boundary
between ecology and evolution. This project will examine ecological and
evolutionary processes across a range of species resolutions to identify
unifying principles of ecology and evolution. The Fellow will search for these
unifying principles using a 20-year microbial time series from a freshwater
lake. The Fellow will create interactive data visualizations and incorporate
them into outreach programs and course materials for diverse, public audiences
that include scientists and educators.

The 20-year microbial time series includes 500 metagenomes from Lake Mendota
(WI, USA). The Fellow will assemble genomes from these metagenomes, and group
them into "genome groups" that approximate a wide range of phylogenetic
delineations from sub-species to phyla. First, the Fellow will quantify the
standing genetic variation by comparing the gene contents of a genome group's
core genome to its accessory genome. Analyzing annotated accessory genes may
reveal functional impacts of genetic variation. Second, the Fellow will identify
temporal changes in the abundance of different genome groups. Correlating genome
group abundance with accessory gene abundance may reveal functional
characteristics contributing to ecological success. Third, the Fellow will
identify changes in allele frequencies in the finely resolved genome groups.
Focusing on single nucleotide variants that change protein structure, and
correlating these with the genome group's abundance, may reveal functional
characteristics contributing to evolutionary success. To communicate these
complex topics with the public, the Fellow will create interactive, mobile-
friendly websites using the R-Shiny package. This will allow students, including
those underrepresented in scientific disciplines, to move a slider to see how
adjusting the phylogenetic resolution changes results.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.