* 2011670
* The Eighth International Symposium on Data Assimilation (ISDA); Fort Collins, Colorado;  June 8-12, 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Steven Fletcher, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 15,581.00

The 8th International Symposium on Data Assimilation will take place during the
week of June 8th, 2020 in Ft. Collins, CO on the campus of Colorado State
University. An international group of scientists and students will come together
to discuss ideas that are at the forefront of data assimilation research. This
award provides travel support for up to 7 students to attend the Symposium,
present their research, and interact with researchers from various domestic and
foreign institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main topics that will be
discussed at the Symposium include: 1) Method Development and Mathematics of
Data Assimilation, 2) Satellite Data Assimilation, 3) Error Covariance
Estimation in Observations, State and Model, 4) Coupled Data Assimilation
Developments, 5) Convective Scale Data Assimilation, 6) Atmospheric Chemistry
and Aerosol Data Assimilation, 7) Emerging Applications of Data Assimilation,
and 8) Machine Learning for Data Assimilation. The presentations and posters
will be hosted publicly, with permission, and there will be a summary article
submitted to the Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.