* 2011763
* RUI: Hadronic Structure from Spin Observables in pQCD
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Daniel Pitonyak, Lebanon Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 164,862.00

The nucleus of an atom is made up of protons and neutrons, which are a part of a
broader category of particles called hadrons. However, these hadrons are not a
fundamental form of matter since they are composed of other particles, namely,
quarks and gluons (collectively called partons). The partons form a dynamical
system inside of hadrons that is governed by the strong nuclear force. A goal of
nuclear physics research is to understand this internal structure through the
interactions of these partons, the elementary pieces of visible matter. In
particular, the analysis of high-energy collisions sensitive to an intrinsic
property, called spin, of hadrons and/or partons is especially useful. These
observables allow us to explore the 3-dimensional motion of partons inside of
hadrons and how the proton's spin arises from its constituent partons. This
research will give us better insight into these aspects of hadronic structure as
well as support the science of the future Electron-Ion Collider to be built in
the United States. Undergraduate students will be included in substantive parts
of the project in order to foster the interests of young scientists in the
subfield of nuclear physics and train them for future careers in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will further our knowledge of
observables sensitive to parton intrinsic transverse motion and correlations,
which allow for a 3-dimensional imaging of hadrons in momentum space. This
includes performing a global analysis of data from various experiments sensitive
to the spin of hadrons in order to extract the relevant functions, using an
iterative Monte Carlo routine, that encode their internal structure. These
functions will then be used to make predictions for upcoming measurements at the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), Jefferson Lab's 12-GeV upgrade
(JLab-12), and a future Electron-Ion Collider (EIC). Since a rigorous
theoretical formalism is needed in order to interpret such experimental data,
this project will also solidify the framework used in spin observables through
higher-order calculations within quantum chromodynamics (QCD). The project will
lastly investigate certain aspects of how the proton spin arises from its
constituent partons by analyzing how much of this spin is due to partons that
carry only a small fraction of the proton's momentum. The study will incorporate
first principle results as input to the extraction of partonic functions that
can be used to calculate their spin in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.