* 2011924
* UC San Diego MRSEC: an NSF Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Michael Sailor, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2026
* USD 9,000,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The growth, prosperity, security, and quality of life of
humans are in large part determined by the materials they use. The mission of
the UC San Diego Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (UCSD MRSEC)
is to perform innovative, interdisciplinary materials research relevant to
societal needs, and to prepare students to become future leaders in materials
design and discovery. The research effort of the Center is conducted within two
highly interdisciplinary groups. The first group is deploying the most powerful
computers available to understand, predict, and ultimately control the
properties of materials at microscopic size scales—sizes just larger than
molecular dimensions. It is in this size regime where many useful properties of
materials emerge. For example, changes in the shape of metal particles at this
scale can change their color, their efficiency as a catalyst, or their
sensitivity in a medical diagnostic test. The second group is using the tools of
the biotechnology revolution—in particular, genetic engineering and synthetic
biology—to build new classes of materials that can respond to stimuli from their
environment in useful ways. Both groups are targeting fundamental breakthroughs
that can impact a number of critically important needs: faster, more accurate
sensors for medical diagnostic tests, more efficient decontamination of chemical
or biological hazards, better catalysts to reduce the cost of industrial
processes, and improved therapeutics for treating diseases. The fundamental
research within the two groups is empowered by an integrated educational program
to prepare a diverse community of trainees to enhance national proficiencies in
the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields. Immersive training
for scientists across all levels – novice through established – develops
technical competency in laboratory procedures, advanced instrumentation, and
computational methods. Internship and scientist-in-residence programs fuel vital
exchange of ideas and leverage partnerships with industry, national
laboratories, and other collaborators. Partnership with the Fleet Science Center
builds researchers’ skills in science communication and connects the UCSD MRSEC
with the diverse San Diego community to address community-articulated needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The UCSD MRSEC addresses two
fundamental challenges: (1) How to predict and direct the assembly of materials
at the mesoscale, where macroscopic behavior and properties emerge (IRG1:
Predictive Assembly); and (2) How to deploy the tools of synthetic biology to
build soft materials that meld the characteristics of living systems with the
performance requirements of advanced engineered materials (IRG2: Stimuli-
Responsive Living Polymeric Materials). IRG1 focuses on the rational design of
innovative, functional mesomaterials with programmed plasmonic, catalytic, and
structural properties. A computation-driven framework is being created to
understand, predict, and design how shaped nanocomponents are used as material
building blocks. The models developed bridge length and time scales relevant to
mesoscale assembly. IRG2 integrates engineered living matter – photosynthetic
organisms – into biological composites that respond to stimuli with genetically
encoded outputs, such as chemical reagents and polymer feedstocks. The UCSD
MRSEC creates unique resources to benefit the broader materials-research
community: a MesoMaterials Design Facility – a virtual, computational facility,
and an Engineered Living Materials Foundry, consisting of a bio-synthesis
laboratory and soft-matter characterization tools. The Center’s educational
goals include preparing the next generation of interdisciplinary materials
scientists, and increasing diversity and inclusion in materials research. The
Research Immersion in Materials Science and Engineering (RIMSE) Summer Schools
provide intensive training in the areas of IRG research. Enabling professional
development for Center members in science communication, a partnership with the
Fleet Science Center facilitates meaningful engagement with the diverse San
Diego community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.