* 2011271
* CIBR: Full-Spectrum Prediction of Peptide Tandem Mass Spectra using Deep Neural Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Yuzhen Ye, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 781,018.00

The last decade has witnessed rapid advances in mass spectrometry (MS)
technology. In particular, the liquid chromatograph coupled tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) has become a popular analytical tool for characterizing
complex protein samples in many branches of life sciences, including
microbiology, environmental science, plant biology, agriculture and biomedicine.
This project aims to exploit publicly available proteomic data for predicting
tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra of peptides. Successful prediction of peptide MS/MS
spectra is of great theoretical interests (for better understanding mechanisms
of peptide fragmentation in mass spectrometers), and will significantly improve
the peptide identification, which is critical for the analyses of complex
protein samples. The PIs of this project are actively involved and lead some the
school and departments outreach activities and events, including the annual
summer camp for girl scouts. They plan to recruit students from HBCU institutes
to participate summer research each year in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs of the project propose to a sequence-to-
sequence (seq2seq) deep learning model for predicting the full MS/MS spectra of
peptides directly from their sequences without any assumption of fragmentation
rules. They will also exploit the multitask learning (MTL) approach for
predicting the MS/MS spectra from peptides containing post-translation
modification (PTMs), and the MS/MS spectra acquired by using different ion
activation methods, such as Electron Transfer Dissociation (ETDs). The deep
learning models will be implemented and released in open source software tools
to be used by the research community. The update of the research project will be
made available through the project website:
http://www.predfull.com.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.