* 2011147
* How land use change transforms the landscape of vector-borne disease
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Erin Mordecai, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,817,295.00

Human-induced ecological and social changes are transforming the landscape of
infectious disease at a scale unprecedented in both speed and global reach.
Anticipating and preventing disease expansions is a critical goal for humanity,
which requires understanding fundamental ecological mechanisms that drive
infectious disease transmission. Vector-borne diseases—those transmitted by
biting arthropods like mosquitoes and ticks, including malaria, dengue, West
Nile, Zika, and Lyme disease, are highly sensitive to environmental change
because vectors live, breed, and bite hosts in the human-impacted environment.
This research investigates the mechanisms by which ecological changes in land
use, such as deforestation, agricultural intensification, and unplanned
urbanization, affect vector-borne disease transmission. The project will build
capacity in STEM research and education, focusing on promoting diversity and
open access to science and including a geospatial data analysis tutorial.
Results of the research will be incorporated into tools directly useful to
policymakers, including informing the development of InVEST software, which
describes how natural ecosystems support human health and welfare and is
currently in use in over 180 countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses three questions: (1) How does land use change affect the vector, host,
and pathogen distributions and traits that drive disease transmission? (2) How
important is land use change for vector-borne disease incidence observed at
large scales in the field? (3) By what socioeconomic, behavioral, and ecological
mechanisms does land use affect vector-borne disease transmission in the field?
The hypothesis is that a dynamic gradient of land use intensification leads to a
turnover in ecological suitability for transmission of different vector-borne
diseases, resulting in succession from forest-based yellow fever and some forms
of leishmaniasis, to malaria during early land conversion, to arboviruses
transmitted by suburban and urban mosquitoes. The research will codify this
hypothesis by developing trait-based epidemiological models of transmission for
each of these focal diseases. Next, the research will test proposed
relationships between environment and disease transmission using large-scale
geospatial data on human disease, environment, and population in an econometrics
statistical regression framework. Finally, the research will drill down into
local transmission dynamics by surveying vector abundance, pathogen presence,
human behavior, and socioeconomic conditions, combined with local-scale disease
incidence data in situ in a field setting where land use is rapidly changing.
Together, these approaches will identify and predict impacts of land use change
on human disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.