* 2011254
* Directed Self-Assembly of Block Copolymer Thin Films into Useful Organized Patterns for Microelectronics and Nanofabrication.
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Michael Arnold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 345,941.00

This grant supports research that creates new understanding and capabilities
regarding a manufacturing process enabling the fabrication of patterns and
features on surfaces that are extremely small -- only a few billionths of a
meter (a few nanometers) in extent. Precision fabrication at these lengths is
driving manufacturing advances in areas of national importance including
microelectronics, optical materials, sensors, chemical purification membranes,
and quantum materials. This award supports fundamental research on block
copolymer-based nanofabrication. When two different conventional polymers that
do not “like” each other are mixed, the two polymers separate – like oil and
water. However, when these two polymers are bonded to each other – to form a
block copolymer – macroscopic separation is inhibited, and nanoscale segregation
occurs instead. Features smaller than hundred (100), ten (10), and even five (5)
nanometers are generated automatically, that cannot be easily created otherwise.
This project focuses on spatially directing this nanoscale segregation on
surfaces so that rationally organized and useful (as opposed to random) patterns
can be formed. An example is nanopatterning the surfaces of semiconductors for
computer chips so that they perform faster, are more energy efficient, and can
be more complex. The research integrates advanced concepts from materials
science and engineering, chemistry, and nanomanufacturing. The interdisciplinary
research helps widen the involvement of diverse groups in fundamental research
and constructively influences science and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research specifically addresses the
challenge of registering and directing the self-assembly of vertically oriented
block copolymer lamellar domains into rationally controlled sub-lithographic
patterns through the exploitation of boundary-directed epitaxy. Boundary-
directed epitaxy uses the abrupt chemical contrast that is inherent at spatial
boundaries between regions on a substrate with different surface composition to
direct the registration, alignment, and self-assembly of block copolymers. The
advantages are substantial: the boundaries can be defined between features that
are planar and relatively large – circumventing the need for trenches or high-
resolution chemical patterns. The mechanisms that drive self-assembly are highly
unexplored. The project determines the chemical composition / preferentiality
window for boundary-directed epitaxy; quantifies the impact of boundary-
roughness on assembly; characterizes how defects arise; and understands how the
assembly evolves over time. The project studies and demonstrates boundary-
directed epitaxy for nanofabrication, materials synthesis, and nanolithography;
investigates assembly on templates with curved boundaries and complex shapes –
essential for many applications; and, broadens the library of template materials
that can be exploited to advance the generality of the
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.