* 2011333
* RUI: Neutrino Oscillations with DUNE and MicroBooNE
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Nathaniel Tagg, Otterbein College
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 05/31/2021
* USD 29,223.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. A primary area to search for answers to these and
other open questions about the universe, how it came to be and why it is the way
it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to use what we
know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science beyond the Standard
Model. Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact with practically
nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and were once thought
to be massless. Like other elementary particles, they were believed to have an
antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino. Moreover, the Standard Model predicted
that there were actually three different kinds of neutrinos that were
distinguishable through the different interactions that they did undergo
whenever there was an interaction. But recent measurements have totally changed
our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a mass and because
they do, they can actually change from one type to another. Detailed
measurements of these changes, along with other current neutrino experiments,
form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics Beyond the Standard
Model (BSM) and are the subject of this investigation. This research will
involve the work of undergraduate students at Otterbein University, a RUI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the neutrino physics group at
Otterbein University to work on two experiments, MicroBooNE and DUNE, both of
which use large-scale liquid Argon time-projection chamber (TPC) technology. The
DUNE experiment will send a high-intensity broad-band neutrino beam from
Fermilab to a liquid argon TPC in the Homestake mine in South Dakota. DUNE will
make precise measurements of neutrino oscillations and support an extensive
astrophysics program. On MicroBooNE, the Otterbein group will continue to work
on data analysis, particularly regarding measurements of low-level data quality
and detector properties relevant for calibration and systematic errors. The
group is the sole support for the MicroBooNE online monitor and event display
systems. On DUNE, the group is just starting the first steps and are exploring
opportunities in wire plane (APA) manufacturing databases, cryogenic
instrumentation and slow control, trigger systems and event displays. All of
this work will enable the crucial measurements that both experiments will make
regarding the nature of neutrinos. A special contribution of this award and an
exciting broader impact of this research program is the development and
implementation of 3D visualization tools to guide the physics analyses of the
experiments and to render visible to students and the public the nature of
neutrino interactions as recorded and studied by
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.