* 2011839
* MRSEC: Center for Nanoscale Science
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Vincent Crespi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2026
* USD 9,130,000.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The Penn State Materials Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) - Center for Nanoscale Science pursues new materials
platforms, aspiring to deliver the materials of the future. Advancement of these
platforms requires a cross-disciplinary Center-scale effort, one that fosters a
widening gyre of innovation and discovery in emerging research areas of
compelling opportunity. This MRSEC’s interdisciplinary research group (IRG) Two-
Dimensional Polar Metals and Heterostructures studies ultrathin sheets of metals
covered by an atomically thin sheet of carbon – graphene – which protects the
metal from rusting. These structures provide a ground-breaking way to form
combinations of materials whose individual quantum properties may come together
to enable new materials for quantum computing as well as new sensor
technologies. The IRG Crystalline Oxides with High Entropy also pioneers a new
frontier of materials discovery, in this case crystalline materials composed of
a multitude of chemical elements. Out of this huge compositional diversity it is
possible to design materials with attributes that are valuable in energy or
defense applications, such as transparent metals or materials capable of
withstanding extreme environments. The Center’s multifaceted educational program
introduces a core professional development theme of Sustainability in research
practice and outcomes, expands educational offerings that increase access to
STEM for disabled populations, and further deepens and expands two Partnerships
for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) through pervasive mentoring. In
addition, knowledge transfer and the instilling of industry-valued leadership
and team-building skills amongst Penn State MRSEC researchers at all levels
amplify impact nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The air-stable two-dimensional metals studied by IRG1 are
bonded covalently below and non-bonded above: such symmetry breaking activates
novel electronic, spintronic, and optical phenomena such as strongly nonlinear
optics, ultralow-background Raman enhancement, and the types of spin-dependent
bandstructures critical to polar and topological superconductivity; these
transformative properties promise impacts in biosensing, quantum
heterostructures, and nonlinear metasurfaces. IRG2 seeks to define the crystal
chemistry principles that guide data-informed material design in a high-
configurational-entropy landscape, in which the rich diversity of crystal
environments defines an “entropy bank” from which a material can make
“withdrawals” to achieve ground-breaking properties not otherwise possible;
these unique features anticipate broad impacts in ion conduction, transparent
conductors, electrocaloric materials, and correlated oxides. Key equipment
acquisitions expand access to specialized tools while systematic support for
innovation and entrepreneurship across all career stages amplifies the impact of
fundamental science innovation, all supported by targeted international research
connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.