* 2011175
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: Building an Electronic Voting Technology Inspired Interactive Teaching and Learning Framework for Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Matt Bishop, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 178,000.00

Information technology advances quickly and the computer science knowledge base
expands dramatically along with it. These bring about new interconnections,
challenges and opportunities in cybersecurity education. Two main educational
themes resulting from these changes are interactive learning and
dynamic/adaptive computer science course curricula. E-voting is a unique
technology with rich (even conflicting) features that play roles in education
related to these educational themes. Recent studies show that lessons based on
E-voting technology enhance student learning outcomes when used in the
classroom. This project aims to build an Electronic Voting Technology Inspired
Interactive Teaching and Learning Framework for Cybersecurity Education that
will effectively improve student learning outcomes and meet the needs of
dynamic/adaptive computer science course curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses cybersecurity education by using e-voting as a basis. It
emphasizes student-centered interactive learning by developing and using
composable and interactive modules. The composable security topic modules allow
an instructor to form a comprehensive or light-weighted information security
curriculum or to integrate security topics into other courses. It can support
dynamic/adaptive computer science course curricula. The interactive teaching and
learning modules enable student-centered extensive and deep interactive
learning, e.g., student-centered interactions and full engagement in the entire
learning process and systematic inter-connection/transition among different
teaching and learning activities and between topics. It supports broader
teaching and learning activities not only within the classroom but also outside
the classroom, not only involving class lecturing, but also involving class
projects. It supports six student-centered interactions between the instructor
and students, between students and students, and between students and the
E-voting system. As a result, the project significantly enhances student
learning outcomes in cybersecurity. It will attract more students, even
undergraduates, underrepresented student groups and/or high school students, to
the cybersecurity field and lead more undergraduate/minority/high school
students to security research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.