* 2011941
* Collaborative Research: Network Cluster: The Coastal Critical Zone: Processes that transform landscapes and fluxes between land and sea
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Katherine Tully, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 612,551.00

Coastal marshes are essential environments that preserve a fragile and highly
valuable ecosystem. They are an integral part of the Critical Zone that
regulates the conditions at the Earth’s surface and helps sustain life. Coastal
marshes provide crucial services such as carbon storage and removal of nutrients
and contaminants that would otherwise make their way to the ocean. Rising sea
level is expanding these environments, but salt-water is also moving in,
destroying woodlands, and damaging farm fields. Ghost forests and salt-damaged
farm fields are stark indicators of these ecological changes along world
coastlines that can adversely affect land use and economies. Less apparent, and
perhaps even more important, are the concurrent changes in water and chemical
cycling that are altering the functioning of the coastal Critical Zone. This
research project will quantify the processes that occur in the changing coastal
Critical Zone and associated alterations in cycling, fluxes, and storage of
elements at the land-sea margin. The project will address important questions
about how sea-level rise may alter the natural “plumbing” that occurs at the
land-sea boundary and its implications with respect to coastal ecosystems. The
results will assist decision-makers and stakeholders in planning for future
environmental changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify the
coupled processes and feedbacks that govern the hydrological, ecological,
geomorphological, and biogeochemical transformations in the coastal Critical
Zone and how rising sea level will translate to changes in cycling, fluxes, and
storage of elements at the land-sea margin. Sea-level rise pushes salt and
inundation fronts inland via storms and tides (fast processes) while gradually
elevating the water table (slow processes). The complexity of the system, with
its strong hydrologic transience (e.g. tides, storms), tightly coupled ecosystem
and biogeochemical mosaics, and human influences, make functioning and response
at the marsh-upland transition difficult to characterize and predict. The
governing hypotheses of this project address (1) the major fast and slow
hydrological drivers of coastal Critical-Zone transition, (2) the landscape
feedbacks in which ecological change drives geomorphological evolution that
feeds back into hydrological and biogeochemical processes, and (3)
biogeochemical feedbacks in which salinization and redox shifts alter cycling,
mobility, and sequestration of nutrients and carbon. These processes differ
between areas where the marsh abuts forested uplands versus agricultural land.
The hypotheses will be addressed through interdisciplinary field observations,
experiments, and modeling that are fully integrated across three locations along
the mid-Atlantic coast with paired marsh-forest and marsh-agriculture sites. The
forested and agricultural sites at each location represent major differences in
hydrology, geochemistry, and ecology, and are expected to respond differently to
rising sea level. This project addresses pressing needs to determine how
landscapes in the coastal Critical Zone may respond to sea-level rise and how
Critical-Zone research can be applied to developing policies and actions to
mitigate the effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.