* 2011583
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Dynamics and Control with Ultracold Rydberg Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Thomas Carroll, Ursinus College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 231,205.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long range interactions among
atoms provide the foundation for many possible quantum information applications.
These include quantum computing, cryptography, and simulation of complex
phenomena like superconductivity. In the past few decades, theoretical
explorations have revealed surprising new dynamics in these interactions that
have only recently been probed by experiment. For example, under certain
conditions an interacting system of atoms can be “localized” so that the initial
state of the system persists for long times; this has potential for a quantum
memory device. This research team will use lasers, electric fields, and magnetic
fields to study quantum dynamics and control by probing groups of atoms cooled
to a few hundred millionths of a degree above absolute zero. Their project is a
collaborative effort between Bryn Mawr and Ursinus, both small, national liberal
arts colleges located in close proximity in southeastern Pennsylvania. A diverse
group of students, particularly undergraduates, will be employed and trained
every year. The students will participate in all facets of the research,
including experimental lab work, computational studies on a supercomputer,
writing and publishing journal articles, and presenting at conferences. They
will therefore be well-prepared for graduate school and careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is considerable interest, from both the
condensed matter and atomic physics communities, in using cold atom systems to
study the quantum dynamics of many-body thermalization and localization. While
there are many theoretical and computational results in the study of
thermalization and localization, there are still only a few experimental systems
being explored. Ultracold Rydberg gases in a magneto-optical trap will be used
to explore quantum control of the Rydberg electron, dipole-dipole interaction
dynamics, and many-body thermalization with a combination of experimental and
computational efforts. These experiments will attempt to create and control
coherence in interacting many-atom systems. An echo-like measurement will be
developed, which will illuminate the role that field-tuned and always-resonant
dipole-dipole interactions play in many-body thermalization and possible
localization. Optimization of these quantum processes will be explored using a
genetic algorithm or other machine learning
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.