* 2011743
* RUI: Algorithms and Complexity in Chip-Firing Games and Graph Gonality
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Ralph Morrison, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,445.00

This mathematics research project studies "chip-firing games" on graphs from a
computational and algorithmic perspective. Chip-firing games, which are based on
redistributing items throughout a network or graph, have appeared in a wide
variety of mathematical and computational areas over the past three decades.
They originated in dynamical systems as part of the abelian sandpile model, the
first known example of a system to display an important property known as self-
organized criticality. A more recent perspective has treated chip-firing games
on graphs as a discrete, combinatorial tool for studying algebraic curves. This
has led to a deeper understanding of the connections between the mathematical
fields of graph theory and algebraic geometry. A key concept in this framework
is the divisorial gonality of a network, which measures how difficult certain
chip-firing games are to win on that network; this number has already been
connected to key invariants from graph theory, such as treewidth. This project
will deepen understanding of chip-firing games from a computational perspective,
first designing and then implementing efficient algorithms for studying these
games and their difficulty. Once implemented, these tools will be used for
research in such disparate fields as algebraic geometry, graph theory, and
dynamical systems, as well as in classrooms as pedagogical tools. In addition to
these mathematical applications, the chip-firing problems that are known to be
computationally difficult will serve as a good benchmark for computational
methods and techniques. This project involves undergraduate students in the
research, providing those students with key skills for future careers in both
pure and applied areas of STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consider
several versions of gonality, on both finite and metric graphs: divisorial
gonality, the minimum degree of a positive rank divisor on a graph; geometric
gonality, defined in terms of harmonic morphisms to a tree; stable divisorial
gonality, which allows for refinements before computing the divisorial gonality;
and higher gonalities, which ask for the minimum degree of a divisor with
prescribed rank. Although purely combinatorial in nature, these topics connect
deeply to such areas of algebraic geometry as tropical geometry, Berkovich
theory, and Brill-Noether theory. There are three main components of the
overarching project: (1) To study the theoretical aspects of computing graph
gonality and related topics vis-a-vis computational complexity. This includes
studying the computational complexity of bounding the different versions of
gonality, both in general and for special classes of graphs; designing
algorithms for computing gonalities; and studying questions with important
computational consequences, like finding upper and lower bounds on gonalities.
Key tools here will be modifications of such existing algorithms as Dhar's
burning algorithm. (2) To implement computational tools for studying chip-firing
games on graphs. This will include tools for both combinatorial and metric
graphs, which will also be made freely available to both researchers and
teachers. (3) To apply these tools to study chip-firing games, graph theory, and
algebraic geometry. Such projects include studying gonality of random graphs,
investigating long-standing conjectures on graph gonalities, performing
computations relevant to algebraic curves, and investigating embedded aspects of
tropical geometry. In some cases, the computations themselves will be of
paramount importance; in other cases, they will simply guide the direction of
research in fruitful directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.