* 2011608
* Unmasking the Remnants of Gamma-Ray Bursts in the Era of Gravitational Wave Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Alessandra Corsi, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 262,509.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
era of gravitational-wave multi-messenger astronomy started on 2017 August 17,
when LIGO (the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory) discovered
an event dubbed GW170817. This was the very first direct observation of
gravitational waves from a binary neutron star in-spiral, which was accompanied
by the detection of light at all wavelengths. The multi-messenger observations
of GW170817 have crucially informed a large variety of fields including
gravitational physics, nuclear physics, cosmology, and relativistic
astrophysics. In spite of the spectacular progress, several questions remain
open. A key one is whether the stellar object leftover from the merger is a
short-lived neutron star, a long-lived neutron star, or a promptly formed black
hole. This award supports searches of LIGO data for signatures aimed at
uncovering the nature of the merger remnant. Studying how the nature of the
remnant depends on the properties of the merging objects can unlock the
fundamental physics of matter at densities much larger than those that can be
probed in Earth-based laboratories and clarify the physics of some of the most
exotic objects in the stellar graveyard. This project also supports the training
of graduate and undergraduate students who will constitute the next generation
of scientists, and several outreach activities aimed at presenting LIGO results
to the general public and K12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
intellectual goals are: (i) Unmasking the remnants of compact object mergers
accompanied by gamma-ray bursts by carrying out searches for gravitational waves
from newly formed neutron stars; (ii) Assessing the efficiency of the newly-
developed Cross-Correlation Algorithm (CoCoA) in detecting the full zoo of
possible gravitational wave signals from merger remnants, and its efficacy in
post-detection parameter estimation; (iii) Quantifying the potential for
discovery of gravitational waves from neutron stars formed in long gamma-ray
bursts by future upgraded gravitational wave detectors. Broader impact goals
are: (i) Bringing age-appropriate presentations and LIGO-related outreach
activities to under-represented groups by leveraging the TTU Honors College-
Bayless Elementary School mentoring program; (ii) Presenting a LIGO prize to the
South Plains Regional Science Fair; (iii) Presenting LIGO results to the general
public during the Astronight at TTU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.