* 2011260
* EAGER: Invisible Shield: Can Compression Harden Deep Neural Networks Universally Against Adversarial Attacks?
* CSE,CNS
* 11/07/2019,08/31/2021
* Wujie Wen, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2021
* USD 149,180.00

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are finding applications in wide-ranging
applications such as image recognition, medical diagnosis and self-driving cars.
However, DNNs suffer from a security threat: decisions can be misled by
adversarial inputs crafted by adding human-imperceptible perturbations into
normal inputs during training of DNN model. Defending against adversarial
attacks is challenging due to multiple attack vectors, unknown adversary's
strategies and cost. This project investigates a compression/decompression-based
defense strategy to protect DNNs against any attack, with low cost and high
accuracy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to create a new paradigm of
safeguarding DNNs from a radically different perspective by using signal
compression with a focus on integrating defenses into compression of the inputs
and DNN models. The research tasks include: (i) developing defensive compression
for visual/audio inputs to maximize defense efficiency without compromising
testing accuracy; (ii) developing defensive model compression, and novel
gradient masking/obfuscating methods without involving retraining, to
universally harden DNN models; and (iii) conducting attack-defense evaluations
through algorithm-level simulation and live platform
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any success from this EAGER project will
be useful to research community interested in deep learning, hardware- and
cyber- security, and multimedia. This project enhances economic opportunities by
promoting wider applications of deep learning into realistic systems, and gives
special attention to educating women and students from traditionally under-
represented/under-served groups in Florida International University
(FIU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be stored on a publicly
accessible server at FIU (http://web.eng.fiu.edu/wwen/). Data will be maintained
for at least 5 years after the project period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.