* 2011168
* Collaborative Research: FoMR: Taming the Instruction Bottleneck in Modern Datacenter Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Joseph Devietti, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

Data centers are the power plants that drive the digital economy. These
warehouses filled with acres of computers, operated by the likes of Google,
Facebook and Amazon, run the websites and apps that we use every day. Yet, as
vast as these computing resources are, the amount of code they are tasked with
running is larger still and growing at around 20% each year. This project will
explore new hardware and software mechanisms to allow large data center programs
to better fit within their limited computing resources, to improve data center
program performance and energy efficiency, and reduce the toll that power-hungry
data centers take on our planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will unfold
in three stages. The first stage will leverage new hardware mechanisms for
profiling program execution, to obtain an accurate picture of how a data center
program is running at the hardware level. The second stage will use that
profiling information to adjust the code of the program at runtime to make
better use of on-chip caches. The third stage will use the profiling information
from the first stage, integrated with new hardware support for code prefetching
and code-aware cache replacement, to drive cache utilization even higher than in
stage two. Taken together, these optimizations will accelerate data center
programs and improve data center energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.