* 2011410
* Mechanochemistry of Silicate Glass Surface: Mixed Modifier Effect on Resistance to Frictional Subsurface Damage
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Seong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 479,725.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Silicate glasses are vital in high-tech optical
industries and as commodity materials such as windows, containers, and fibers.
This research is to advance mechanistic knowledge of how silicate glass surfaces
are damaged by frictional contacts in ambient conditions. The impact of physical
scratches or cracks on practical strengths of glass objects has been studied
extensively and is relatively well understood; but in the case of chemical or
optically-invisible mechanical defects made by frictional contacts under low
load conditions, their impacts are far less understood for glass surfaces.
Scientific breakthroughs in elucidating the impact of interfacial friction on
mechanical and mechanochemical properties of silicate glasses can enable
transformative growth in glass technologies. Today, researchers with surface
science expertise are in high demand in glass manufacturing industries. The
project team includes diverse students (at the undergraduate and graduate
levels) and a postdoctoral scholar, and collaborates with on-campus
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The damage to the glass
by contact of foreign objects is typically studied by measuring hardness,
fracture toughness, or cracking load/probability under high contact pressures
applied with relatively sharp indenters. Although such studies can provide
physical insights into mechanical responses of glass under extreme contact
pressure conditions, they cannot explain the damage modes resulting from
interfacial friction by a smooth and blunt object under a mechanical load far
below the indentation damage threshold. Understanding the interplay between
intrinsic factors (such as composition and thermal history of glass) and
extrinsic parameters (such as water molecules adsorbed from surroundings) in
friction-induced surface damage modes is important. The specific hypotheses
being studied are: (a) friction-induced subsurface damage can occur at a contact
stress far below indentation damage threshold and (b) the mechanochemical wear
of soda lime silicate glass is governed not only by Na ions but by the interplay
of mixed modifier ions (sodium and calcium) in the presence of adsorbed water
molecules. The latter is a new type of mixed modifier effect that has not been
examined extensively in glass science. These hypotheses are studied through
carefully designed control experiments and reactive molecular dynamics
simulations. The relaxation of subsurface damages and the interplay with other
divalent ions (such as magnesium) hold interest to this project. Overall, a
better understanding of parameters governing contact-induced surface damage
processes can lead to better glass design for improved usable mechanical
strength of silicate glass materials and well as high-quality optics with low
sub-surface damage and good surface quality. The research motivation and outcome
are integrated into a graduate course where the graduate student and
postdoctoral researchers serve as guest lecturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.