* 2011511
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enhancement of Jackson State University Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (JSU-CURE) Program in the Biological Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Gloria Miller, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 399,958.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. This project at Jackson State University
will take place in the Biology Department and course-based research will be used
to increase student comprehension of foundational material. The project is
expected to enhance the undergraduate STEM education for biology majors and
better prepare them for the rigors and challenges of graduate school programs
and STEM employment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will enable
Jackson State University to transform traditionally taught lectures and labs
into courses that actively engage students in authentic scientific inquiry
through inquiry-based instruction. Course-based Undergraduate Research
Experiences (CURES) will be utilized to enhance student research competency,
improve the Biology curriculum, stimulate student interest in discovery and
prepare students for entry into graduate school or the STEM workforce. The JSU-
CURE program is expected to impact at least 500 undergraduate students.
Implementation of the program will result in a significant increase of
underrepresented minority students entering post-graduate education and careers
in the STEM arena. The program will also establish a cohort of JSU-CURE scholars
who will employ CURE knowledge to teach the next generation of STEM middle
school and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.