* 2011357
* HAYSTAC Phase II: Quantum Detection Technology Enhanced Axion Dark Matter Search
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Reina Maruyama, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2023
* USD 991,260.00

Astrophysical observations and cosmological data point convincingly to a large
component of Cold Dark Matter in the Universe. Weakly interacting massive
particles (WIMPs) and axions have been proposed as theoretically favored
candidates for dark matter. Despite the strong evidence for the existence of
dark matter, neither WIMPs nor axions have been conclusively detected. Dark
matter axions may be detected through their conversion into a narrow band Radio
Frequency (RF) signal in a microwave-cavity resonator permeated by a magnetic
field. Under NSF funding, a Yale-UC Berkeley-University of Colorado Boulder
collaboration came together in 2011 to design, build and operate an advanced
technology experiment, HAYSTAC, to serve both as an innovation test-bed to
develop new cavity designs and quantum-limited photon detection schemes, and as
a pathfinder to take first data in the 10 to 50 micro-eV mass range, well above
all previous such searches. This award will provide funding to continue this
axion search. The collaboration-wide efforts of HAYSTAC are leading to many
technical innovations. R&amp;D on superconducting thin-films and sub-quantum-
limited photon detection will produce unanticipated spin-offs. The experimental
techniques being developed, in particular magnetic shielding and data analysis,
will be useful to other experiments that use similar quantum sensing techniques.
The group will continue their successful recruiting and training of new talent
inclusively. HAYSTAC has been very successful in attracting many bright young
people to the field. The PIs are active in giving popular public lectures and
participating in educational outreach. Wright Laboratory has begun negotiations
with the Peabody Natural History Museum at Yale to prepare an exhibit
highlighting the history and research of the Laboratory itself, featuring dark
matter studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HAYSTAC is the first dark matter search to
successfully incorporate a squeezed-vacuum-state quantum limited receiver, and
along with LIGO, is among the first fundamental physics experiments to use
squeezed-state receivers for data production. The actual system noise
temperature is twice the standard quantum limit (SQL), with the additional
quantum of noise from transmission losses. During Phase I, HAYSTAC established
an exclusion limit of 2.3 times the KSVZ coupling at 23.15 to 24.0 micro-eV.
HAYSTAC is nearing its goal of increasing the mass scan rate by at least a
factor of 2 compared to Phase I, with sensitivity at the level of about twice
the KSVZ axion coupling. Additional innovative improvements are planned,
including a new symmetrized-tuner design cavity and an improved squeezed state
receiver that eliminates losses from circulators and other elements in the
present receiver design. A long run will then commence to cover the axion mass
range predicted by Klaer and Moore, based on the first and only calculation of
axion production incorporating in a self-consistent way both the vacuum
realignment and string radiation mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.