* 2011088
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Coupled Learning for Anatomically and Developmentally Consistent Analysis of Macaque-Human Fetal Brain Growth
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Colin Studholme, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 541,402.00

Neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorder, attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, fetal alcohol spectrum disorders, and
complications associated with premature birth, impact the quality of life of
affected individuals over the entire lifespan. Neuroanatomical anatomical
differences between people affected by these conditions and “typically
developing” individuals have been identified with magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), but the biological mechanisms leading to such differences, and their link
to the disease processes, are incompletely understood. It is safe to perform MRI
on pregnant women, and recent developments in the ability to account for fetal
motion during image acquisition, have enabled high-resolution 3D imaging of the
fetal brain. In order to better understand the developmental mechanisms that
underlie the trajectory of anatomical changes observed by MRI in humans,
longitudinal measurements are also collected in nonhuman primates. Human and
nonhuman primates share many similarities in both brain structure and function
that allow findings in one to be translated to the other. Advantages of nonhuman
primate studies are that many factors that may vary between human pregnancies
can be experimentally controlled, and much more detailed longitudinal imaging is
possible. This research will develop computational approaches to more precisely
link fetal growth between human and nonhuman brains. The work leverages unique
human and nonhuman primate imaging datasets with new methods for systematically
labeling the brain into corresponding sub-regions and establish closer links
between developmental events. This increased precision will enhance knowledge
gained from ongoing human observational studies and enable new clinical
approaches to address neurodevelopmental diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to non-invasively monitor fetal brain growth in both human and nonhuman
primates using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides a new opportunity to
characterize brain development with longitudinal experimental designs. However,
given the increased frequency with which data can be acquired, and quality of
high-resolution images, an important new limitation is the inability to
translate developmental time points between species at the level of precision of
the acquired data. Conventional approaches for studying postnatal brain images
utilize processing steps such as spatial normalization to a common anatomical
coordinate frame, segmentation into tissue classes, and parcellation into known
neuroanatomical regions. Adaptation of these techniques to study the developing
fetal brain requires age and species-specific definitions for quantities such as
transient developmental zones, or emergence of cortical gyri and sulci. This
project makes use of increasingly powerful machine learning techniques and
leverages the increasingly rich fetal imaging data now being collected, to
extract consistent cross-species measures of brain development. An additional
objective is to develop fine scale anatomically and temporally consistent
definitions across species. These neuroanatomically localized definitions will
then be used to quantify regional morphometric growth during fetal brain
development in both species. This work contributes to the computational science
and the neuroscience that supports neuroimaging studies of fetal brain
development. These developments will provide a new translational resource to
link anatomically and temporally specific information about brain development,
both in normal growth and in clinical and animal model experiments focused on
neurodevelopmental disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded
by the CISE Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) through the CRCNA and
BRAIN Programs, and the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the
Mathematical Biology Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.