* 2011001
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kelly Wallace, Wallace, Kelly J
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The proposed
research investigates how early life social environments and development mode
shape decision-making processes. During early life, young range in developmental
mode across a precocial-altricial spectrum, where precocial species are born
mobile and independent whereas altricial species are born helpless.
Additionally, young can experience a variety of early life social environments,
from small family groups to large communal rearing populations. How do these two
factors-developmental mode and early life social complexity-interplay to shape
how adults make decisions (cognitive style) and the underlying neuromolecular
mechanisms of decision-making? Understanding how the early life social
environment and patterns of development shape adult mammalian decision-making is
critical to understanding the decisions animals, including humans, make in a
complex social world and the shared neural mechanisms governing these processes.
The Fellow will use educational outreach to encourage participation in research
by students who are otherwise underrepresented in scientific
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research compares a unique pair
of rodent species: the precocial and communal African Spiny Mouse, A.
dimidiatus, and the altricial Mongolian Gerbil, M. unguicalatus. Within each
species, juveniles will be reared in either a simple (small group) or complex
(communal) early life social environment. Upon maturity they will be tested in
four behavioral tasks to assess cognitive style across contexts, including
metrics boldness, exploration, decision-speed, choosiness, and neophobia.
Following an additional two-part social exposure task, brains will be analyzed
for co-localization of neural activity (c-fos expression) and early life
neurogenesis (BrdU) in regions associated with social decision-making including
the hippocampus, basolateral amygdala, preoptic area, and lateral septum (among
others). Using cellular compartment analysis of temporal activity by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (catFISH), the Fellow will identify distinct
neural activity patterns across the two-part social exposure task. In parallel
with the described research endeavors, the Fellow will develop a support network
for URM graduate students within the Emory University Graduate Division of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences (GDBBS). To do so, the Fellow will organize
Diversity and Excellence in Academia Research Symposia (DEARS) consisting of
panels by URM faculty members, career development sessions, a mentor-mentee
meetup, and an affirming environment for participant research
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.