* 2011870
* Targeted Infusion Project: Developing the Biotechnology Certificate Program at Harris-Stowe State University
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Sandra Leal, HARRIS-STOWE STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2023
* USD 342,699.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. This project at Harris-Stowe State
University will develop a Biotechnology Certificate for STEM students that will
provide a skill set which they may use to gain employment in the St. Louis
Biotechnology environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work intends to
use CURES (Classroom Undergraduate Research Experiences) to achieve three aims.
The first aim is to develop advanced laboratory courses to support a
biotechnology certificate program. The second aim is to establish the
biotechnology certificate at Harris-Stowe State University. The third aim is to
provide CURES that will increase workplace readiness and opportunity placement
for students. The implementation of CURES will assist students in developing
critical thinking skills, project management and tolerance for ambiguity. The
proposed implementation at Harris-Stowe State University will broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities in the STEM workforce. Students who
successfully complete the program will be granted a biotechnology certificate
that will provide them with a competitive advantage in pursuing STEM
opportunities such as graduate school employment and
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.