* 2011931
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Understanding the role of culture in an intervention to increase the persistence of African American STEM students
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Marie Hammond, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 07/31/2023
* USD 349,991.00

The proposed project will examine the impact of contextual factors, career
planning skills, confidence in career decision, mindset, social class, and
social capital on career development of STEM students. Researchers will
investigate the tole of these factors on African American STEM student
persistence. As a translational research study, the project grounds theory in
practice and demonstrates the impact of using a revised intervention focused on
developing the career management skills of African American undergraduate STEM
students. The researchers will produce evidence of an effective method for
increasing the retention of minority STEM students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded in Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT), the
project follows a mixed methods design to answer three research questions: (1)
How do SCCT-defined contextual factors such as social capital and social class
affect the change in participantsâ€™ career planning abilities and intentions to
obtain a graduate degree in STEM? (2) How does an increase in institutional
resources designed to support STEM majors impact the efficacy of the
intervention? and (3) What is the long-term impact of the intervention on STEM
students who participated in the prior career management interventions?
Researchers will obtain quantitative and qualitative information on the impact
of the intervention and support model building related to career development of
minority students. The project is expected to fill a gap in the vocational
psychology and STEM persistence literature, i.e., the integration of theory
related to career development with underrepresented minorities with research on
effective career intervention, growth mindset, and academic persistence for
African American STEM students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by
the Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program,
broadening participation in STEM education research
track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.