* 2011681
* Advanced Adhesion from Origami Inspired Thin-Film Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Andrew Croll, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 09/30/2023
* USD 240,256.00

This grant will create new understanding of versatile adhesive systems that have
the potential to create strong bonds on rough surfaces, to be used as new
measurement techniques, and to be used to create responsive adhesive structures.
Origami is the ancient art of paper folding which involves folding a thin sheet
into an intimate, complex, and beautiful shape. The strategy is not limited to
artistic work – sheets can be folded into shapes that can solve many modern
engineering problems. When applied to adhesive technologies, Origami design can
help overcome challenges by using the easy bending of a thin film to deform
around roughness, while exploiting the stiffness of a film to create a strong
structure. Origami structures can also be designed to be stable in two states,
for example, one that sticks to an object well and one that does not stick well.
In this way, dynamic systems can be developed to switch from a low adhesion to a
high adhesion state upon request. In addition to these practical outcomes, this
research will build a deep fundamental understanding of different basic features
of origami structures, such as folds, ridges and d-cones. In concert, the grant
will create educational and outreach opportunities for k-5 students,
underrepresented minorities and the local public through interactive
demonstrations, summer schools, and public speaking events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to discover relations
between material type (elastic, plastic, brittle) and adhesive performance of
thin polymer films in several origami inspired architectures.
Polydimethylsiloxane elastomers, polycarbonate and polystyrene will be used as
model materials. Experiments will be performed under a confocal microscope, such
that full 3D structural information is obtained at the same time as traditional
force-displacement data is collected. Thin film loops, crumples and Reich
origami patterns will be tested in compression and tension, quantifying useful
mechanical and adhesion related metrics such as compliance and peak adhesive
force. Specific focus will be given to understanding how material properties
interplay with structural design units in thin film adhesives. The work will
advance the fundamental understanding of how basic thin-film building block
structures (bends, folds, d-cones, and ridges) work in concert to deliver
macroscopic performance in Origami based designs. This research will allow the
PI to advance structure-property understanding in thin film mechanics and
advance the ability of engineers to design and predict behavior of origami
inspired structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.