* 2011967
* UCI MRSEC: Materials Discovery Through Atomic Level Structural Design and Charge Control
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Ruqian Wu, University of California-Irvine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2026
* USD 9,000,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC) at the University of California, Irvine (UCI) builds on UCI’s strengths
in multidisciplinary science and engineering research to establish a major
research hub for materials discovery and innovation in the Southern California
academe-industry eco-system. The primary mission of this MRSEC is to establish
foundational knowledge in materials science by developing new classes of
materials that offer unique and broad functionalities. The MRSEC comprises two
Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs), each working in close collaboration to
address Grand Challenges in national defense and human health. The first IRG
aims to create materials which exhibit unprecedented physical properties, such
as the ability to withstand extreme environments having applications in national
defense. The second IRG team is addressing dynamic, responsive soft materials
that are in essence living electronic materials serving as an interface with
living systems for healthcare applications. Through seed projects, the UCI MRSEC
engages new participants in exciting new research directions. It attracts a
diverse group of scientists, including women, underrepresented minority groups,
and persons with disabilities, from across the nation and trains future leaders
at all academic and professional levels to address critical societal challenges.
This MRSEC’s integrated activities—including novel materials research,
partnerships with industry and national laboratories, entrepreneurial
innovation, career development, and mentorship—are enabling a transformative
long-term impact on fundamental science, advanced applications, and workforce
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The UCI MRSEC combines an
experimental, computational, and theoretical framework pursuing atomic- and
molecular-level design and control of structure and dynamic response through two
Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs). IRG 1 investigates the atomic-level
structure, chemistry, thermodynamics, and kinetics of interfaces in an emerging
class of Complex Concentrated Materials (CCMs) that exhibit exceptional
properties such as high strength, ultra-low thermal conductivity, and extremely
large dielectric constants. Understanding their structure-property relationships
guides design and processing of next-generation structural and functional
materials. IRG 2 investigates dissipative self-assembly strategies to understand
fundamental charge-matter interactions, with the goal to produce supramolecular
“living” materials. Development of conductive active materials, where assembly
is fueled by chemical, electrical, and other stimuli, provides the intellectual
framework for a new class of living electronic materials for bio-interfaces and
biological computing. The research team leverages state-of-the-art electron
microscopy facilities within the Irvine Materials Research Institute and pursues
instrumentation innovations to characterize atomic-scale structure and dynamic
properties. Multifaceted education, outreach, and collaborations with industry,
national laboratories, and nonprofit organizations allow this MRSEC to achieve
significant, long-term impact with the targeted scientific advances. This impact
includes technological innovation, workforce development, and boosting of the
regional and national economy. Synergistic activities provide holistic training
of diverse junior scientists at all stages, from K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students to postdoctoral scholars and untenured faculty, further
fostering inclusive excellence in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.