* 2011010
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Elizabeth Lee, Lee, Elizabeth Erin Lailei
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Observing epithelial (skin) cells during wound
healing in humans or model animals is difficult. Jellyfish are an excellent
system for investigating wound healing due to their transparency and the ease of
introducing drugs and dyes. Researchers can watch how cells behave as wounds
heal in real time in a living animal. The epithelial cells of a jellyfish are
similar enough to those in humans that this research helps answer important
clinical questions such as why some wounds leave large scars, heal poorly, or do
not heal at all. In this project, the Fellow will work in jellyfish to perturb a
cell signaling pathway that is implicated in human wound healing, characterize
healing in several tissue types, and generate new genetic tools to optically
track cellular events during healing. This jellyfish system is exciting to
scientists and non-scientists alike, providing a useful research and educational
tool for topics including optics, development, and cell
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across the tree of life, epithelial cells are
polarized cells with the basal end anchored to the extracellular matrix (ECM).
The ECM plays critical roles in wound healing, creating a surface for force
generation as cells move and providing key signals during the healing process.
However, it is complicated to study cell-matrix interactions during wound
healing in living systems, as the ECM is difficult to either visualize or
access. As Clytia hemisphaericaâ€™s ECM is uniquely accessible, this research will
provide new insights into cell-matrix interactions during epithelial wound
healing. Using live imaging, the fellow will interrogate the cell-matrix
relationship during wound healing through the injection of small molecule
inhibitors, dyes, and proteins. Furthermore, this research will determine how
wounds heal in a muscle-like epithelial tissue. Finally, the fellow will
generate transgenic medusae to image subcellular components including focal
adhesions and actin cytoskeleton. The Fellow will be trained in transcriptomics,
genomic analysis, and genetic tool development in this model system. For
outreach, the Fellow will continue volunteering at the Museum of Science and
Industry and participate in a workshop hosted by the Society of Developmental
Biology to introduce Clytia as a lab model for research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.