* 2011369
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Exploring the Mechanism of 3-Hinge Gyral Formation and its Role in Brain Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Tianming Liu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 566,999.00

A 3-hinge gyrus, a conjunction of cortical folds coming from three directions,
is a promising metric to characterize brain folding patterns and has potential
to transform the study of the brain structure-function relationship. However,
there are several significant gaps in understanding its significance, for
example, why a growing brain preferentially develops 3-hinge gyral patterns as
opposed to many other possible folding patterns; what fundamental mechanisms
contribute to this complex process; and whether 3-hinge gyri can serve as hubs
in brain networks and show cross-subject similarity. The goal of this project is
to explore the fundamental mechanism of 3-hinge gyral formations and their role
in brain networks. The study will help reveal fundamental principles of brain
architecture and produce a unified theoretical framework relating between
cortical folding, axonal wiring, and 3-hinge gyral formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to offer a novel
model to describe the relationships among brain morphology, connectivity, and
function. The investigators will employ an integrated computational modeling and
data-mining methodology to understand 3-hinge gyral pattern formation and its
structure-function relationship in the cerebral cortex. The specific objectives
are as follows: (1) Develop a computational mechanical model to explain 3-hinge
gyral formation and the specific roles of geometrical parameters and axonal
fibers. (2) Conduct neuroimaging studies to examine the potential role of
cortical 3-hinge gyri as hubs in brain networks. (3) Perform imaging data
analysis to test whether cortical 3-hinge gyri link the cross-subject similarity
of cortical folding patterns to the correspondences of structural brain wiring
diagrams and brain functions. By exploring the complementary information
provided by cortical folding and 3-hinge gyral patterns, this project will offer
a unique perspective to treat brain anatomy and connectivity collectively and
better understand their relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.