* 2011110
* Research: Characterizing Postdoctoral Education, Mentorship, Gender, and Race in the Formation of Academic Engineers and Computer Scientists
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Catherine Berdanier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2024
* USD 393,733.00

Postdoctoral education can play a critical role in future research success of
computer science (CS) or engineering faculty members, but these experiences are
under-studied in engineering and CS education literature. The National Center
for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) Survey of Graduate Students and
Postdoctorates in Science and Engineering indicates that there are nearly 8600
postdoctoral scholars funded per year across engineering and CS; however, the
lack of diversity in postdoctoral appointments is alarming. For example, women
of color comprise well below 0.5% of postdoctoral scholars in their fields.
Postdoctoral appointments are facilitated through faculty mentorship to help
scholars develop deeper methodological and content competency, research
management skills, and writing, publishing, and researching skills in
preparation for a future academic career. Given that completing at least one
postdoctoral research position is common for engineering and CS students
preparing for competitive academic careers, these numbers can help explain
continued underrepresentation of women and people of color in the professoriate.
To this end, the purpose of this grant is to characterize the development of
knowledge, skills, attributes, and competencies in engineering and computer
science scholars, collecting perspectives of both stakeholders in the postdoc-
mentor dyad with an explicit focus on same- and cross- gender and race
dyads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the lack of scholarly work
about postdoctoral development through the lens of intersectionality and
mentorship across three aims. Aim 1 seeks to characterize the knowledge, skills,
competencies, and attributes that postdoctoral scholars should develop through
their appointments. Aim 2 will investigate narratives of postdoctoral
socialization and competency development from the points of view of postdoctoral
advisors and postdoctoral scholars from same- and cross- gender and race dyads.
Aim 3 will use natural language processing methods to compare findings with
available resources for postdoctoral mentorship and supervision. This study is
framed through two theoretical lenses. Leader-member exchange theory focuses on
the transactional nature of dyads in supervisory working relationships.
Intersectionality theory recognizes the inherent power and positioning
associated with race while also acknowledging the amplified complexity that
exists for those that are situated at the intersection of race and gender.
Existing theories of academic socialization can be expanded for postdoctoral
education using these two lenses. Phase 1 of research is survey- and interview-
based to collect information from faculty and postdoctoral scholars in two
different data collection formats to meet the first two aims of the project. The
quantitative results will provide context and a participant pool for the semi-
structured interview portion of the research, which will highlight potential
reasons for the continued underrepresentation and marginalization of diverse
groups in CS and engineering postdoctoral positions. The quantitative and
qualitative research will inform the second phase of research in which with
freely available postdoctoral mentoring tools, plans, and guidelines available
on the internet will be evaluated using natural language processing and other
machine learning tools. The data from Phase 2 will indicate how postdoctoral
mentoring plans and resources can be improved and enacted to support
professional and personal development of both postdocs and mentors. Expected
results include that mentorship plans in general do not address diversity,
equity, and inclusion, or suggestions to help faculty build diversity in their
postdoctoral scholars. and that postdoctoral mentorship resources for
engineering and CS departments may not emphasize the opportunities and potential
difficulties that come with cross-gender and/or cross-race mentorship
relationships. Deliverables for this project include workshops and resources to
improve postdoctoral mentoring experiences for both postdocs and their
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.