* 2011840
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security (CNS)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Rui Zhang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2023
* USD 18,000.00

This proposal supports student travel to attend the 2020 IEEE Conference on
Computer and Network Security (CNS 2020) held June 29-July 1, 2020. The IEEE CNS
Conference is a premier venue for communications and network security
researchers to present new research results in this domain. This travel grant
will enable career development and learning opportunities for US-based and/or US
citizen graduate students. Attending conferences is an important component of
graduate school education for our society's future computer security
researchers. Students have the opportunity to discuss leading edge research with
world-class computer security researchers, and establish networks, connections,
and mentoring relationships that will serve them well during their research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides travel support to encourage
participation in the 2020 IEEE Communications and Network Security Conference by
students who would normally find it difficult to attend. Criteria for selection
include evidence of a serious interest in the field, as demonstrated by research
output, coursework and/or project experience. Organizers encourage participation
of women and students from other under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.