* 2011296
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive, Multi-Layered Fenestration Elements for Optimum Building Energy Performance and Occupant Comfort
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/12/2019,06/30/2022
* Zheng O'Neill, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 174,494.00

As buildings work towards reducing energy demands, while maintaining a both
thermally and visually comfortable environment for occupants, fenestrations
(i.e. windows) are a key influential component in this effort. Fenestrations
allow for natural daylight and outdoor views, but also represent the least
thermally efficient portion of the building envelope, as well as a source of
unwanted discomfort glare and direct sunlight. A multi-layered, dynamically-
operated fenestration system that can be installed in new buildings or
retrofitted for an existing building will address building energy use and
occupant comfort needs under a diverse range of climate conditions. The project
will explore the theoretical and practical challenges for the building industry
to develop a model for the performance of dynamic fenestration designs to
enhance building energy sustainability and human health. To encourage exchanging
of ideas internationally, the research team will collaborate with European
colleagues through the European Commission Horizon 2020 PLUG-N-HARVEST project.
In addition, instructional and interdisciplinary research opportunities will be
provided for graduate and undergraduate students of civil, mechanical, and
materials engineering to serve a vital need, particularly from existing
buildings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lay the theoretical and
practical foundations for the intelligent control and operations of smart and
energy efficient fenestrations by developing an adaptive, multi-layered
solution. This includes: (a) a dual-band, continuous-state electrochromic
glazing applied to the window exterior in a matrix pattern to enable localized
control, (b) a motorized and dynamically-operated shading device, and (c) a
novel, multi-physics model-based adaptive control framework, with the goal of
balancing a range of building energy consumption and occupant thermal and visual
comfort priorities in real time. The exterior 2-dimensional electrochromic
glazing array combined with a second dynamic layer on the fenestration interior
provides the ability to address localized occupant visual comfort challenges,
and allows for a broader range of capabilities to control solar heat gains,
while addressing differences in occupant comfort criteria. The model framework
solution will be tested and evaluated using simulations, and a full-scale
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.