* 2011784
* Dynamical and Strong-Gravity Effects from Black-Hole Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* David Nichols, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 210,000.00

The NSF's Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) and the
Virgo detector have now observed gravitational waves from tens of pairs of
merging black holes and neutron stars. These remarkable observations have opened
up a new field of gravitational-wave astrophysics, and they are allowing the
predictions of Einstein's theory of relativity to be tested in new ways for
these dynamic and strongly gravitating binaries. Much remains to be learned from
these novel observations. Through a better understanding of the predictions of
Einstein's theory and through more precise calculations of the emitted
gravitational waves, more of the scientific potential of these observations will
be tapped. This project, therefore, outlines a research program to use a
combination of foundational computations, as well as analytical and numerical
modeling of black holes and neutron stars, to aid in extracting insights from
gravitational-wave observations. Many of the calculations will be carried out by
graduate students, who will be trained in techniques that are useful in physics
research and other quantitative areas. A final component of the project involves
the development of visualizations that are intended for a broad audience of non-
scientists, which aim to make the generation of gravitational waves more
intuitive and accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the research
goals of this project will be to make advances in gravitational physics on two
fronts: (i) to investigate and compute the part of the gravitational waveform
that is strongly constrained by the symmetries and conserved quantities of
isolated radiating systems, and (ii) to compute gravitational waveforms from a
range of black-hole binaries that can be used to look for deviations from
relativity because of the presence of matter or the modification of the
underlying gravitational theory. The main goals of direction (i) are first, to
compute gravitational waveforms associated with gravitational-wave memory
effects that can be evaluated rapidly; second, to understand discrepancies
between two commonly used definitions of angular momentum in asymptotically flat
spacetimes; and third, to compute generalized notions of memory effects in these
spacetimes. For direction (ii), there are three different objectives: for the
first, investigating the influence of dense distributions of matter on the
gravitational waveforms from black-hole binaries with mass ratios that differ
greatly from one; for the second, to explore how modifications to general
relativity affect the gravitational-wave memory effect; and for the last,
approximating the gravitational waveform in modified gravity theories using a
combination of perturbative expansions. The outreach aims of this project
revolve around creating visualizations of the warped spacetime of binaries
radiating gravitational waves. The visualizations will highlight the physical
stretching and squeezing effects of gravitational waves and illustrate how
gravitational waves are generated. Animations of these visualizations will be
posted online and could also be used as pedagogical
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.