* 2011295
* Workshop to Investigate an Integrated Data Architecture for Paleogenomics, Micropaleontology, and Macropaleontology; May, 2020; Madison, WI
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2023
* John Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Our understanding of the past is being revolutionized by the study of ancient
DNA recovered from fossils and sediments. Because many species do not preserve
well in the fossil record, our knowledge is limited about the past locations of
species. Ancient DNA can allow the detection of many species that lived in the
past. Therefore, understanding how species migrate or otherwise survive past
environmental changes can occur. Ancient DNA can also allow the detection of
past losses of genetic diversity, due to species extinctions. However, as a data
type, ancient DNA falls in a gap between databases designed to store genetic
data and other kinds of databases designed to store fossil data. Because of this
gap, researchers cannot easily assemble ancient DNA data to study biodiversity
changes at large spatial and temporal scales. This project will support a
workshop of leading researchers in ancient DNA, biodiversity databases, and
paleontological databases, to build new systems for archiving and sharing
ancient DNA data. The workshop will allow more open access to ancient DNA data
by both researchers and educators. This access will enable more powerful
integrative research approaches and authentic teaching experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific workshop goals include: 1) review the current
state of the art with respect to ancient DNA data; 2) review the current
capabilities of existing cyberinfrastructures in genomics and paleoecology; 3)
identify gaps and misalignments among existing resources; 4) establish
priorities and initial standards for data and metadata reporting in community
resources; and 5) envision the establishment of an informatics infrastructure
for sedimentary ancient DNA. The people attending this workshop will maximize
interdisciplinary exchange of ideas. The workshop will include early career
researchers from groups traditionally underrepresented in science and
technology. Ultimately, the workshop will produce guidance and resources for
researchers working with ancient DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.