* 2011961
* WOU-MMA: Gravitational Radiation and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,050,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is now repeatedly
detecting gravitational waves (GWs)---ripples in space and time---emitted by the
collision of compact objects millions, sometimes billions, of light-years from
Earth. Most of these objects have been black holes, others have been neutron
stars. From the GWs, scientists can measure properties (locations, masses,
spins) of the objects and learn about how they might have formed and how they
warp space and time as they collide; for neutron stars, the collision also
produces gamma-rays and other electromagnetic radiation, and together with the
GWs this teaches scientists how matter behaves at ultra-high densities and how
some chemical elements were formed. But these studies require comparing the
detected GWs with detailed predictions of the waves. The predictions are made
using the equations of General Relativity, written down by Einstein in 1915 but
unsolvable (for colliding compact objects) until about 2005 with the development
of advanced methods and powerful supercomputers. This project supports
theoretical work designed to underpin and improve LIGO's ability to extract from
observed GWs the rich information that the waves carry, and to improve the
interpretation of LIGO events with electromagnetic counterparts. This includes
the improvement and use of the Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC), currently the most
accurate computer code for solving Einstein's equations for black hole binaries.
SpEC will be used to carry out numerical solutions of black-hole collisions for
the purpose of analyzing LIGO data. In addition, a next-generation computer code
SpECTRE, under development, will be used to predict GWs from two colliding
neutron stars and from a black hole colliding with a neutron star, and will be
used to study accretion disks that form after the merger. This program will also
serve as a training ground for young physicists and astrophysicists. The new
code SpECTRE and its output will be publicly released. The group members will
reach out to the general public through lectures, interactive web pages, and
YouTube videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining analytical techniques and
numerical simulations with the Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC): (i) GW signals for
BBHs will be generated for use in LIGO data analysis in poorly-explored regions
of the BBH parameter space, and will be used to produce numerical surrogate
models that can evaluate a single waveform in milliseconds while retaining the
accuracy of full numerical simulations; and (ii) the dynamical behavior of
highly curved spacetime will be explored via analytic, perturbative, and
numerical approaches, which will include studies of quasinormal mode
excitations, exotic compact objects, beyond-Einstein theories of gravitation,
and extreme mass ratio inspirals. A combination of analytic techniques and the
next-generation open-source code SpECTRE will be applied to studies of BHNS and
NSNS binaries and accretion disks to understand multi-messenger events. This
will include investigations of post-merger accretion disks and tidal coupling.
Parameter estimation will be investigated for signals that might be detected by
both ground-based and space-based detectors, and the science case for possible
future deci-Hertz gravitational-wave detectors will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.