* 2011302
* I-Corps: Developing a data analytics platform for pain management and alternative treatment
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Ricky Leung, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is to provide insight to support pain
management with minimal intervention. The envisioned system uses off-the-shelf
mobile and wearable devices already available as consumer devices to minimize
costs to the consumer, recording pain episodes, sleep patterns, and associated
lifestyle factors impacting pain management. Furthermore, it will enable
communication between patients and health care providers so they can jointly
identify effective treatment regimens to manage pain and reduce health care
costs. It is anticipated that this will have particular value for shoulder, back
and other musculoskeletal pains.

This I-Corps project draws on artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learning
algorithms to help patients record their pain episodes, sleep and exercise
patterns, and related activities. The research on which this project is based
has shown that mobile and wearable devices are able to utilize sensors,
including accelerometers, high-definition cameras, gyroscopes, thermometers and
other environmental sensors, to collect diverse data and produce intelligent
deep learning algorithms. Additional studies suggest that healthy lifestyles and
alternative treatments impact reduced use of prescription drugs. The technology
in this project provides an infrastructure for patients to collect their own
data securely. Patients and health providers can access these data through an
internet-based platform to analyze factors such as: 1) patient sleep patterns,
exercises and similar activities; 2) frequency and severity of pain episodes;
and 3) treatment effectiveness. The technology will serve as a technological
infrastructure for patients to manage chronic pain intelligently. It also will
support the development of related smart and connected health applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.