* 2011754
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Jennifer Lewis, Harvard University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2026
* USD 9,000,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The Harvard MRSEC focuses on cutting edge materials
research, investigating materials such as gels, polymers, and colloidal
suspensions that are soft and easily deformable. Soft materials are widely used
in applications ranging from flexible electronics to biomedical devices. The
Center consists of two interdisciplinary research groups, IRGs. IRG 1 will yield
fundamental advances in materials synthesis, modeling, and 3D printing that
enable the creation of functional soft materials that augment human performance.
New classes of soft materials that sense, actuate, and communicate will be
developed for use in wearables, haptic interfaces, and artificial muscles to
enhance Future Work at the Human-Technology Frontier, namely, for superior
future robotics. IRG 2 will yield new insights regarding the behavior of
mechanically soft systems that are subjected to perturbations far from
equilibrium. By combining data-rich experiments, theory, and artificial
intelligence, the research will contribute greatly to Harnessing the Data
Revolution by expanding its application to soft materials. An essential
contribution of the Center is to increase the diversity of participants in
materials science through close collaborations with minority-serving
institutions, including a ground-breaking partnership with a Tribal College. The
Center also fosters unique and highly successful initiatives that bring
returning veterans into STEM fields. By forging new scientific directions, the
Center focuses on unraveling complex phenomena in soft materials with the goal
of translating these advances to benefit society. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The Harvard MRSEC supports highly collaborative,
multidisciplinary research at the forefront of soft matter science. The Centerâ€™s
research activities are organized into two interdisciplinary research groups.
The first research group focuses on the predictive design and programmable
assembly of functional soft matter across multiple scales that sense, actuate,
and communicate in response to external stimuli. The second research group
focuses on the non-equilibrium phenomena in mechanically soft systems subjected
to perturbations far from equilibrium through a combination of data-rich
experiments, machine learning, and theory. The MRSEC also supports seed projects
to enable rapid response to emerging discoveries. The Center provides
intellectual rigor and broad training to undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows through its strong mentorship and vibrant
cadre of educational and outreach partnerships and activities. The MRSEC fosters
a culture of innovation and entrepreneurship, enhancing the competitiveness of
the national economy through extensive industrial collaborations and formation
of numerous start-up companies creating new high-tech jobs based directly on NSF
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.