* 2011901
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusion of Computer Technology into General and Organic Chemistry.
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Richard Walker, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,948.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or careers. This project at the
University of Arkansas Pine Bluff (UAPB) will infuse the General and Organic
Chemistry curriculum with web-based teaching tools and simulation software. It
is expected that learning outcomes will be improved leading to an overall
increase in retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
increase the number of students completing Organic Chemistry I and moving to
Organic Chemistry II, resulting in an overall increase in retention of students
in STEM disciplines. This project is also designed to incorporate Peer Led Team
Learning (PLTL) practices into General and Organic Chemistry classes at UAPB.
The intervention strategies will improve studentsâ€™ performance in organic
chemistry leading to overall increase in retention of students in the sciences.
It will also strengthen STEM curricula through infusion of new pedagogical
approaches that will promote a greater depth of knowledge in Organic Chemistry.
This project will quantify and analyze the effects of technology infusion in
learning difficult concepts in Organic Chemistry. The study will also identify
the effectiveness of educational TPACK Framework in framing the study for
technology infusion in the classroom and laboratory settings. This project will
help UAPB to produce a greater number of qualified minority graduates who will
pursue careers in the STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.