* 2011864
* RUI:  Strong-Field Control of Polyatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Eric Wells, Augustana University Association
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 197,676.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrashort laser pulses have
properties that suggest they might be used to directly influence chemical
reactions: the force exerted by the laser field can be comparable to the
electric force that holds a molecule together, and the pulse can be turned on
and off before the molecule will move significantly. Thus, the precise
application of a customized laser pulse to an individual molecule might enable
the modification of the molecule in a targeted, desired manner. Stated another
way, the laser can be thought of as a new type of reagent that drives a chemical
reaction. The development of these laser-based reagents could one day allow
chemical synthesis of novel materials and medicines that contribute to the
public well-being. Progress toward this long-standing goal has been made, but
molecules are complex and dynamic, making it difficult to determine the specific
laser characteristics to drive a particular process. This work probes the
fundamentals of the interactions between strong laser fields and molecules to
improve the understanding needed to design appropriate laser pulses. Doing this
work with undergraduate students provides motivation for further scientific
education and therefore helps develop a highly-skilled workforce. Undergraduate
students from Augustana University carry out this work using the laser
facilities of the J.R. Macdonald Laboratory at Kansas State University in
collaboration with the researchers there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work probes bond rearrangement in
polyatomic molecules using shaped laser pulses to initiate molecular dynamics
and sophisticated detection schemes to measure the reaction products. Bond
rearrangement, which occurs in forms such as scrambling, hydrogen migration, and
roaming, encompasses several of the steps in any chemical reaction. By applying
rapid three-dimensional image-based feedback to the closed-loop control of bond
rearrangement, the investigators can determine how well these essential steps in
a chemical reaction can be controlled by applying a suitable laser field. In
addition, the researchers will increase the data acquisition rate of
coincidence-time-of-flight feedback for closed-loop control. In either
technique, the highly specific feedback guides the closed-loop search to a well-
defined goal. Separating the ionization step from the manipulation of the
nuclear wave packet during the rearrangement process using multiple laser pulses
makes the examination of the control mechanism more direct. By improving the
understanding of how the application of a strong, non-perturbative laser field
can affect processes via manipulation of the relative phases of the frequency
components in the broad bandwidth pulse, the project examines a widely
applicable method of coherent control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.