* 2011716
* CRCNS US-Japan Research Proposal: A computational neuroscience approach to skill acquisition and transfer from visuo-haptic VR to the real-world
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Scott Makeig, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 766,105.00

The ability to learn motor skills allows people to perform critical activities
of daily life (walking, dressing, cooking, etc.). It also enables people to
engage in social and artistic endeavors and for some to attain virtuoso levels
of performance. Understanding the changes that occur in the brain as we learn a
motor skill and how we might develop training programs to accelerate such
learning, would have impact for many areas, including skill acquisition in
robotic training and human-robot interaction, motor skill re-learning in limb
amputees, and rehabilitation of motor disorders such as dystonia and gait
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of motor learning are often restricted
to highly simplified tasks; few studies have tried to study complex skill
learning. The current research project aims to develop a neurobehavioral model
of complex skill learning by integrating information from both brain activity
and body movement in real time as participants learn real-world activities. The
second aim studies ways to enhance learning of complex motor skills. The
investigators have developed new visuo-haptic virtual reality (VR) systems that
allow detailed interaction with virtual objects, complete with force feedback,
to provide a convincing simulation of the real-world but with finer experimental
control. This creative VR environment also can simulate changes in the
gravitational field which allows using the neurobehavioral model to predict and
test human behavior in non-standard environments, such as in space or in
underwater applications. Such research is expected to be highly accessible and
engaging for the broader public, and the researchers have proposed a range of
outreach plans to enhance participation in STEM among groups typically under-
represented in these sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion
project is being funded by the National Institute of Information and
Communications Technology, Japan (NICT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.