* 2011699
* Deep Learning for Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Lexing Ying, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

In the past few years, deep learning has become the dominant approach for
computer vision, image processing, speech recognition, and many other
applications in machine learning and data science. This success is a synergy of
several ingredients: (1) neural networks (NNs) as a flexible framework for
representing high-dimensional functions and maps, (2) simple algorithms such as
back-propagation and stochastic gradient descent for tuning the model
parameters, (3) highly effective general software packages such as Tensorflow
and Pytorch, and (4) unprecedented computing power. Despite the successes
however, several key challenges remain: (1) the NN architectural design is still
an art and it lacks basic mathematical principles in many cases, and (2) the NN
training often requires an enormous amount of data, which is not available in
many applications. Many computational problems in physical sciences also face
the same challenges as those in data science: high-dimensionality, complicated
or unspecified models, and large computational cost. Some well-known examples
are many-body quantum systems, deterministic and stochastic control, molecular
dynamics, uncertainty quantification, and inverse problems. It is natural to
leverage the recent developments of NNs in the study of these problems. This
project focuses on inverse problems, that is, recovering unknown problem
parameters from observation data. It is a field of enormous importance, with
applications in physics, chemistry, medicine, earth sciences, and defense.
However, many inverse problems are known to be computationally challenging. This
project will use deep learning as a means for solving these inverse problems
more efficiently. The PI plans to develop a new applied linear algebra course
with a machine learning focus and to organize workshops at the interface of deep
learning and physical sciences. The project will train graduate and
undergraduate students through the research and support one graduate student per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a tool for representing high-dimensional maps,
neural nets (NN) offer a flexible way for representing the full inverse maps and
learn the data distribution prior via training. The rich mathematical and
physical theories behind inverse problems provide theoretical guidance for
designing compact yet effective NN architectures and hence it is possible to
avoid the need for an enormous amount of data. In the theoretical part, this
project plans to identify the commonly-used mathematical operators in many
inverse problems and design novel NN modules for these operators. Two such
examples are the pseudodifferential operators and the Fourier integral
operators. Using analytical results from partial differential equations and
numerical linear algebra, both types of operators can be represented compactly
and accurately as NN modules. In the application part, this project considers
five inverse problems: electric impedance tomography, optical tomography,
inverse acoustic/electromagnetic scattering, seismic imaging, and travel-time
tomography. The NN for the inverse map is then assembled using the modules from
the theory part, along with existing primitives such as convolutional NN. The
whole NN is then trained end-to-end with the training data. The research results
such as publications and software will be made available in public domain. The
project will also lead to broader impacts in several areas. First, this project
advocates for a more principled approach for NN architecture design based on
mathematical theories, sparsity considerations, and invariance/equivariance
principles. Second, the project covers inverse problems from five different
topics. By working with scientists and engineers, the PI plans to apply the
technologies developed to practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.