* 2011794
* Accurate Electronic and Vibrational Structure Calculations of Metal-Containing Small Molecules of Importance to Precision Measurement and Laser Cooling
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Lan Cheng, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 412,951.00

The proposed research consists of computational studies of heavy-metal-
containing small molecules that play important roles in the search for new
physics via precision spectroscopy and research on laser cooling of polar
molecules, two frontier areas in the field of atomic, molecular, and optical
physics. The proposed work on computational techniques deals with the
development of new algorithms and computer programs to provide enhanced
capabilities for computations of molecular properties pertinent to the search
for the electron electric dipole moment (eEDM) and the nuclear magnetic
quadrupole moment (NMQM), intrinsic properties of an electron or nucleus of
central importance to understanding new physics beyond the Standard Model.
Proposed molecular applications in close collaboration with experimental groups
aim to provide insights into molecules relevant to cutting-edge research in
laser cooling and in search for new physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method-
development work proposed here is focused on an analytic scheme for relativistic
coupled-cluster calculations of effective electric field and the T, P-odd
interaction pertinent to search of eEDM and NMQM via precision spectroscopy. The
new analytic scheme is an order of magnitude more efficient than currently
available techniques using numerical differentiation of electronic energies. In
addition to improved efficiency, the proposed analytic scheme is also of a
black-box nature and easy to use. This aims to bring a transformative impact to
the research in the selection of candidate molecules for the search of new
physics. The molecular application work proposed here is focused on accurate
predictions of electronic and vibrational properties, including spin-orbit
mixing and Franck-Condon factors, for transition-metal and f-element-containing
small molecules to provide insights for their use in laser cooling and in the
search for eEDM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Physics Division and The
Chemistry Division contribute funds to this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.