* 2011917
* Implementation Project: Preparing the Pipeline of Next Generation STEM Professionals
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Chi Shen, Kentucky State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,250,000.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthen education and research. The
project at Kentucky State University seeks to build on a previous successful
planning grant to increase participation of African-American and other students
from historically disenfranchised groups in STEM disciplines. The project will
enhance teaching pedagogy and research capacity in STEM fields, foster a
supportive learning and research environment, and develop new project-driven and
inquiry-based curricula and programs that will provide academic support to
students. The project will impact all STEM majors at the
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to: increase
enrollment of students in biology, computer science, mathematics, physics, pre-
engineering, geospatial technology, and environmental studies programs; involve
students in experiential research projects and internships to enhance their
scientific skills; and assess and design STEM curricula, faculty pedagogy, and
major and minor STEM degree programs to ensure that these programs meet the
universityâ€™s realigned academic program goals and quality enhancement programs
while addressing the diverse cultural backgrounds and learning styles of the
students. The project will be guided and evaluated by internal and external
advisory boards and evaluators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.