* 2011675
* WoU-MMA: Correlating the Gravitational-Wave and Electromagnetic Sky Maps
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Vuk Mandic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

The recent detections of gravitational waves (GWs) from the mergers of binary
black hole (BBH) and binary neutron star (BNS) systems have initiated the fields
of GW and multi-messenger astrophysics. These discoveries have triggered a broad
range of studies including novel tests of General Relativity, constraints on the
neutron star equation of state, a new measurement of the Hubble constant H0, and
others. Advanced GW detectors are expected to further improve their
sensitivities, and to conduct extended observing runs in the next 2-4 years. One
of the primary targets of these upcoming runs is the detection of the BBH and
BNS gravitational-wave background (SGWB) due to the superposition of all compact
binaries in the universe. This project will transform the study of the SGWB by
developing new interpretation techniques to combine the GW and electromagnetic
(EM) signals and apply them to existing and upcoming data. The project will
conduct numerous outreach activities through the Science Museum of Minnesota and
will promote involvement of women in astrophysics by connecting with appropriate
groups and organizations at the University of Minnesota
(UMN).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the project are as follows:
1) Develop techniques for correlating the SGWB directional composition with
electromagnetic (EM) tracers of matter structure such as the cosmic microwave
background (CMB), the cosmic infrared background (CIB), and galaxy count
surveys. 2) Apply the above techniques to the existing and upcoming GW data from
aLIGO and aVirgo in correlation with the CMB/CIB data from Planck, and galaxy
survey data from SDSS and (upcoming) Euclid. 3) Contribute to the development of
the emerging field of multi-messenger astrophysics by establishing new
connections between the GW community and the traditional astrophysics community.
SGWB-EM correlations will illuminate the origin and the evolution of the compact
binaries, potentially resolving the primordial (dark matter) black hole
population. They also have the potential to identify and characterize the early
universe sources of the SGWB, uncovering the first moments of the universe and
probing the physics of very high energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.