* 2011478
* Nematic and Magnetic Behavior of Spin-1 Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Chandra Raman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 668,561.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Most waves—from those traveling
in water, to radio waves used for communication—naturally spread out, or
disperse, when traveling over a long enough distance. Solitons are a special
category of wave that does not experience dispersion, and which therefore
maintain its shape while propagating. Solitons occur naturally in the world,
from water waves to biological systems, and have even existed in the early
universe. If the medium is an optical fiber, then the resulting waves are
optical solitons, whose nonspreading ability has technological relevance for
sending optical pulses over long distances for communication. The solitons
created in quantum systems such as atomic Bose-Einstein condensates have unique
aspects, including the potential for quantum communication and computation. This
project will discover how to make such quantum solitons in Bose-Einstein
condensates in a careful and controlled manner in order to answer questions such
as when do solitons form bound pairs and what is the collective behavior of
large numbers of solitons that interact with one another. By answering such
questions, we may come closer to finding practical applications for solitons. In
addition to conducting this laboratory research, the PI will reach out to the
Atlanta K-12 community through summer internships for local high school
teachers. Graduate student teaching and training will continue to be emphasized,
as will exposure of undergraduates to research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
audience abstract: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be performed that
create and control magnetic solitons and related structures in sodium spinor
Bose-Einstein condensates. These unique solitons, which exist only for
antiferromagnetic interactions, were first predicted theoretically in 2016, and
were recently observed experimentally. They are a type of vector soliton
existing in a quantum fluid with multiple components in the non-Manakov limit of
the nonlinear Schrodinger equation. Bose-Einstein condensates, with a rich
panoply of internal hyperfine levels, or spin components, are a unique platform
for exploring these solitary waves. Digital micromirror devices will be used to
carefully control the soliton placement and dynamical evolution, with the goal
of observing soliton bound states and other ordered structures. The research
connects atomic physics to nonlinear science, optics and condensed matter.
Scientific collaborations established in the previous funding cycle will be
continued and strengthened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.