* 2011171
* EAGER: Fundamental Considerations in Using Non-Hermitian Microscale Resonant Optical Structures for Rotation Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Mercedeh Khajavikhan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2021
* USD 47,820.00

Measuring rotation rate is of utmost importance in a number of existing and
emerging areas of science and technology, from general relativity, to robotics,
medical-imaging, virtual reality, computer games, unmanned aerial vehicles
(drones), and driverless cars. Over the years, various physical phenomena have
been utilized for measuring rotation rates. In optics, the Sagnac effect has
been employed to develop some of the finest and most accurate tools for
determining rotational speeds. In fact, as of now, free-space ring laser
gyroscopes (RLG) and passive fiber optic gyroscopes are among the most sensitive
rotational sensors built to date. However, despite their superior performance in
terms of resilience to shock and vibration, ring laser gyroscopes are not
readily scalable and therefore cannot be integrated on chip. Recently, a
technique based on differential gain architecture was proposed to significantly
increase the sensitivity of RLGs. The goal of the proposed effort is to
investigate the fundamental limitations of this technique and to pave the way
towards the development of ultrasensitive ring laser gyroscopes on chip. The
project will provide scientific training for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies suggest that non-Hermitian
degeneracies can significantly enhance the sensitivity of photonic resonant
structures. One area where such sensitivity enhancement can become very useful
is in ring laser gyroscopes (RLGs). In standard optical gyroscopes, sensitivity
increases with the square root of the enclosed area. This behavior results in a
fundamental trade-off between size and sensitivity. However, the use of non-
Hermitian degeneracies or exceptional points for sensitivity enhancement raises
several fundamental questions in terms of quantum noise, detection limit,
measurement stability, and signal to noise ratio. The proposal aims to address
these issues in an analytical and conclusive way and to determine the
performance metrics for non-Hermitian gyroscopes. In addition, the design and
fabrication of some of the constituent parts of the gyroscope will be
considered. The proposed research may not only impact the technology of chip-
scale gyroscopes, but will also advance the science of non-Hermitian physics.