* 2011257
* LTREB: Collaborative Research: Long-term changes in peatland C fluxes and the interactive role of altered hydrology, vegetation, and redox supply in a changing climate
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Evan Kane, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2025
* USD 290,707.00

Globally important carbon (C) stores in northern (boreal) peatlands are
vulnerable to changes in altered precipitation and runoff patterns, groundwater
inputs, and changes in the extent of frozen ground in high latitudes (called
‘permafrost’, or the ‘cryosphere’). These changes can affect the extent of
boreal wetlands as well as their ability to sequester and transform C and other
nutrients. In 2005, the Alaska Peatland Experiment (APEX) was created to examine
the role of changing soil climate and vegetation on peatland C cycling. Over the
past fifteen years, core data has been collected on soil moisture and
temperature, plant composition and amount, and the fluxes of important
atmospheric gases emitted (as methane and carbon dioxide) from water table
treatments that simulate floods and droughts. A key result from this group's
prior investigations was that C emissions from this experimental site appeared
to be high, regardless of water table position, revealing that interactions
among changes in plant species composition in response to the treatments were
strongly controlling the ability of this ecosystem to retain C. This is a five-
year renewal of a Long-Term Research in Environmental Biology (LTREB) project,
DEB-1354370. The study is examining the interactions among changes in hydrology,
plant species composition and changes in climate (particularly flooding and
drought) in controlling C storage in this peatland complex; this work is
necessary for understanding the consequences of an altered climate for C cycle
processes. Undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral researchers will
all be trained and in field and laboratory techniques. Results from the research
will also be incorporated into new high school curricula for use in the
Fostering Science summer camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current view of peatland
carbon cycling is that the majority of soil carbon mineralization occurs in the
relatively shallow aerated peat layer above the water table (acrotelm), and that
deeper peat carbon occurring in anoxic layers (catotelm) undergoes minimal
decomposition. As such, the position of the water table (and the associated
thickness of the acrotelm) is used as a predictor of overall decomposition rates
and long-term peat accumulation rates. However, findings from this team's
fifteen-year manipulation of water table position in an Alaskan fen (Alaska
Peatland Experiment, APEX) challenge this view, and in particular suggest that
carbon mineralization in saturated peat is faster than previously expected,
leading to high fluxes of anaerobic CO2 production. Prior analyses indicated no
significant effect of water table position on ecosystem respiration, but it is
possible that this result was due at least partially to changes in vegetation
that have occurred both under lower (drier) and higher (wetter) water table
positions. The initial experimental design could not disentangle the effects of
changes in vegetation from hydrology on peat redox and C fluxes. As such,
understanding the interactive effects of altered hydrology and vegetation on
anaerobic decomposition processes, and how this governs the turnover of deep
soil C pools in peatlands, was the prime objective of the first phase of LTREB
funding. Results during that initial LTREB funding period showed that sedge and
Equisetum (horsetail) rhizospheres indeed had oxidizing effects on peat and
dissolved organic matter. However, persistent flooding over this period of
research has presented key gaps in mechanistic understanding of controls on
trace gas production in this system, and revealed that plant community structure
and the dominance of algae likely have unique controls on soil redox processes
and C fluxes. Flooding history also exerted strong control over the relative
activity of algae vs. heterotrophic microorganisms, depending on changes in C
substrates from different plants. Exactly how changes in plant community
interact with altered water tables in governing the supply of electron donors
and acceptors, and how this controls anaerobic metabolism in low- and high-water
table years, are key questions this collaborative team will examine in the next
five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.