* 2011652
* Research Support for iGEM Program at the University of Virginia
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Keith Kozminski, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2021
* USD 26,800.00

The goals of this project are to use the International Genetically Engineered
Machine (iGEM) competition, a global undergraduate research activity at the
interface of biological sciences and synthetic biology, as a tool to recruit and
retain diverse students in STEM and give them meaningful research experiences
through participation in the University of Virginia iGEM team. Participation in
the iGEM competition enables and broadens undergraduate participation in
synthetic biology research at the University of Virginia, enhancing access for
women and individuals under-represented in STEM. The project develops an inter-
disciplinary STEM workforce from a diverse cohort of science and engineering
students by providing an opportunity for cross-discipline communication and
problem solving. The project also supports the bio-economy by introducing
students to and creating an opportunity for student-driven entrepreneurship
within the field of synthetic biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Virginia iGEM team has a long and successful of engaging students projects in
the field of synthetic biology. The current project concerns the use of
synthetic biology for the commercial production of various pharmaceuticals,
reagents, and other organic compounds. A major impediment in such commercial
productions is the lack of a versatile, reliable, and efficient method to
increase the flow of molecules through specific biochemical pathways within a
cell. This problem is addressed in this project with the use of the biosynthesis
of resveratrol as an experimental model. Specifically, mathematical modeling
combined with existing knowledge of molecular structures is being used to design
small artificial compartments within bacteria that serve as a foundry for
resveratrol biosynthesis. Once designed, the compartments are assembled in
cells, through the regulated expression of synthetic genes, and tested for
efficiency, reliability, and versatility. The project builds basic research into
a foundational technology to expand the applications of synthetic biology,
especially in the area of bio-manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.