* 2011937
* RUI: Three-Dimensional Spatial and Polarization Modes in Classical and Quantum Light Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Enrique Galvez, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,640.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The beam of light coming from a
laser is typically brightest in the middle becoming dimmer towards the edges and
keeps that basic pattern as it moves through space. It is possible to manipulate
such a beam to produce one with much more complicated patterns across and along
the beam. The PI and his students will be continuing the exploration of such
novel light beams and their applications. Such studies may have an impact in the
creation of new types of imaging for medical diagnosis and new ways for
increasing the amount of information carried by light in communications. The PI
and his team will investigate one type of novel light beam, known as a non-
diffracting beam which has the interesting property of not spreading or
shrinking, at least over a limited distance. Such beams can be used to simulate
physical situations that may be intractable to investigate by other means, or
give complementary perspectives to present-day studies. This type of research
will offer new approaches for the creation of novel light-based technologies. In
this research the PI and co-workers, mostly undergraduates, will use emerging
technologies in light manipulation to reshape and study light in new ways.
Immediate byproducts beyond the main research include creating new instructional
laboratories designed to educate an emerging workforce that must understand the
quantum physics used in new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study the PI and coworkers aim
at manipulating light beams to study scalar and vectorial light patterns in new
spatial arrangements of amplitude, phase and polarization, which evolve and
redistribute as the light propagates. These patterns are known as non-
diffracting beams. The group will study optical singularities in these beams,
such as optical vortices and caustics, in arrangements that have not been
previously investigated. These new configurations of fields are important
because they unravel underlying phenomena that are not easily predicted. A
particular problem that will be investigated uses light to simulate quantum
mechanical problems due to similarities between the Helmholtz wave equation and
the Schrodinger equation. The researchers will also study new polarization
patterns in three dimensions that involve rotations of the polarization ellipse
that mimic twisted patterns of spins. They will do these investigations
classically as well as quantum mechanically via experiments with single photons.
At the quantum level, the studies will involve new spatial correlations that
involve the propagation dimension. These studies open new paradigms for
understanding light-wave patterns and to use them in photonic applications such
as imaging, manipulation and communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.