* 2011738
* Columbia University MRSEC on Precision-Assembled Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Colin Nuckolls, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2026
* USD 12,000,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The Columbia Materials Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC) - Center for Precision-Assembled Quantum Materials P(AQM) partners with
faculty at Minority Serving Institutions and explores new materials systems that
will enable future quantum technologies, and educates a diverse new generation
of scientists and engineers who reach across disciplines to advance the
frontiers of knowledge and technology. The PAQM research program comprises two
interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs), both of which study materials
assembled from lower-dimensional building blocks: the first group creates
layered structures by stacking atomically thin sheets, and the second group uses
chemically synthesized molecular clusters to create bulk materials. In both
systems, the emergent properties can be controlled both by choosing different
building blocks and controlling how they are assembled. PAQM seeks to harness
this design freedom to create a next generation of quantum materials which
provide new ways to manipulate the flow of charge, spin, and energy, and host
quantum states such as superconductivity. These new properties will in turn
enable future quantum technologies in computing, sensing, and communications
like digital memory, switchable absorbers, and new photodetectors. PAQM trains
researchers at the high school, community college, undergraduate, and graduate
levels in an environment that brings together researchers from multiple science
and engineering disciplines. The center engages students and teachers at the
elementary and middle school levels to build interest in science. The
educational and research activities of the Columbia MRSEC are designed to
increase diversity at all levels, particularly in fields related to Materials
Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The
Columbia MRSEC - PAQM consists of two IRGs focused on materials created by
precise assembly of low-dimensional building blocks. IRG1 combines two-
dimensional materials into van der Waals heterostructures (vdWH) hosting
emergent quantum phenomena. Three classes of quantum phenomena – tunable
superfluids, non-equilibrium states, and topological quantum states – motivate
this work. IRG1 focuses on foundational materials issues by synthesizing high-
purity crystals, creating ultraclean heterostructures, and performing detailed
characterization to fully understand structure/property relationships in vdWH.
These advances will propel the field and enable harnessing of quantum phenomena
underpinning future quantum information, sensing and computing technologies.
IRG2 designs and synthesizes atomically precise, functional materials from
chemically synthesized molecular clusters (superatoms). Using a closed-loop
approach that combines synthesis, theory, and characterization, the IRG2 team
develops methods to control the coupling between superatoms. Tuning the
superatoms’ electronic, magnetic, vibrational, and symmetry characteristics
allows the team to design reconfigurable phase change materials; control
directional transport of energy, charge and spin; and achieve emergent quantum
phenomena, properties that underpin future technologies including electronics,
digital memory, switchable absorbers, and new photodetectors. Investments in new
research tools and shared facilities supports this work. These research goals
are propelled by collaborations, with major partners including Brookhaven
National Laboratory, the Flatiron Institute, and the Max Planck Society.
Industrial partnerships and an entrepreneurial seed program support
translational efforts toward applications. PAQM education and outreach
activities support STEM and materials education at all levels and train the next
generation of interdisciplinary materials researchers in the cutting-edge area
of quantum materials. Reflecting the diversity of the Columbia MRSEC faculty and
its urban location, research and education are integrated with a diversity
strategic plan aimed at increasing participation of underrepresented groups in
materials science and related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.