* 2011838
* Development of Adaptive Sparse Grid Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Multiscale Kinetic Simulations in Plasmas
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Yingda Cheng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims at designing efficient numerical schemes for simulating
complex plasma phenomena. Plasma is a state of matter similar to gas in which a
certain portion of the particles is ionized. Understanding the complex behaviors
of plasmas has led to important advances in areas ranging from space physics,
fusion energy, to high-power microwave generation and large scale particle
accelerators. There is strong need for laying out mathematical and algorithmic
foundations for the design of efficient numerical methods so that we can advance
basic research in plasma simulations. The algorithms developed in this project
have the potential to provide high fidelity simulations in plasma physics with
manageable computational cost and will have applications and impacts in
multiscale simulations in fusion devices. The principal investigator (PI) will
organize special events at professional meetings and workshops to promote the
participation of female researchers. This project provides research training
opportunities for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
project is to make significant advances on the design and analysis of a class of
numerical methods called adaptive sparse grid (aSG) discontinuous Galerkin (DG)
methods. The methods incorporate high order accurate DG solver that excels at
transport simulations and the dimension reduction technique by aSG approach. The
aim of this proposal is to advance the algorithmic foundations of the schemes
for time-dependent PDEs, and push them onto the broader arena of multiscale
simulations and applications for fusion science. The PI will investigate several
fundamental issues including the analysis of CFL conditions, development of
multiscale time stepping, postprocessing and hybrid aSG schemes. For a class of
multiscale kinetic problems bridging kinetic and fluid models, by utilizing the
multiresolution offered in the aSG-DG framework, the research will take
advantage of both multiscale simulation tools and multiresolution on
hierarchically defined meshes to achieve acceleration in computations. The
schemes will be applied to simulations of runaway electrons in tokamak
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.