* 2011023
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Molly Matty, Matty, Molly A
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project adds to our knowledge of
microbiomes, the communities of microorganisms that are in constant contact with
most animals. Prior research on these microbiomes has shown that some microbes
are associated with dietary changes and/or diseases but we have a limited
understanding of how the gut microbiome affects behavior. Using the nematode
worm C. elegans as a model system, this project seeks to characterize
differences in microbiome composition during development and between males and
females. It will further determine to what extent the microbiome affects
behaviors and the neural signals that encode them. By focusing on mate choice
and mating success-based behavior, this research will further explain the
complex interactions of gut microbes with host tissues and subsequent behavioral
changes. The Fellow will curate a network among scientists and teachers to
develop educational (K-12) programming. These activities seek to improve
scientistsâ€™ communication skills while providing hands-on, research-based
scientific resources to educators and students from diverse communities who are
often underrepresented in scientific disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Microbiome studies are notoriously underpowered and what comprises a
microbiome is inconsistently defined across laboratories. Therefore, this
project will use a model microbiota, termed CeMbio, and its natural host, C.
elegans, to facilitate reproducibility and collaborative efforts to characterize
the effects of the microbiome on host biology. It seeks to integrate signals
from microbial communities into neuronal circuitry and subsequent animal
behavior. The Fellow will integrate large-scale genetic and metabolomic analyses
with whole-brain calcium imaging from single-animal neural networks and small-
population mating behavior studies. The project will address 1) how microbial
colonization differs between males and females, 2) what molecular changes occur
upon colonization in each sex, and 3) how colonization with a complex microbiota
elicits differential behavioral patterns and neural circuitry. The Fellow seeks
to understand if female- or male-specific behaviors and/or reproductive
isolation can be caused, in part, by microbes. The Fellow will collaborate with
expert mentors, attend conferences, and develop skills in computational and
behavioral neuroscience. The Fellow will also develop a network of scientists
and educators to bring research-based science lessons to local classrooms in the
San Diego area by providing instructional tools and resources to
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.