* 2011819
* Catalyst Award: Enhancing STEM education and recruitment through hands-on learning
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Zhiming Yang, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,786.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution.
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
North Carolina Central University is designed to increase the enrollment in the
undergraduate Environmental Geographic Science Program. Hands-on learning is
expected to increase the retention rate and enrollment in the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enhance STEM education and
recruitment at NCCU by implementing hands-on learning, thereby contributing to
increase the enrollment in the B.S. Environmental Geographic Science program
(EEGS) at NCCU. In this project, the following activities will be conducted: 1)
Develop and implement hands-on labs for two existing courses including GEOG2100
Physical Geography and ENSC2100 Global Environmental Sustainability; 2) Develop
two new environmental science courses: ENSC2600 Environmental Science and ENSC
2700 Environmental Education and Outreach with significant number of hands-on
labs; 3) Extend hand-on labs to students from high schools for the recruitment
of STEM majors. Handheld instruments and devices will be acquired to establish a
quality teaching facility and allow faculty to implement hands-on learning and
to extend hands-on learning to students from high schools. It is expected that
there will be a significant improvement in student performance and mastery of
concepts in two existing STEM courses. There also will be an increase in the
retention rate and enrollment of EEGS program at NCCU. The methods developed in
this project could be extended to many other STEM courses to enhance STEM
education at Minority institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.