* 2011093
* Wireless implantable optoelectronic arrays for untethered high performance cardiac monitoring and modulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Igor Efimov, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2024
* USD 392,248.00

Life-threatening cardiovascular diseases including heart failure and heart
rhythm disorders (arrhythmias) have significant impact on the quality of life,
morbidity, and mortality. Ventricular arrhythmias alone are responsible for
300,000 sudden cardiac deaths in the United States per year. The development of
effective therapeutic and diagnostic approaches requires detailed understanding
of the complex underlying pathophysiology of heart failure and arrhythmias.
However, this is limited by available experimental cardiovascular
electrophysiology technologies. This multidisciplinary project will develop the
next generation of wireless multifunctional optoelectronic array tools for
cardiac monitoring and modulation. Such a technology is critical for
developmental, structural, and functional cardiac studies. It will lead to new
insights in cardiovascular disease pathogenesis and facilitate the development
of therapeutic/diagnostic options for various types of arrhythmias and heart
failure. This multidisciplinary project will be integrated with
educational/outreach activities, including adopting the results of this project
into various courses being taught at the George Washington University, hands-on
research training for undergraduate students from different disciplinary
programs, and directly engaging underrepresented K-12 students. Results from
this project will also be used in The George Washington University Pre-College
Summer Immersion Program to boost underrepresented high school students'
interests in biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current cardiac
electrophysiology research is often based on acute in vitro and ex vivo
experiments using cardiomyocytes or explanted hearts. Chronic in vivo
cardiovascular studies on awake, freely behaving animals will offer some of the
greatest areas of opportunity for understanding the complex pathogenesis of
cardiovascular diseases. The goal of the project is to develop wireless,
implantable optogenetic modulation and electrical sensing arrays to enable
significant new opportunities for basic and translational cardiovascular studies
with freely behaving animal subjects. This project includes three research
objectives: (1) Develop cellular scale flexible transparent microelectrode
arrays with superior electrochemical, optical, and mechanical properties for
high-resolution electrophysiology. Efficient biocompatible encapsulation
strategies will be explored for studying chronic disease models using the
microelectrode arrays. (2) Design wireless, subdermally implantable,
multifunctional, multisite microsystems consisting of transparent microelectrode
arrays and microscale inorganic light-emitting diodes for simultaneous
crosstalk-free electrophysiological recording and optogenetic modulation. (3)
Validate the microsystems by studying the roles of specific cardiomyocytes and
multisite pacing strategies in ventricular arrhythmias termination and in heart
failure in freely moving mouse models. The wireless features of the devices will
minimize adverse effects (e.g. motion artifacts, severe tissue damages, etc.) of
conventional tethered, wired techniques associated with fiber optic cables and
electrical wires. The proposed work will build upon the principal investigators'
expertise in innovative materials, bioelectronic device fabrications, circuit
designs, and cardiovascular physiology. The multifunctional implantable array
tools will offer cardiovascular research community currently unavailable
technological platforms for chronic research into the basic operating principles
of cardiovascular physiology on freely moving animals and allow future
development of therapeutic/diagnostic approaches in clinical medicine. The
project will reveal the key parameters in designing high performance cellular
scale transparent microelectrode arrays, provide versatile approaches for
constructing minimally invasive wireless multifunctional bioelectronic
interfaces, and demonstrate important new insights in cardiovascular physiology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.