* 2011382
* Investigations in Gravitational Quantum Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Miles Blencowe, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The microscopic quantum world of subatomic particles, atoms, and small molecules
can behave in a radically different way from the macroscopic classical world of
everyday experience. In particular, a small molecule can bizarrely travel along
two different paths 'at the same time’, while on the other hand when you throw a
ball up in the air for example, it only ever follows a single path determined by
how you threw it. The commonly accepted explanation is that the larger the
system, the more it interacts with its environment; it is usually sufficient for
a single wayward light quantum (i.e. photon) to interact with a macroscopic
object to cause it to collapse onto a single path. However, we can in principle
reduce the interactions with the environment, which then raises the fascinating
question: how large can a macroscopic quantum object be in 'two places at once'?
In this project, the PI will quantify the effects of gravity as the possible
fundamental enforcer of macroscopic classicality; in contrast to the other
everyday environments, gravity cannot be removed. The project will aim to
provide predictions that can help guide the development of macroscopic quantum
experiments, currently an active and developing area of research. The outcomes
will be of direct interest to the international relativistic quantum information
community, as well as to experimentalists and theorists working in quantum
information science, providing for example fundamental limits on how large a
quantum computer can be realized. The projects will provide training over three
years for one postdoctoral fellow and one graduate student in a diverse range of
theoretical physics topics. This project is jointly funded by the Quantum
Information Science Program (Physics Division), and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Quantum
superpositions of localized position states have to date been experimentally
demonstrated for atoms with meter-scale separations, for large atomic number
molecules with sub-micrometer scale separations, and for micrometer-sized
vibrating structures with sub-picometer scale separations. The commonly accepted
reason for not observing similar Schrödinger cat-like states in macroscopic,
everyday situations is that they decohere away extremely rapidly due to
interactions with air molecules, photons, defects internal to the objects etc.
Such interactions with the object's environment can in principle be suppressed
by cooling the suspended object in ultrahigh vacuum and inside an
electromagnetic radiation shield. The one environment that cannot be shielded
out, however, is gravity, i.e., gravitational wave background radiation. A
number of recent efforts have set out to address the decoherence rates of
macroscopic mass and energy superposition states, with a goal to provide in
principle fundamental bounds on the lifetimes of macroscopic superposition
states. The proposed activity comprises two projects within the area of
Gravitational Quantum Physics, defined as the study of quantum dynamics in the
presence of weak gravity. One project will utilize quantum field theoretic
techniques involving weak gravity to quantify the upper limits on the lifetimes
of mass system spatial superposition states set by gravitationally induced
decoherence. The approach will consider a thought experiment, where the
decoherence rate is obtained through a quantum interference measurement. The
other project, while distinct from the first one, does connect to gravity
through the equivalence principle. In particular, the project will consider a
cloud of defect-like photodetectors undergoing oscillatory acceleration in a
microwave cavity and quantify the photon detection/production from vacuum that
results. Beyond a certain critical detector number, the photon production rate
may undergo a phase transition, scaling as the square of the detector number and
thus significantly enhancing the production rate beyond the normal scaling with
detector number. The existence of this superradiant-like phase may increase the
possibility of experimentally verifying photon production from vacuum for
accelerating photodetectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.