* 2011265
* RUI: Supporting New Efforts in Studies of Neutron-Rich Nuclides
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Nathan Frank, Augustana College
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 175,698.00

Research experience for undergraduate students is vital for their professional
development and entrance into a successful career or graduate school. The
nuclear physics group at Augustana College (a small, undergraduate-only, liberal
arts institution located in Rock Island, Illinois) provides an active research
program that involves undergraduate students in unique experiments and equipment
development. This Research in Undergraduate Institutions award will support
undergraduate students and the primary investigator, including support to travel
to the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State
University (MSU), to collaborate with others on experiments that explore nuclear
structure, analyze data, and publish research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments on exotic nuclear systems at or near
the neutron drip-line are necessary to constrain modern theoretical models.
Nuclides near the neutron drip-line may be produced in states that are neutron-
unbound, which means that a neutron is emitted from a nuclide shortly after the
nuclide is formed. In addition, the charged fragment left over after neutron
emission may be in a bound excited state resulting in gamma-ray emission. A
device developed by the PI and collaborators called the charged particle
detector telescope (CPDT) provides the ability to detect long-lived neutron-
unbound states or short-lived bound excited states of the charged fragment. The
device was funded by an MRI NSF grant. Experiments studying 13Be and 28O (via
28F) with efficient detection of gamma-rays will be performed using the CPDT.
Neutrons will be detected by the MoNA-LISA (Modular Neutron Array and the Large-
area multi-Institutional Scintillator Array). The nuclides will be produced
using the unique capabilities of NSCL. The research in this project involves
analyzing and disseminating results about neutron-unbound nuclear systems from
prior and new experiments. Future experiments will be proposed for the Facility
for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB), under construction at MSU, focusing on higher Z
nuclides, which will require improved understanding of the CPDT to determine any
upgrades needed for to the experiment setup. This project will further our
current understanding of neutron-rich nuclides using the capabilities of the
NSCL facility moving toward FRIB. The PI will involve undergraduate students in
all aspects of the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.