* 2011361
* Wou-MMA: Particle Astrophysics with VERITAS and CTA
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jamie Holder, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 862,081.00

This award continues an ambitious and diverse research program focused on high
precision measurements of Galactic particle accelerators, which hold the key to
the origin of the Galactic population of cosmic rays. Over the past decade the
VERITAS observatory has played a key role in opening the highest energy
electromagnetic window on the Universe. Gamma-ray emission reveals where
relativistic particle acceleration happens, but the acceleration mechanisms, and
the connections between the accelerators and the origin and properties of cosmic
rays, remain unclear. The study will exploit new capabilities of VERITAS and
synergies with new facilities to search for potentially transformative new
source classes. This group plays a leading role in planning the next generation
Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA). This award provides operational support for the
groupâ€™s ongoing research and their role in the maintenance, operations and
calibration of VERITAS. This group mentors undergraduate students, engages local
high school students, and gives public presentations to amateur astronomers and
other interested groups. They also work with the overall VERITAS outreach
program, including conducting on-site tours, but the main outreach effort is a
high energy astrophysics summer school for graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers from around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Targets for gamma-ray
observation with VERITAS include a possible PeVatron, which may be the source of
the highest energy Galactic cosmic rays, and a gamma-ray binary system at the
peak of its 4.5-year super-orbital period. New instrumentation on VERITAS, and
new synergies with the Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME)
radio telescope, will be used to search for optical and gamma-ray counterparts
to the still enigmatic fast radio bursts. The many VERITAS activities are all
worthwhile, some are creative, and others are potentially
transformative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.