* 2011968
* WOU-MMA: Maximizing Science Output of LIGO: Data Analysis and Improved Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2023
* USD 405,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. This
project aims at maximizing the scientific output of the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory, via formulating strategies for detector
improvements and the development and implementation of new data analysis
algorithms. This project will contribute to the advancement of precision
measurement technology, deepen understandings of general relativity, and push
the frontier of experimental physics at the interface between gravitational and
quantum physics. It also supports the observation and interpretation of multi-
messenger astrophysical sources. This project will serve as a training ground
for early career physicists and astrophysicists, teaching them a wide variety of
research techniques. By interacting with the broader quantum metrology
community, this project will benefit other precision measurement experiments
outside the gravitational-wave community. Participants of this project will also
vigorously pursue a wide range of activities that reach out to the the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary scientific objective of this program is
to drive the continued improvement of LIGO sensitivity, to enable the most
efficient analysis of LIGO data, and to extract fundamental physics from
upcoming LIGO detections. More specifically: (A) The proposed research program
will formulate and evaluate innovative approaches to improving LIGO's
sensitivity, by inventing new quantum metrology techniques for use in future
detectors, and by studying strategies toward lowering thermal noise, beam-
scattering noise, and toward nonlinear regression using auxiliary channels. The
program will also explore new approaches toward GW detection, e.g., atom
interferometry and displacement-noise-free interferometry. By collaborating with
experimentalists, participants will attempt to make theoretical progress that
will eventually make impacts in real experiments. (B) Numerical relativity
simulations of binary black holes and binaries containing neutron stars will be
used for LIGO data analysis: (i) Simulations following up on LIGO detections
will be used to verify the accuracy of phenomenological waveform models, to
explore parameter biases of these models, and to perform alternative parameter
estimation strategies as needed; and (ii) Surrogate waveform models, which
interpolate between numerical relativity waveforms to produce a waveform at
requested parameters to high accuracy, will be implemented into LALSuite and be
used in parameter estimation studies on future events. (C) Aspects of general
relativity will be tested and demonstrated using LIGO data, including: testing
the existence of non-GR structures near the horizon, and using the coherent
stacking of waveforms from multiple sources to reconstruct the emission pattern
of a single source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.