* 2011490
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Theoretical Understanding of Accelerated Nonlinear Solvers, with Applications to Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Leo Rebholz, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 196,555.00

Many mathematical models used to describe and predict behavior of physical,
biological, chemical, and financial systems lead to systems of equations for
which the problem coefficients depend on an unknown solution. These are known as
nonlinear problems, and they are solved iteratively, by generating a sequence of
successive approximations. For many such problems, even state of-the-art
solution methods can be slow, can fail, and may not be robust with respect to
changes in the underlying problem data. This project aims to develop faster and
more reliable iterative solution techniques using methods that recombine
information from previous approximations to create a more accurate next
approximation. Theory will be developed to mathematically show how these methods
improve current solution techniques, and the improved methods will be
demonstrated on a wide range of systems that arise from important practical
problems in optics and fluid mechanics. This project provides research training
for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficient solution of systems of
nonlinear equations is essential to the high-fidelity simulation technology
necessary for predictive physical modeling throughout engineering and the life
sciences. An extrapolation technique commonly referred to as Anderson
acceleration (AA) has been known since 1965 to often improve the efficiency and
robustness of iterative solvers for nonlinear problems. It has been successfully
used in a surprisingly wide variety of applications, however theoretical
understanding of its convergence properties remains largely open. Better
theoretical understanding of mathematical algorithms is fundamentally important
for both practical implementation and for the creation of the next generation of
algorithms. The aim of this proposal is to improve theoretical understanding for
AA, and to develop robust and efficient variants with improved convergence
properties, both in general settings and for specific nonlinear PDEs. The main
theoretical components are (1) the analysis of a variant using principal
component analysis; (2) the design and analysis of robust adaptive damping and
algorithmic depth strategies for noncontractive operators; (3) the analysis of
the superlinear convergence of accelerated Newton iterations for degenerate
problems. The proposed work will include theory and practical application of AA
to several difficult nonlinear PDEs from fluid mechanics and
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.