* 2011544
* Fast Electrostatics and Brownian Hydrodynamics in Doubly-Periodic Geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Aleksandar Donev, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 289,453.00

New computational tools are required for large-scale modeling of a broad range
of biological and engineered systems such as lipid bilayer membranes in
biological cells and engineered vesicles, thin liquid crystal films in displays,
confined electrolytes in batteries, and colloidal monolayers in materials
science. These systems are all quasi two-dimensional (2D) because the system is
bounded in the third (normal) direction, they all involve particles (lipid
molecules, liquid crystal molecules, ions, colloids) suspended in a solvent
fluid, and in all of these systems diffusion via Brownian motion needs to be
modeled accurately. This project will develop novel mathematical techniques and
computational codes for computational modeling of these types of systems. The
new algorithms will allow the research team to study collective diffusion in
quasi-planar systems over unprecedented length and time scale, vastly expanding
our ability to answer fundamental science questions about diffusion in quasi-2D
materials, as well as helping us engineer better devices and materials such as
battery electrodes. The PI will involve and train several undergraduate, Ph.D
students and a postdoctoral fellow in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team will develop novel computational techniques for modeling collective
diffusion in a broad range of physical systems such as electrolyte solutions,
lipid bilayer membranes, thin liquid crystal films, colloidal monolayers on a
liquid-liquid interface or sedimented on a bottom wall, and colloidal clusters.
The team will develop numerical techniques based on the Fast Fourier Transform
and Chebyshev polynomials that can compute electrostatic and hydrodynamic
interactions in doubly-periodic geometries in linear time in the number of
particles. The team will develop tools for long-time Brownian HydroDynamics
simulations of many-particle systems by designing algorithms to efficiently
generate Brownian velocities in the presence of hydrodynamic interactions. The
team will develop efficient public-domain parallel codes for electrostatics and
Brownian dynamics, capable of handling hundreds of thousands of particles over
long time scales. The team will also use the developed techniques to illuminate
physical phenomena such as electro-hydrodynamic flows, collective diffusion in
colloidal monolayers, and collective dynamics in driven colloidal layers. In
particular, the team will characterize diffusion of ions in electrolytes, as
well as lipids and protein inclusions in bilayers, over a broad range of time
scales. This will elucidate the range of applicability of the widely-used
Poisson-Nernst-Planck equations for electric double layers, as well as the
Saffman model of membrane hydrodynamics. This project will support one graduate
student in the second and third years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.