* 2011853
* Catalyst Project: A Two-Semester Driven Conceptualization Training of Manufacturing Intelligence in Materials Engineering (MIME) - A Froshmore FUTURES Program
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Tarik Dickens, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,999.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The project at
Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) seeks to increase
undergraduate matriculation in the institutionâ€™s Industrial and Manufacturing
Engineering program. The PI intends to implement integrative persistence models
that are specific to the department, enhance mathematics education, and recruit
and retain more students who are typically underrepresented in the discipline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project incorporates next generation educational
directions for employing evidence-based active STEM learning practices targeting
perseverance in Freshman and Sophomores (Froshmores). The specific objectives of
the project are (1) to understand the role of augmented reality in
conceptualized learning of calculus for STEM targeted skill attainment in the
Froshmore years, (2) to assist with research integration for acquiring critical
thinking skills, and (3) to provide industry advocacy as an enhanced
professional student model level to improve retention of Froshmore students at
FAMU. The methods employ targeted inclusion and retention of women through a
two-semester course incorporating (1) inductive learning techniques and (2)
course-based undergraduate research experiences, also known as CUREs. Novel
learning practices, such as augmented reality tools (e.g. guided book and media
materials) are used to created conceptualized math curriculum for learning and
retention. The FAMU Catalyst award will assess the impact of the program on
guiding Froshmores through nascent STEM careers. The project will use evidence-
based, critical-thinking assessments to educate faculty about continuous
improvement needs of the curriculum and engage students in active problem-
solving scenarios. A broader element of the project is the Industry advocacy
panel (community engagement) which will assist in student mentorship, badge
certifications and provide research-based projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.