* 2011358
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying controls on weathering of volcanic arc rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Kenneth Hughes, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 117,468.00

Chemical weathering turns rock into soil. Over long periods of time it also
lowers carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Knowing how fast soil forms on
different rock types is important for sustainable farming and forestry. It is
also important for understanding what drives the world’s climate over millions
of years. This project uses three different methods to measure weathering and
soil production rates on a variety of rocks in Puerto Rico and will involve two
new measuring methods using isotopes. These rock types are common, easy to
weather, and very important on a global scale. It brings together researchers at
Purdue University and the University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez. This grant brings
new education and research opportunities to both graduate and undergraduate
students at the two institutions, including Puerto Rican students, who are
traditionally under-represented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to measure how the chemical weathering of volcanic and iron-rich
igneous rocks depends on the supply of fresh minerals by physical erosion. This
relationship is critical for understanding the role of tectonic processes for
governing the global carbon cycle and climate through geologic time. The primary
methods for determining long-term weathering rates will utilize the measurement
of cosmogenic nuclides, which are produced by cosmic rays in minerals near
Earth’s surface. These include a new method using cosmogenic chlorine-36
produced in the mineral magnetite, as well as an emerging method that uses
cosmogenic beryllium-10 produced in the atmosphere and deposited onto the soil
by rainwater. These long-term rates will be measured in a variety of watersheds
with different rock types and physical erosion rates. They will be compared to
short-term rates determined from measurement of dissolved minerals in stream
water to explore the degree to which weathering is driven by short-term
processes such as the exposure of fresh rock by tropical cyclone-driven
landsliding, an important erosional process in Puerto Rico and elsewhere. This
work is expected to contribute some of the first data that systematically
address chemical weathering and physical erosion for a variety of rock types,
and also serves to test and validate new and widely applicable cosmogenic
nuclide-based methods. This project helps support and develop a new research
relationship between scientists at Purdue University and the University of
Puerto Rico, Mayaguez and brings new education and research opportunities to
students at the two institutions, including Puerto Rican students, who are
traditionally under-represented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.