* 2011420
* WoU-MMA: Astrophysics with Very-High-Energy Gamma Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 710,963.00

High-energy gamma-rays are used to study the most extreme objects in the
Universe, such as pulsars, black holes at the center of active galaxies, and
gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). Cosmic gamma-rays can also reveal new physics beyond
the standard models of particle physics and cosmology. This award supports
continued research by this group, using the VERITAS telescope array in southern
Arizona to study very-high-energy (VHE) gamma-rays. The work will also use the
novel prototype Schwarzschild-Couder telescope (pSCT), which images atmospheric
showers much more precisely, and serves as a pathfinder towards the future
Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA). The growing data sets and new machine-learning
tools developed by this research will allow for better sensitivity than ever
before. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, many from
underrepresented groups, will continue to participate in this research.
Curiosity about the Universe creates many opportunities to engage public
interest and, often, participation, and this study includes setting up a new
citizen science project for the classification of shower images from the
pSCT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most powerful VHE sources are believed to emit
narrow jets of high-energy particles, but how the jets form and what processes
occur in them are still uncertain and a major focus of this project. Active
galactic nuclei (AGN) of the BL Lac variety are the largest such class of VHE
source, and this work will study these and other AGN types to isolate key
features related to VHE emission. The research will also tackle the continuing
puzzle of GRBs, the most powerful objects in the Universe but of only fleeting
existence. These measurements probe properties of the jets, such as the size of
the emission region and strength of the magnetic field, helping to reveal how
the acceleration works. The data will also be used to study gamma-ray absorption
by collisions with the extragalactic background light, testing not just
cosmological models but also Lorentz invariance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.