* 2011836
* Spectroscopy of Dense Positronium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 579,358.00

Positronium is an exotic hydrogen-like atom composed of one ordinary electron
(the light mass negatively charged components of all ordinary matter) bound to
one positively charged electron, the antimatter twin of the electron, called a
positron. Positronium has a brief existence which terminates in its annihilation
into a burst of two or three gamma ray photons (very high energy particles of
light). The primary goal of the project is to produce a high density positronium
gas and cool it to produce the first positronium "superfluid", known as a Bose-
Einstein condensate. This substance is predicted to exhibit stimulated
annihilation, in which one annihilation gamma ray photon induces the emission of
others of exactly the same direction and energy, the essential activity required
for all types of laser action. The second goal of the project is to obtain
evidence for this stimulated annihilation to open the way for the first highly
penetrating annihilation gamma ray lasers. Besides the scientific interest in
the phenomena, the possible eventual benefits include medical applications to
radiography and radiation therapy, defense and other uses of high-power gamma
ray beams, and the possibility of gamma ray laser ignition of fusion for clean,
low-cost electric power generating plants.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principle goals of the project are to (1) produce and observe a Bose-Einstein
condensate of positronium and (2) to obtain evidence for the stimulated emission
of its two-photon annihilation radiation. The project will use an existing slow
positron beam and magnetic trap system that produces nanosecond pulses of about
100 million 30% spin-polarized positrons. The positrons will be extracted from
the confining magnetic field of the trap and focused in a 200 micron diameter
spot on a thin metal film that efficiently emits slow positrons. These will be
accelerated and focused to a 5 micron spot onto a target containing cavities
within which high density positronium will be formed and thermalized to low
temperatures. The positronium temperature will be measured as a function of time
by the angular correlation of the annihilation photon pairs using an existing
detector. The presence of a condensate will be inferred from its sub-thermal
apparent temperature. Various cavity geometries will be used to achieve the
required high positronium densities and sufficiently cold positronium
temperatures around 10 K. Having made the first positronium Bose-Einstein
condensate, a search will be made for the stimulated emission of its
annihilation gamma rays. Besides enabling the production of the first gamma ray
lasers, this work will open the way for other topics involving high density
positrons, including the first production and studies of the positronium
positive ion (the bound state of two positrons and one electron), formation of a
positronium atom laser beam, and production of Bose-Einstein condensed
positronium bubbles in superfluid helium-4.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.