* 2011331
* Electronic devices enabled by magnon transfer torques
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Shufeng Zhang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2023
* USD 375,000.00

Spin-based electronic devices for information storage and memory rely on the
efficient control of magnetization orientation of nanoscale magnetic materials.
At present-day devices, spins and charges of the conduction electrons provide
the angular momentum and the energy needed for the switching of magnetization
states. However, the current density required for fast switching remains
undesirably high and the energy consumption associated with the Joule heating of
the electric current makes next-generation spin-based memories challenging. This
proposal is to explore alternative angular momentum carriers, known as magnons,
to achieve magnetization switching with far less energy consumption. Magnons are
quasi-particles that possess same amount of angular momentum as electron spins,
but without electric charge. Therefore, there is no Joule heating when magnons
travel in magnetic materials. Recently, there are a number of groups and the PI
have demonstrated that magnons can also serve as active angular momentum
carriers that are capable of manipulating magnetization states. This proposal
will theoretically investigate the effects of magnon motion in a number of
prototype magnetic structure and materials. The goal is to identify physical
processes that govern the magnon-driven magnetization switching. If successful,
one would create a disruption spintronic devices by using magnons as an
information manipulator which is far more energy efficient, compared to spins of
conduction electrons. The educational components of the proposal include strong
graduate student participations in research, training, and visiting industrial
research laboratories, as well as for PI to develop a spintronics course related
to this research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Similar to the electron spin
current that transfers the spin angular momentum of mobile electrons to local
magnetization, known as spin-transfer torques, magnon currents can efficiently
transfer magnon angular momentum to magnetic texture as well, leading to
magnetic configuration changes. This proposal will explore theoretical
foundation of this magnon transfer torques (MTT), predict plausible structure
for MTT driven magnetization switching and dynamics, and propose device concepts
for MTT applications. The present proposal aims at advancing the field of
spintronics by theoretically investigating the generation, propagation, and
detection of non-equilibrium magnons in magnetic heterostructure. Magnons are
low-energy excitations hosted by magnetically ordered texture (including
ferrro-, antiferro- and ferri-magnets). The scientific issues will be addressed,
include the physics and key materials parameters that give rise large MTT,
magnetization dynamics driven by MTT, and the switching efficiency of MTT
compared to that of STT in devices such as magnetic tunnel
junctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.