* 2011800
* Targeted Infusion Project: Development of a Nuclear Science Facility for Training of Undergraduate Students in Critical Skills for National Need
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Mohammad Ahmed, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,331.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or careers. North Carolina Central
University (NCCU) intends to enhance its nuclear science capabilities for the
purpose of producing innovative research while training undergraduates in the
field. Results from the project may have application in nuclear medicine and
support interdisciplinary STEM research. Furthermore, the project provides the
opportunity to prepare more scholars from underrepresented groups in STEM
fields. Successful implementation of the project will establish a model for
other analogous programs at peer institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal is to establish a low-energy nuclear accelerator facility to enhance
scientific research capabilities and expand science and engineering training at
NCCU. The specific goals of the project are to (1) establish the facility to
foster interdisciplinary research; (2) provide intensive skills and ancillary
skills training in nuclear science to undergraduates, and (3) develop research
capabilities in the production and study of medical radioisotopes. The
radioisotopes used in the medical diagnosis and treatment are typically produced
in nuclear reactors or with a cyclotron. The most commonly used radioisotope for
medical needs is technetium-99m (99mTc, a meta-stable isotope of element
technetium). Novel methods to produce 99mTc are being investigated, including
reactions initiated by particles incident on long-lived molybdenum isotope,
100Mo. This work will focus on development of technology to use low-energy
particle accelerator which can produce particle beams up to 1 million-volt, or 1
MeV to produce 99mTc. The reaction of interest involves transforming a 100Mo
nucleus into 99Mo (one less neutron) by bombarding it with a neutron beam and
ejecting two neutrons from the target (n + 100Mo ïƒ  99Mo + 2n). The 99Mo is an
unstable isotope and decays into the desired isotope 99mTc with a half-life of
67 hours. However, this reaction requires the incident neutron to be between 12
and 17 million-electron-volts. As our low-energy accelerator can only produce
beams up to 1 MeV, the desired neutrons are produced using a secondary reaction
in which a tritium target (heaviest isotope of hydrogen) is bombarded with a
low-energy (less than 1 MeV) lighter isotope of hydrogen, deuterium. This
reaction in turn produces neutrons which can be used to further produce
99Mo/99mTc isotopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.