* 2011744
* I-Corps: Blockchain-backed system that establishes the provenance of digital images and videos
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Shweta Jain, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project explores
translation of a media authentication technology. In an increasingly digitized
world, this technology allows for anyone to instantly check the authenticity of
an image or video. This technology can be used in a number of applications, such
as verification of video recordings, copyright management, supply chain
management, chain-of-custody processes, and other uses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project advances the development of
blockchain-backed technology to provide a visual proof of occurrence of an
event. The technology frontend allows a controlled capture of images and/or
videos, computes a unique signature of the media, and collects metadata such as
date, time, ownership. and device identification. In the backend, a blockchain
places the unique signature and meta information in a block committed upon
consensus by two-thirds of the blockchain participants. Blockchain consensus
guarantees the immutability of the media once the block is committed. A
certified recipient can re-compute the unique signature from the file, search
the blockchain for a matching block, obtain proof that the media is authentic,
and instantly obtain the metadata, such as the date and time. The content
creator could be anonymized or copyright information can be
validated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.