* 2011008
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Tanya Brown, Brown, Tanya Louise
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The skin is
the largest sensory organ in the body and provides important information about
the surrounding environment through the sense of touch. Most studies of touch
focus on rodent models, but recent findings highlight key molecular differences
of touch-sensing cells in different skin environments. The Fellow will use
zebrafish as a new model to investigate conserved mechanisms of touch system
development and function. The Fellow has identified putative sensory cells in
the zebrafish skin that share hallmarks with touch-sensing cells in mammals and
other organisms. This research will use zebrafish to develop new tools to
investigate how these sensory cells communicate information from the environment
(i.e., touch) to the nervous system. This project will provide important
insights into the conservation of touch sensation among vertebrates, as well as
develop a new model to investigate sensory cell biology. To provide
undergraduate students opportunities to participate in research, the Fellow will
mentor undergraduate researchers throughout this project. The Fellow will also
develop a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) for
underrepresented minority students and provide them with access to authentic
research experiences, aiding their development of skills in data analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the sense of touch in zebrafish, the Fellow
will investigate a novel population of putative sensory cells in the zebrafish
skin. To determine how sensory cell biology is conserved among vertebrates, this
proposal will use both targeted and unbiased approaches that include antibody
staining, transmission electron microscopy, and RNAseq to characterize this
novel cell population and identify specific neurotransmitters that mediate
sensory cell-axon communication. This research will also use live-cell imaging,
optogenetics, and chemical perturbations to test the functionality of sensory
cells in the zebrafish skin. This proposal will address the evolution and
conservation of the vertebrate touch system while creating novel reagents and
datasets to be shared with the community. The Fellow will be trained in RNA
sequencing methodology which will be extended to the development of a CURE that
is focused on RNA-seq, computational analysis, and using big data to develop
novel hypotheses. Education and outreach programs at the host institution (BERG,
McNair Scholars, and LSAMP) will support the engagement of students from diverse
backgrounds in the proposed research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.