* 2011785
* CCSS: Error-Correcting Codes Enabling Hyper-Speed Communications and Storage: from Theory to Hardware Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Xinmiao Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,059.00

Hyper-speed communications and storage are required to access and utilize the
exploding amount of data that is being generated, and are indispensable to the
development of many paradigm-changing technologies, such as machine learning,
Internet-of-things (IoT), and big data analytics. Driven by the needs of video
streaming, social media, autonomous vehicles, etc., wireless data rate has been
projected to reach 1Tb/s in 2030. Ubiquitous communications are incomplete
without satellite links and optical backbones, which are following a similar
data rate trend. Besides, high-speed satellite communications are essential to
realizing fast connectivity in remote areas, enabling remote sensing for
scientific recovery, and facilitating weather monitoring for disaster forecast.
To cope with hyper-speed communications, computing, and analytics, the data
access from storage devices also needs to reach commensurate speed. Although the
feasibility of terabit/s front-end transceivers has been analyzed and storage
class memories with very short sensing latency have been developed, the error-
correcting codes (ECCs) that are needed to ensure data reliability have not been
addressed for these systems. The requirement of hyper speed combined with the
deteriorating communication and storage channels can not be tackled by extending
existing ECC solutions. By nesting short sub-codewords, which allow very fast
decoding with low complexity, to generate shareable parities, which improve the
error-correcting capability by orders of magnitudes, the generalized integrated
interleaved (GII) codes are the best candidate for next-generation terabit/s
communications and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop
efficient hyper-speed and low-complexity GII decoder hardware implementation
architectures for a broad range of applications. The nested decoding process of
the GII codes faces many challenges, such as long data path that limits the
achievable clock frequency, large silicon area, and low hardware utilization
efficiency. Instead of directly translating the decoding algorithm to hardware
implementations, in which case the achievable throughput is far below terabit/s
and hardware complexity is high, integrated algorithmic reformulations and
architectural optimizations will be exploited in this project. The mathematical
computations leading to the hardware bottlenecks will be identified. Then those
computations will be modified or eliminated by reformulating the algorithms
without changing the decoding results. Such a cross-layer design approach allows
unprecedented improvements on throughput, latency, and logic complexity. The
silicon area and latency tradeoffs of various architectures for each decoding
step will be evaluated, and a framework will be developed for GII decoder design
to meet different system constraints under given code parameters and channel
conditions. Besides, for the first time, GII decoders that are capable of
handling soft probability information from the channel, such as by incorporating
erasures and bit flips, will be investigated to further improve the error-
correcting performance. New optimizations and reformulations will also be
developed to efficiently implement the soft-decision
decoders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.