* 2011817
* Collaborative Research: Measuring G with a Magneto-Gravitational Trap
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Zachariah Etienne, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2022
* USD 118,517.00

Gravity was the first force mathematically described by scientists as an
explanation for the motion of the moon, planets, and stars. Hundreds of years
later, gravity is still considered to be the most poorly understood force. It
cannot be consistently described across different theories in physics, and even
its strength is poorly known. The Newtonian constant of gravitation, which
quantifies the strength of gravity, is perhaps the most poorly measured
fundamental property of the universe. This project seeks to greatly improve our
knowledge of this constant with the most significant change in technique since
the experiments of Henry Cavendish in 1798, who used a torsion balance for his
measurements. The measurement funded by this award may be of value across many
areas of physics and astronomy, and the new experimental tools being developed
may lead to new instruments for measuring extremely small forces and
accelerations for use in studying the earth and for inertial navigation.
Further, the attention to detail required in these experiments makes them an
exceptional training ground for tomorrow's STEM
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this project is to develop a
new system for measuring the Newtonian constant of gravitation G, and to make a
measurement of G to unprecedented accuracy (10 parts per million or better). The
approach leverages a recently-developed optomechanical system: a silica
microsphere suspended in a magneto-gravitational trap under ultra-high vacuum.
The mechanical oscillation of the microsphere will be used in the time-of-swing
method to determine G from the change in oscillation frequency when field masses
are brought near the trapped particle. The system has multiple features that
make it nearly ideal for precision measurements, including an oscillation
frequency that can be made less than 1 Hz, isolation from the surrounding
environment, and other degrees of freedom to act as a built-in probe to correct
for drifts. The proposed measurement strategy was chosen for its transparency to
the scientific community. First, the simplicity of the system makes it simple to
understand and analyze. Second, most of the data will be contained in sequences
of images which are recorded; there are almost no hidden feedback loops or other
difficulties in reanalyzing components. To ensure confidence in the new
measurement, all data and analysis code will be stored and made freely available
to other researchers in their entirety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.