* 2011109
* US-UK Collab: Heterogeneities, Diversity and the Evolution of Infectious Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Michael Boots, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,609,049.00

The aim of this project is to understand the effect of disease severity on the
spread and evolution of infectious diseases, and its significance for infectious
disease management and control. Recent and current epidemics emphasize that
there is a pressing need to understand what makes some infectious diseases so
devastating. Pathogens from the common cold through seasonal flu, SARS-1,
SARS-2, and Ebola vary remarkably in how deadly they are and how well they
transmit between people. Moreover, there is considerable variation in the impact
that a specific disease will have on different individuals in a population. For
example, some individuals get sicker than others, and importantly some will act
as superspreaders of the pathogen. This type of variation is typical of
infectious diseases in humans and other species, including livestock, crops and
wildlife. To answer these questions the researchers will combine mathematical
and computational models to develop new evolutionary theory that will explain
the important factors responsible for variation in the outcome of an infection.
The findings from the theory will be tested experimentally using an insect
disease system in the laboratories at UC Berkeley. The mathematical modelling
and experimental analysis can then be applied to real systems. A particular
focus will be to examine the impact of different agricultural management
practice on the severity of disease in agricultural systems, for example, which
farming practices lead to the evolution of more virulent disease. Understanding
what determines the virulence of infectious disease is critical to the effective
management of current and emerging disease
threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual hosts vary in their susceptibility and
transmissibility through genetic and epigenetic effects, their condition, and
their immune memory. Individual hosts also vary in their disease contacts within
a population due to how individuals are arranged in space, how they move, and
how they interact, all of which can generate population structure even in the
absence of heterogeneities in the environment. These individual heterogeneities
and the heterogeneity in transmission due to population structure can interact
with heterogeneities that arise from specific interactons between host and
parasites genotype. This project will test theories about the effects each of
these three sources of heterogeneity (individual, population and interaction)
have on the epidemiology of disease. How these different heterogeneities
interact to determine the evolution of disease virulence and host defense is
little studied. New theory is therefore required to test these interactions’
implications to both long-term evolutionary outcomes and short-term transient
dynamics. This project will: (1) develop theory to predict how these
heterogeneities interact to determine long-term outcomes and transient
evolutionary behavior, (2) test these predictions in a tractable laboratory
model system (larvae of the moth Plodia interpunctella infected with PiGV), and
(3) develop models to predict the impact of heterogeneities on the evolution of
pathogens in agricultural systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.