* 2011146
* FoMR: A Software and Hardware Co-Design for Addressing the Performance Bottlenecks in Secure Non-Volatile Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Jun Yang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Modern computer systems increasingly integrate NVM (non-volatile memory) as part
of main memory, e.g., the Intel Optane Persistent Memory module. While such
integration effectively addresses the large capacity demands of modern
applications, there is an increasing concern on the security of NVM-based
computer servers. While Intel SGX (Software Guard eXtensions) achieves high-
level security protection, it faces dramatic performance degradation on NVM-
based memory systems. This project aims to address the performance issues in
SGX-based secure NVM systems without compromising the security requirements.
Given the large global footprint of computer servers that rely on Intel SGX to
provide security, this project will have an impact by enabling an efficient and
secure operating environment for computer programs. This project also enhances
undergraduate and graduate education with outreach to under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing hardware-assisted zero-copy page
remapping and parallel remapping techniques, it enables secure and low-cost
dynamic remapping of insecure pages to SGX memory. By developing compiler-
assisted user-controlled paging, it reduces the page reuse distances such that
the total number of page remaps between the SGX memory and the untrusted memory
can be significantly reduced. By developing cache contents based Merkle tree
techniques for secure NVM, it enables the adoption of write-back replacement
policy for metadata caches and thus effectively reduces the number of NVM
writes. This project enables the delivery of simple yet effective software and
hardware components that dramatically enhance performance in secure
NVM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.