* 2011061
* Scientific Discovery from Chemical Data Analyses
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Sharon Neal, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

With support from the Division of Chemistry and partial co-funding from the
Divisions of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, Professors Karl Booksh and Sharon Neal at the University of
Delaware are organizing a workshop to identify new frontiers in data analyses
associated with chemical measurements for scientific discovery. Advances in
scientific instrumentation have helped enable the "data revolution" through
collection of vast amounts of data, both to probe a single sample in exquisite
detail and to collect snippets of data from a wide array of interesting samples.
Data analytic strategies, often under the banner of machine learning and
artificial intelligence for example, offer new tools to help researchers gain
valuable scientific insights from such data collections. Unfortunately, there
remains an adaptation gap between these tools and researchers with application
domain knowledge who would benefit from the availability of more advanced data
analysis methods. This workshop seeks to identify convergent areas of chemical
research that would most benefit from new cutting-edge tools for data analysis
and to identify means of reducing the impediments to broad and rapid adoption of
such tools by researchers with relevant application domain knowledge. The
workshop will also explore needs and means for training of students in valuable
data analysis skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together
researchers in the chemical sciences and related areas (e.g., environmental
analysis, biological chemistry, materials science, and national security
monitoring) and experts in novel data analytics (e.g., machine learning,
artificial intelligence, graph theory). Participants will explore the
relationship between pressing scientific questions in convergent application
fields and the potential for new analytical methods that uniquely address these
questions. For example, how might graph theory or network analyses advance
prediction of new catalysts and more efficient reaction sequences? What insights
might machine learning or artificial intelligence derive from high-resolution,
multivariate images of catalytic surfaces? How can sensor arrays be best adapted
to improve understanding and prediction of the chemistry of dynamic
environmental processes? Participants will strive to identify where
collaborations are necessary to advance convergence research and means of
facilitating establishment of those collaborations. The workshop will also
consider the education and training needs for creating a research workforce
versed in both measurement science and data analysis. The workshop will engage
approximately 30 thought-leaders spanning academic, industrial, and governmental
sectors using virtual and/or in-person formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.