* 2011025
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Rachel Diner, Diner, Rachel E
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. For many animals, it is unclear how stressful
environments shape the microbial communities that live on and within them, and
whether changes in these “microbiomes” make animals more vulnerable to disease.
This study will use oysters to study the complex relationship between the
environment, animal microbiomes, and animal health. Shellfish are important
members of coastal ecosystems and a popular, sustainable human food source. The
Fellow will examine microbiomes, including viruses, bacteria, and protists, of
wild oysters that have been exposed to different environmental conditions, and
will also assess oyster health. This information will be used to predict which
environmental conditions might harm shellfish and how their microbiomes could
potentially guard them. This study will help better understand and protect
coastal ecosystems and improve shellfish aquaculture and harvesting practices.
The Fellow will design hands-on classes that teach K-8 students from
underrepresented groups about microbiomes and how they affect animals in a
changing environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellowship project will integrate
experimental, computational, and conceptual approaches to investigate how
environmental stressors influence shellfish microbiomes and associated host
phenotypes. The project consists of three main objectives that will integrate
host phenotypes with microbiome dynamics in the context of environmental change:
(1) use next-generation sequencing to characterize tissue-specific oyster
microbiomes exposed to a variety of environmental conditions at different sites,
over time; (2) use computational approaches to determine the environmental
drivers of microbiome community structure and function; and (3) conduct gene
expression analyses using RNA-seq to examine relationships between oyster
phenotypes, oyster microbiomes, and environmental stressors. These objectives
will address the central hypothesis that environmental stress alters oyster
microbiomes with associated impacts on oyster phenotypes. This study will
establish a broadly applicable model system and develop tools for assessing
impacts of environmental change and associated human and ecosystem implications
on multifaceted animal-associated microbiomes. The Fellow will gain extensive
training in teaching, research, and professional development from Dr. Jack
Gilbert and his diverse lab group, allowing her to develop new technical skills
and lines of research inquiry, facilitating her transition to an independent
academic career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.