* 2011933
* Targeted Infusion Project: Inspiring, Engaging and Retaining Underrepresented Students in Computing Research and the Emerging Field of Data Science
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Clarence Lee, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. This project at Howard University intends
is to introduce undergraduate students to data science approaches and to enhance
conceptual knowledge through applied learning activities. Proposed activities
which include the hosting of data science workshops and conferences will further
support student learning and increase student competitiveness for graduate
studies and/or future employment opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposed work is to infuse data science into the curriculum
which will enable students under the leadership of the course instructor to
apply their skills to the exploration of scientific questions that were
previously inaccessible using traditional approaches. For example, students will
use High Performance Computing to examine levels of archaic human ancestry that
have been inferred to be present in the genomes of contemporary populations. The
project will support the training of over 600 minority undergraduate students in
cutting-edge methods in data science throughout the Biology curriculum,
increasing their competitiveness for graduate studies and/or future
employability in a variety of settings, including in biomedical and
environmental sciences, research education, and public
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.