* 2011220
* Multiscale Modeling and Biomechanical Analysis of Animal Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Elba Serrano, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2024
* USD 655,254.00

This research will reveal quantitative connections between geometry and material
properties of cell constituents. This work will also study the responses of
cells to mechanical loads. Sensitivity to mechanical forces is a general feature
of all living cells, tissues, and organs. Unhealthy cells exhibit different
mechanical properties than healthy ones. For example, most cancer cells are more
deformable than their noncancerous counterparts. However, the mechanisms
underlying the reaction of biological systems to applied loads are not well
characterized. The dominant factors controlling cell mechanical properties
remain unknown. This work will produce a quantitative model that describes cell
reactions to the applied forces. The approach will combine numerical,
theoretical and experimental methods. The resulting model may be used for the
future development of rapid diagnostic methods for various diseases such as
cancer and Alzheimer’s disease. Results from this research will immediately
benefit society with fundamental knowledge on the rules of life. In the long
term, the knowledge and working model can be used to further the health of the
nation. The project will build research capacity at New Mexico State University,
a land grant Hispanic serving research institution. The research will be
performed by an interdisciplinary team of investigators and trainees with
expertise in computational chemistry, micromechanics, and cellular biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, cellular biomechanics research has been focused
on acquisition of experimental data characterizing cellular properties, with
lesser emphasis on developing theoretical frameworks that can explain the
observable responses of cells to mechanical forces. The present project bridges
this knowledge gap by implementing multiscale modeling to analysis of cellular
biomechanics. The ultimate goal is to produce a multiscale model of an animal
cell that can be used to formulate predictions, develop testable hypotheses, and
uncover insights into the mechanisms by which cells react to the external
forces. This goal will be achieved through completion of the following
objectives: (1) determination of the mechanical properties of cell components,
(2) development of a micromechanical model of the viscoelastic properties of
cells, and (3) experimental validation of the developed model. To meet
objectives (1) and (2), a combination of methods of molecular dynamics and
micromechanics will be used. To meet objective (3), atomic force microscopy of a
wide variety of animal cells from different species will be used. This project
is jointly funded by the Biomechanics &amp; Mechanobiology (BMMB) Program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.