* 2011330
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing Innovative IoT Technologies into the Computer Science Curriculum at Prairie View A&amp;M University
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yonggao Yang, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,931.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Prairie View A&amp;M
University (PVAMU) aspires to enhance its computer science by infusing “Internet
of Things” therein. The project’s focus is in line with NSF’s “10 Big Ideas” as
it affords undergraduate students with the opportunity to contribute to, and
engage in emerging technologies. This work is important as it addresses the need
to ensure that all students are engaged in a national initiative that fortifies
the country’s international stature. The project promises to enhance Computer
Science (CS) undergraduate education at PVAMU through enriching courses and
providing students with research opportunities. The project design includes
foundational and practical components that promise to effect institutional
change, while influencing the enhancement of similar departments at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
increase the learning and research capabilities at Historically Black Colleges
and Universities (HBCUs) in Internet of Things (IoT) and Data Science. This
project has four main objectives: (1) To develop innovative IoT learning modules
that can be easily integrated with existing courses at the CS curriculum at
PVAMU to engage students in smart IoT education. A new project-based course will
be developed and integrated into the current CS curriculum. This course will
consist of a series of modules focusing on intelligent IoT technologies. (2) To
build an IoT Innovation Lab that will offer the opportunity for undergraduate
students to learn cutting-edge IoT technologies and enrich their learning
environment. (3) To develop an IoT ecosystem that encapsulates a high-
performance big data platform that can be used by students for initiating and
managing IoT applications. (4) To establish an IoT Special Interest Group (IoT-
SIG) to encourage broad adoption of IoT technologies within the HBCU community.
Also, an annual summer IoT workshop will be organized, which will invite
underrepresented students and faculty from other HBCUs to participate in a
project-based IoT competition at the PVAMU campus. Furthermore, the research
results, source code, developed learning modules and related teaching materials
will be available to the research and educational community to benefit other
institutions and enrich the NSF learning material repository. The proposed
educational approach is scalable and replicable, and can be easily adopted by
other institutions with similar degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.