* 2011321
* Testing a Model of Instructor Feedback to Improve College Students' Success in Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Joseph Hundley, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 501,336.00

&lt;p&gt;This project aims to serve the national interest by improving success
in college mathematics. To do so, it will develop and implement specific
instructor feedback strategies that are expected to increase student learning
and success in introductory college calculus courses. Introductory college
calculus is a gateway course that enrolls hundreds of thousands of students
across the nation each year. Many of these students aspire to major in a STEM
field. Students' experiences in calculus can have a significant impact on their
interest and persistence in pursuing those aspirations, particularly for
students from underrepresented populations, including women, racial minorities,
first-generation college students, and those from low socioeconomic backgrounds.
Students in these populations leave STEM degree programs at a higher rate than
their peers. The loss of students from STEM majors has far-reaching consequences
for the students' educational attainment and career prospects. However, it also
limits the potential of the STEM enterprise to benefit from the advantages of
diversity for problem solving, innovation, and other outcomes. This project
focuses on instructor feedback to students as a potentially transformative,
relatively low-cost instructional tool to improve the undergraduate STEM
experience, particularly for students from underrepresented groups. Certain
types of feedback may boost students' confidence in their ability and belonging
in math, which in turn may shape their study habits, academic help-seeking
behaviors, and attitudes toward, identification with, and interest in math and
related fields. Over time, these subtle changes may contribute to improved
performance and persistence in math, as reflected by students' calculus course
grades and future enrollment in STEM courses. By defining the types of feedback
that are most effective for improving math outcomes, the project will produce
information that will be immediately useful to mathematics educators and that
may apply in other STEM fields.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Using survey methods,
researchers will first investigate current norms, practices, and experiences
surrounding feedback in introductory college calculus courses. Next, using
experimental methods, students in introductory calculus courses will be randomly
assigned to receive different types of feedback to determine which are most
beneficial, and whether aspects of the feedback provider and student status
matter in shaping the outcomes. Four types of feedback will be examined:
Objective feedback (providing only a grade or score), and three types of
descriptive feedback: Positive feedback (conveying a job well done), Corrective
feedback (conveying what could be improved), and Wise feedback (corrective
feedback plus assurance that students can meet high standards). Students will
complete four surveys over the course of the semester, examining measures
including self-efficacy and belonging in math, study habits, academic help-
seeking behaviors, attitudes/identification/interest in math, and performance
and persistence in math (i.e., calculus grades, future enrollment in STEM
courses). By examining existing norms and practices and testing the types of
feedback that are most beneficial for students, this project could improve the
mindsets and practices of instructors in these courses. Findings from the
project may provide guides for improving the design and implementation of
feedback protocols in math classrooms, which in turn may improve the educational
experience for students, especially students that may have increased risk of
leaving STEM degree programs. The researchers will disseminate results of this
project widely to math educators, college administrators, academics, and the
public by publishing the findings in journals, presenting at conferences,
conducting instructor workshops, and creating an online feedback training course
for math instructors on how to give feedback. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.&lt;/p&gt;