* 2011520
* Probing Fundamental Physics with Gravitational Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Eric Adelberger, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,050,000.00

In modern physics Nature is described by two theories. One is the “Standard
Model,” which describes all material properties with quantum particles; the
other is “General Relativity”, Einstein’s theory that describes gravitation.
Most physicists think that there must be a connection between these two
theories, but to date there is no experimental signature for such a connection.
Furthermore, the discoveries of dark matter and dark energy suggest that
gravitational phenomena exist that lie outside of General Relativity. The group
at the University of Washington specializes in measuring ultra-feeble forces to
search for unprecedentedly small deviations from gravity as described by General
Relativity. While observing any deviations from General Relativity would be a
revolutionary scientific discovery, it may also have consequences for future
technical applications of GPS or next-generation precision clocks. Technology
and technical expertise developed by this group has applications ranging from
industrial metrology to earthquake prediction. Modern ideas for unifying gravity
and particle physics, as well as the observation of dark energy and dark matter,
suggest that some aspects of gravity remain undiscovered. The table-top
experiments of the University of Washington gravity laboratory (Eöt-Wash Group)
provide a unique opportunity to search for new physics at the intersection of
General Relativity, cosmology, and particle physics. The group is a leader in
the ﬁeld of ultra-weak force detection through technical expertise, innovation,
and by responding to the most relevant timely and timeless physics questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speciﬁcally, the group will:1) Test the equivalence
principle (EP): It is almost certain that any connection between General
Relativity and the Standard Model violates the EP. The group’s torsion balances
provide the most precise EP-tests at distances below 100 km. With highly-
increased sensitivity through fused silica torsion ﬁbers, a new EP measurement
will be carried out. The experiment’s generality and relevance to cosmology will
be enhanced by probing the EP with hydrogen test masses. 2) Test Newton’s
Inverse-Square Law at short distances: The Eöt-Wash group has measured and
tested gravity at distances of 41 μm. The group will use its expertise to design
and build a new instrument aimed at measuring and testing gravity down to
distances of 25 μm. 3) Advance the frontier of low-frequency ultra-small-force
technology: Innovative and challenging technology development has enabled the
group’s success. With a vision towards the future of gravitational research
(including LIGO), the group will continue pursuing development of cryogenic
instruments and interferometric torsion balance
readout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.