* 2011807
* Transforming Lower Division Undergraduate Mathematics Through Team-Based Inquiry Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shiladitya Chaudhury, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 579,762.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the teaching and
learning of undergraduate mathematics. It intends to do so by implementing Team-
based inquiry learning, a collaborative form of inquiry-based learning, across
three key introductory mathematics courses (Calculus I, II and Linear Algebra).
Inquiry-based learning is an instructional technique shown to have many positive
impacts on mathematics students. However, in undergraduate mathematics
instruction, inquiry-based learning has been primarily used in upper division
courses. By implementing team-based inquiry learning in these lower division
mathematics courses, the project has the potential to serve a breadth of early
STEM majors. Preliminary research at a single institution has shown team-based
inquiry learning to improve students’ content mastery and successful completion
of introductory mathematics courses. This project’s research plan will examine
whether these results extend to a broad array of
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will recruit and train two
cohorts of 15 mathematics faculty from multiple diverse institutions to
implement team-based inquiry learning in their classrooms. These faculty will
collaborate with the investigators to develop a publicly available library of
mathematics team-based inquiry learning resources that other instructors can use
in their courses. Ongoing virtual support will be provided to faculty as they
implement team-based inquiry learning in their classes. Faculty practices and
student achievement will be evaluated before and after the training in order to
determine what level and what types of support are needed for faculty to
effectively implement team-based inquiry learning in a way that leads to
improved student success. This project aims to benefit the STEM education
community by providing evidence about how inquiry-based learning can be
effectively implemented in lower division mathematics courses. In addition, by
providing students with meaningful opportunities to work in teams, it can also
help students develop teamwork skills, which are important for success in most,
if not all modern workplaces. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.