* 2011903
* Implementation Project: Training of Undergraduates in Genome Engineering and Computational Data Sciences Programs at FVSU
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Sarwan Dhir, Fort Valley State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 2,249,196.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program provide support to design, implement, study and assess
comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the
quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) education and research. The Implementation project at
Fort Valley State University seeks to build on the successes of the former two
Implementation projects and other awards from the National Science Foundation.
Furthermore, the proposed project will focus its efforts on broadening
participation in specified emerging areas, using successful techniques in
recruiting, retaining and graduating African-American undergraduates in STEM.
The project is guided and informed by an on-going evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Fort Valley State University is proposing a holistic undergraduate
academic preparedness and career readiness in Genome Editing/Genome Engineering
(GE) and Computational Data Science (CDS) applications through curricular
development, structured student engagement and mentoring, faculty development,
and URM student exposure to research and study abroad experiences. The goal of
this integrated, interdisciplinary undergraduate program is to use GE-CDS to
create an incubator for engaging underrepresented minority (URM) students in
intensive training, to improve critical-thinking skills development, and expand
global research and education experiences. Further, this project will transform
institutional teaching and learning through evidence-based GE-CDS courses via
reform assessment and intervention. The primary objectives of this program are:
(1) to develop an integrated education and research skills-based curriculum
alignment with technology for student learning; (2) to increase faculty
competitiveness in scholarly inquiries in research, teaching, and learning in
GE-CDS; (3) to provide an intense student research program utilizing resources
on- and off-campus, at international sites, and in national laboratories to
prepare globally competitive students; and (4) To engage in the holistic
approach of student recruitment, mentoring, and transition to success in
graduate schools and the STEM workforce. A Genome Engineering tool, Clustered
Regulated Interspaced Palindromic Repeats, and CRISPR-associated protein 9
(CRISPR/ Cas 9) allows us to perform the deletion, insertion, or modification of
specific DNA sequences in the genome, which lead to gene therapy that could
potentially result in treatment for genetic disorders that remain an enigma for
mankind until today. The intersection of Computational Data Science and Genome
Editing will advance our knowledge in data analytics, which is going to be at
the core of future advances in the medical field. The proposed model involves
curricular development in GE-CDS, and year-round interventions, including a
study abroad component that are well aligned with research findings on
broadening participation of minority students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.