* 2011905
* Cosmic Censorship from Gauge/Gravity Duality
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Netta Engelhardt, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 240,000.00

This research revolves around the quantum nature of gravitational physics. A
complete description of the physics of the universe requires an explanation for
phenomena that involve highly massive bodies, well-described by gravitational
physics, on very small scales, which are described by quantum theory. The
unification of the two theories, a quantum theory of gravity, would describe the
fundamental nature of space and time, the earliest stages of the beginning of
the universe, and the notoriously mysterious interior of black holes. This
research project approaches this problem by asking whether it is in principle
possible to directly observe the quantum nature of gravity in an astrophysical
event such as the collapse to a black hole; and if not, then why not? Tools and
techniques from various aspects of gravitational physics will be used to answer
this question with the goal of gaining insights into the inner workings of
quantum gravity. The results of this research will be disseminated to the
professional community via publications and talks, lectures, and colloquia. An
integral component of this program involves the training of junior scientists,
from graduate students to postdoctoral fellows, as well as outreach to the
general public. This work, as an investigation into the fundamental building
blocks of nature, aims to shed light on topics that have continuously been at
the focal point of public interest in scientific endeavors: the beginning of the
universe and the black hole interior. The PI will communicate the outcomes of
this work to a broad community via various outreach avenues to provide a better
understanding of the current scientific enterprise of quantum gravity and
promote scientific literacy within the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this project will investigate the validity, implications, and
appropriate formulation of the so-called cosmic censorship conjecture in quantum
gravity. This conjecture concerns singularities: regions where spacetime is so
curved that General Relativity no longer accurately describes it. The hypothesis
of cosmic censorship implies that gravitational collapse can only result in a
singularity that is cloaked behind an event horizon. The approach taken in this
project will use a synergy of techniques from classical geometry and General
Relativity and tools from holography, a formulation of quantum gravity in terms
of lower-dimensional quantum field theory, to investigate this conjecture and
reformulate it if necessary. The methodology will range from a combination of
formal proof-based mathematical techniques to computational derivations,
potentially supplemented by some numerical simulations. Whether cosmic
censorship holds in quantum gravity, and what is its correct formulation, is of
paramount importance for an understanding of gravitational physics. If there is
a possibility of directly observing a gravitational process that forms a visible
singularity, then such processes are of potential significance for astrophysical
searches of quantum gravity signatures; if it is in principle impossible, then
this insight constitutes a deep fact about the nature of quantum
gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.