* 2011319
* A Computational Approach to the Design of a Bioartificial Pancreas
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Suncica Canic, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The main goal of this project is optimal design of an implantable, bioartificial
pancreas for the treatment of Type 1 diabetes. The design is based on
transplanting the healthy pancreatic cells into a gel medium (agarose gel), and
encapsulating the cell-containing medium between two nanopore semi-permeable
membranes to block the patient's immune cells from attacking the transplant.
Encapsulated tissue transplantation is a novel approach to eliminating long-term
use of immunosuppressants, which is one of the major challenges in
transplantation therapy. The nanopore membranes are designed to block the immune
cells while allowing passage of nutrients to keep the transplant viable as long
as possible. The team around the collaborator Dr. S. Roy, Director of the
Biodesign Laboratory at UCSF, is exploring a design of an implantable
bioartificial pancreas, which will be implanted in the patient's arm, and
connected to an artery and a vein similar to an arterio-venous graft. The key
challenge in the development of the bioartificial pancreas is maintaining the
survival of transplanted cells for an extended period of time, by providing
sufficient access to nutrients, of which oxygen is the limiting factor.
Involvement of graduate and undergraduate students, as well as high school
students (particularly girls), in several aspects of this research is planned.
The synergistic approach to the proposed project will provide a first, long-term
viable implantable bioartificial pancreas without the need for immunosuppressive
therapy. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the development of a
multi-physics, multi-scale mathematical and computational model to study the
design of an implantable, bioartificial pancreas for the treatment of Type 1
diabetes. The implantable, bioartificial pancreas will consist of an
encapsulated chamber containing the transplanted pancreatic cells called islets,
and a graft connecting the chamber to the patient’s cardiovascular system. The
encapsulation chamber is modeled as a multi-layered poroelastic medium
consisting of two semi-permeable membranes encapsulating a poroelastic gel
holding the cells. The encapsulation strategy prevents the host’s immune cells
from attacking the transplant. The proposed mathematical macro-scale model
captures filtration of blood serum within the encapsulated multi-layered
poroelastic islet chamber, and the fluid-structure interaction between the blood
flow and the arterio-venous graft carrying blood to the islet chamber. To study
oxygen supply to the transplanted cells, the fluid-structure interaction model
is coupled to three nonlinear advection-reaction-diffusion models describing
oxygen concentration in the tubular graft, in the poroelastic membrane, and in
the islet chamber. A novel partitioned, loosely coupled scheme for the numerical
solution of this problem is proposed. At the micro-scale, a Smoothed Particle
Hydrodynamics solver will be used to study the influence of the fine poroelastic
medium structure on oxygen supply to the transplanted cells. Deep Neural
Networks will be used to study parameter estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.