* 2011597
* I-Corps: Generalization Platform for Single Cell Characterization
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Hang Lu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
development of technology to improve drug discovery and medicine. In cell
manufacturing, where human cells are engineered to treat injury or disease, the
technology may be used to efficiently test the safety and potency of the cells,
which will in turn contribute to more effective, less costly, and safer cell
therapies. In drug development, the technology may provide a way to obtain
highly characterized information when screening pharmaceutical compounds,
leading to novel therapies. In medical diagnostics, personalized medicine, and
companion diagnostics, the technology may provide better and faster methods for
analyzing patient cells and predicting patient responses to treatment. Overall,
this project will have broad societal impacts by improving how treatments for
diseases are developed and manufactured. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of technologies to enable information-rich,
fast, and disposable assays for large-scale single-cell characterization. The
technology under investigation is a microfluidic device for high-throughput and
high-content imaging-based measurements of single cells. The device consists of
a dense array of traps into which hundreds of individual cells can be
deterministically loaded and trapped within a few minutes. Once cells are
arrayed, measurements of cell phenotype and function can be made using readily
available reagents and imaging-based measurements. Previous work has optimized
the design of the device for fast, deterministic, and high density trapping of
cells. The device has been applied in a number of different contexts for
studying the biology of cells, cell aggregates, embryos, and organoids, such as
studying the signaling dynamics of T cells and the interactions between T cells
and antigen presenting cells using high-resolution imaging. The results of these
studies have provided important insights into how cells of the immune system
function, which has implications for better understanding human health and
treating disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.