* 2011179
* A novel integration of fine scale ecological data, high-resolution precision mapping, and regional network modeling to investigate environmental drivers of schistosomiasis dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Gretchen Daily, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,452,785.00

In today’s era of rapid environmental change, understanding the implications for
infectious disease is a priority for both science and society. The aim of this
project is to study environmental factors that promote a debilitating parasitic
disease called schistosomiasis, or “snail fever.” Schistosomiasis affects more
than 200 million people worldwide, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. Recent
research developed by this project team supports the hypothesis that disease
transmission is higher near sites where people come into contact with natural
water sources that have more habitat available for the aquatic snails that are
hosts of the parasite. By studying local water circulation, combined with
mapping and field environmental sampling at local disease transmission hotspots,
this research will investigate how seasonal and year-to-year change in the
habitat of disease-carrying snails affects disease risk for people. In
collaboration with public health organizations in low-income countries, team
members will use this knowledge to build a predictive mapping tool that measures
schistosomiasis risk across large landscapes. The team will employ new
technologies, such as satellite and drone imagery and artificial intelligence to
make predictions. The disease risk mapping tool is intended to support public
health decision-makers to better protect human health by efficiently
distributing life-saving anti-parasitic medicine where it is needed most, and by
employing well-designed environmental interventions that reduce the risk of
environmental transmission from disease-carrying snails to people. This project
will also support the training and professional development of underrepresented
groups at the high school, undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels,
through direct involvement in research, intensive courses and international
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that long-term control of
schistosomiasis requires accurate prediction of the spatial distribution of
freshwater intermediate snail hosts in rapidly changing ecosystems. Yet,
standard techniques for monitoring these intermediate hosts are labor-intensive
and time-consuming, and provide information limited to the small areas that are
manually sampled. Consequently, in the low-income countries where
schistosomiasis control is most needed, large-scale programs to fight this
disease generally operate with little understanding of where transmission
hotspots are, and what types of intervention are most effective. This project
has three objectives: (1) to determine the spatial scale at which disease
transmission occurs through microscale hydrological modelling and mapping of
aquatic vegetation; (2) to develop a new generation of machine learning
applications that use drone and satellite imagery to identify key habitat extent
for snails of public health importance, and, ultimately, transmission hotspots
at regional scales; and, (3) to integrate field data with precision mapping of
habitat to parameterize mathematical network models of schistosomiasis dynamics,
and use Optimal Control theory to identify combinations of cost-effective
strategies for disease control. This project will provide a research framework
and epidemiological models based on ecological theory to predict disease
dynamics that can be used to respond to other diseases (e.g., vector-borne and
water borne) with complex ecologies and environmental
drivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.