* 2011161
* Bound State Theory in QED and QCD: Muonium and Pentaquarks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Michael Eides, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Bound states of fundamental particles are ubiquitous in nature and are one of
the most interesting and challenging objects of research in physics. Theoretical
research on the properties of bound states in quantum electrodynamics and in
quantum chromodynamics is the main goal of this project. Research on the
properties of muonium, a loosely bound state of electron and positive muon, will
reduce the theoretical uncertainty for the hyperfine splitting in muonium.
Together with the results of the ongoing MuSEUM experiment in Japan, this will
lead to a more precise value of the electron-muon mass ratio, will allow for the
first time a detection of the weak interaction contribution to the energy shift
of atomic energy levels, and will be used in the future CODATA adjustment of the
fundamental physical constants. The goal of research on the hidden charm
pentaquarks, a new class of strongly interacting particles recently discovered
at CERN, is to explore their internal structure. The hadrocharmonium and
molecular scenarios for pentaquarks will be developed further, and predictions
that differentiate these models (quantum numbers and masses) will be obtained
and compared with the experimental data. This will lead to progress in
understanding of the strong interaction dynamics. The results of the research on
pentaquarks will be cross-disciplinary and will contribute to the field of
particle physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High precision quantum electrodynamics of
hydrogenlike bound states is an active field of theoretical research motivated
both by the spectacular experimental progress and the intellectual challenge.
Many theoretical problems in the theory of electromagnetically bound two-
particle states, in particular of muonium, require further research. The
objective of this research is to reduce the theoretical error (due to the yet
uncalculated contributions) of the hyperfine splitting in muonium below 10 Hz.
To achieve this goal, numerous recoil corrections of the seventh order in the
fine structure constant and nonrecoil corrections of the eighth order in the
fine structure constant will be calculated. In work on the theory of
pentaquarks, partial decay widths of the hadrocharmonium and molecular Pc(4312)
will be calculated, interpretation of the wide Pc(4380) resonance in both
scenarios will be explored, as well as a natural interpretation of the LHCb
Pc(4440) and Pc(4457) pentaquarks in the molecular picture. In connection with
the molecular Pc(4312) pentaquark, the group will look for a natural qualitative
and quantitative explanation of how exchanges by mesons heavier than the pion
can generate a loosely bound resonance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.