* 2011619
* CRCNS: Discovering how touch sensors in the bat’s “hand-wing” enable agile flight control
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,350,000.00

Bats perform feats of aerial agility that are unique in the animal kingdom, and
completely unparalleled by even the very best robotic flying machines. This
project aims to discover the fundamental principles that underlie how these
animals achieve such superior flight control performance. Bat flight is powered
by a “hand-wing,” i.e. the wing is actually an evolutionary adaptation of the
mammalian forelimb. As such, the bat hand-wing shares the same basic anatomy as
the human hand and is highly sensitive to physical forces. The bat hand-wing is
highly deformable and controllable, and is unlike any artificial wing that has
ever been successfully constructed. The bat hand-wing is built from a very thin
membrane that stretches across its fingers and is covered with small wind-
sensitive hairs that enable the animal to “feel” the complex flow of air that
envelopes its wing. This unique set of flight and sensing adaptations presents a
powerful model to investigate the mechanisms of sensing, brain computation, and
movement control. The multidisciplinary research team will characterize and
uncover the complex coupling relationships between aerodynamics, tactile
sensing, and neural processing using a combination of engineering and biological
techniques. This project will lead to deeper understanding of biological flight
control, and will lend insights into ingredients that could one day be used in
developing new robotic aerial vehicles capable of bat-like flight performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates state-of-the-art experimental
measurements and computational flow modeling with behavioral and
neurophysiological experimentation and dynamical control systems neural
modeling. Using a multidisciplinary approach, the team will test the hypothesis
that bat wing sensors carry information about complex airflow patterns and
forces to the sensory cortex. The team will also elucidate sensorimotor
mechanisms that guide wing adjustments to enhance lift and prevent stall. To
achieve these goals, the research includes, : 1) Quantifying the mechanical
stimulus inputs to receptors on the bat hand-wing using stereo-particle-image
velocimetry, digital image correlation and computational fluid dynamic modeling;
2) Encoding mechanosensory signals from the wings via multichannel neural
recordings from bat primary somatosensory cortex; 3) Closed-loop modeling and
real-time control based on decoded output of neural signals. This research will
yield a deeper understanding of sensorimotor feedback in biological systems
while also contributing novel computational and experimental tools in the arena
of sensorimotor control, biophysics, and mechanics, with wide applications to
many arenas of neuroscience. The project will leverage the JHU’s Women in
Science and Engineering (WISE) program and Baltimore Polytechnic’s Ingenuity
Project to engage high school students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.