* 2011386
* Strongly Interacting Atoms under Quantum Gas Microscope
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Erhai Zhao, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Comprehending quantum matter consisting of many strongly interacting quantum
units, such as atoms, spins, or quantum bits, remains a great challenge. It
underpins our capacity to design better materials or to solve hard problems
beyond the reach of classical computers. A quantum simulator is a man-made
system where the individual quantum units as well as their couplings are under
precise control. Quantum gases of ultracold atoms confined in optical lattices
formed by laser light have emerged as a leading platform for quantum simulation.
The recent invention of the quantum gas microscope offers unprecedented
precision readout of these simulators with single-atom and single-site
resolution. It opens up new opportunities to probe the properties of strongly
interacting ultracold atoms confined in two dimensions to solve long-standing
open problems in strongly correlated quantum matter, for instance regarding the
existence of d-wave superfluid in the Fermi-Hubbard model or quantum spin
liquids in frustrated spin models. The ongoing experiments demand from theory
quantitatively accurate predictions to boost the superfluid transition
temperature or to scout out the locations of spin liquids in the parameter
space. These tasks are challenging because strongly interacting quantum gases
are marred with many closely competing orders. To treat them on equal footing,
one is usually limited to small system sizes or low momentum resolution in order
to keep the calculation tractable. The proposed research stimulates the cross-
fertilization between quantum gases, quantum simulation and machine learning.
Students involved in this project will be trained to acquire transferable skills
in high performance computing and data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops new high-precision numerical algorithms to compute the
properties of strongly interacting ultracold atoms confined in two-dimensional
lattices. Two innovative many-body techniques are proposed to overcome the
aforementioned technical challenges. First, functional renormalization group
with full momentum resolution will be developed to accurately track the
competing many-body instabilities for interacting fermionic atoms on optical
lattices. It will be applied to optimize the optical lattice designs to promote
d-wave superfluidity in repulsive Fermi-Hubbard gases. Second, frustrated
quantum spin models of cold atoms localized in optical lattices are solved by
neural network parametrization of the many-body wave function inspired by
machine learning. Variational ansatz based on feed-forward neural networks will
be developed to resolve the nature of their ground states. The proposed work
expands the boundary of precision many-body algorithms for strongly interacting
atoms and spins. It improves the number of running couplings in functional
renormalization group from hundred thousands to tens of millions by solving the
flow equations massively parallel on Graphics Processing Units. The resultant
superior resolution will yield more accurate phase boundaries and estimations of
the transition temperature to guide experiments. Large-scale neural network
ansatz will help answer open questions regarding the existence and nature of
spin liquids and other exotic phases in quantum spin systems. These many-body
techniques developed are general and can be applied to correlated quantum
materials or quantum spin models of interacting molecules and trapped
ions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.