* 2011762
* RUI: Calculation of Higher Order Corrections to Positronium Energy Levels
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Gregory Adkins, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Positronium is the bound system consisting of the electron and its antiparticle,
the positron. As such, it forms an “exotic atom”, similar in many ways to
traditional simple atoms such as hydrogen and helium, but different because of
its unique composition and because of its tendency to annihilate, transforming
into pure electromagnetic energy in the form of high-energy photons. Many
properties of positronium, such as energy levels and lifetimes, are accessible
to high-precision experiments. Positronium properties can also be calculated
theoretically to high precision using the methods of bound-state Quantum
Electrodynamics (QED) because strong and weak interaction effects are
negligible. Consequently, positronium is an ideal system for testing the limits
of QED bound state physics and for exploring the consequences of agreement or
disagreement between theory and experiment at this high level of precision. The
activities involved in calculating the positronium energy levels will be of
great educational value to the undergraduate students at Franklin &amp; Marshall
College involved as collaborators in that work. The students will learn
theoretical methods and techniques of calculation more advanced than those
usually encountered at the undergraduate level. They will gain valuable
experience by doing the research, by presenting their results at professional
meetings, and by publishing their work as co-authors in research
journals.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Positronium energy levels of low-lying states
(n=1 and n=2) have been measured with uncertainties of roughly 1 MHz, and
experiments are presently being developed and performed to significantly reduce
some of these uncertainties. The 1S-2S transition is of particular interest
because it has the smallest natural line-width and thus the greatest potential
for improvement. These transition energies and more will be calculated to a new
and higher level of precision. The calculations will be based on the low-energy
effective quantum field theory NRQED (Non-Relativistic QED), which provides a
natural and efficient framework for the study of non-relativistic atoms such as
positronium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.