* 2011473
* I-Corps Teams: IoT Sensor Networks Detecting User Behavior in Architectural Space
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cost-effective solution to detect user behavior in
architectural space without violating the user’s privacy. This technology uses
passive infrared (PIR) sensors to collect lightweight data and identify user
behavior, which is traditionally done by camera and image recognition at higher
processing power and cost. One possible application includes optimizing mall
market targeting and revenue growth by generating traffic flow and headcount
analytics. This technology also may help commercial properties and hotels to
understand their customers’ needs better and create cross-sale opportunities
through features including individual behavior path predicting, crowd behavior
prediction, population forecasts, and specific behavioral analytics, like queue
management and purchase-tracking habits. Another possible application is in
automating rental property management for homeowners by remotely coordinating
check-in and check-out procedures, monitoring cleaning results, and diminishing
the likelihood of unpermitted parties, fire, flood, or
theft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a novel neural network system that can classify low pixel thermal data into the
number of users and type of user posture. With non-fragmented thermal data in
architectural space, the proposed method is capable of matching user behavior
with hassle-free automation. Using 64 thermal data points from a single PIR
sensor, the system can real-time classify the dataset into occupancy numbers at
a 95% accuracy rate and possible postures in under 800ms. With more sensors in
the network, the system can identify specific user behavior and indoor location.
These behavior data are the key to achieve frustration-free automation in smart
living and working spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.