* 2011285
* Collaborative Research: Climate, Changing Abundance and Species Interactions of Marine Birds and Mammals at South Georgia in Winter
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Jarrod Santora, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2024
* USD 121,510.00

Part I: Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Ocean warming in the western
Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea in winter is among the highest worldwide.
This project will quantify the impact of the climate warming on seabirds. The
study area is in South Georgia in the South Atlantic with the largest and most
diverse seabird colonies in the world. Detecting and understanding how physics
and biology interact to bring positive or negative population changes to
seabirds has long challenged scientists. The team in this project hypothesizes
that 1) Cold water seabird species decline while warm water species increase due
to ocean warming observed in the last 30 years; 2) All species decrease with
ocean warming, affecting how they interact with each other and in doing so,
decreasing their chances of survival; and 3) Species profiles can be predicted
using multiple environmental variables and models. To collect present-day data
to compare with observations done in 1985, 1991 and 1993, 2 cruises are planned
in the austral winter; the personnel will include the three Principal
Investigators, all experienced with sampling of seabirds, plankton and
oceanography, with 2 graduate and 5 undergraduate students. Models will be
developed based on the cruise data and the environmental change experienced in
the last 30 years. The research will improve our understanding of seabird and
marine mammal winter ecology, and how they interact with the environment. This
project benefits NSF's goals to expand the fundamental knowledge of Antarctic
systems, biota, and processes. The project will provide an exceptional
opportunity to teach polar field skills to undergraduates by bringing 5 students
to engage in the research cruises. To further increase polar literacy training
and educational impacts, broader impacts include the production of an
educational documentary that will be coupled to field surveys to assess public
perceptions about climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;Ocean warming in the western Antarctic Peninsula and
Scotia Sea in winter is among the highest worldwide. Based on previous work, the
Principal Investigators in this project want to test the hypothesis that warming
would have decreased seabird abundance and species associations in the South
Georgia region of the South Atlantic. A main premise of this proposal is that
because of marine environmental change, the structure of the seabird communities
has also changed, and potentially in a manner that has diminished the mutually
beneficial dynamics of positive interactions, with subsequent consequences to
fitness and population trends. The study is structured by 3 main objectives: 1)
identify changes in krill, bird and mammal abundance that have occurred from
previous sampling off both ends of South Georgia during winter in 1985, 1991 and
1993, 2) identify pairings of species that benefit each other in searching for
prey, and quantify how such relationships have changed since 1985, and 3) make
predictions about how these changes in species pairing might continue given
predicted future changes in climate. The novelty of the approach is the
conceptual model that inter-species associations inform birds of food
availability and that the associations decrease if bird abundance decreases,
thus warming could decrease overall population fitness. These studies will be
essential to establish if behavioral patterns in seabird modulate their response
to climate change. The project will provide exceptional educational opportunity
to undergraduates by bringing 5 students to participate on the cruises. To
further increase polar literacy training and educational impacts, broader
impacts include the production of an educational documentary that will be
coupled to field surveys to assess public perceptions about climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.