* 2011977
* WoU-MMA: Gravitational Lensing of Photons and Gravitational Waves in the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Lindsay King, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,876.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. This
award supports an integrated research program to investigate the confluence of
three spectacular predictions of Einstein’s theory of general relativity:
gravitational lensing, black holes (BHs), and gravitational waves (GWs).
Gravitational lensing occurs when the gravitational field of a foreground object
like a galaxy or galaxy cluster bends the path of radiation emitted by a
background source as it travels towards the observer. BHs are massive objects so
compact that they possess an event horizon from within which even light cannot
escape. GWs are ripples in the fabric of spacetime that exert time-varying tidal
forces on objects as they pass through them. This research program will
investigate how gravitational lensing affects the GWs and electromagnetic (EM)
radiation emitted by distant binary BHs and their surrounding gas. It has three
main goals: (1) to determine the probability that GW sources are lensed and the
strength of lensing magnification and distortion, (2) to assess whether lensing
can be observationally distinguished from intrinsic changes to the properties of
the background sources, and (3) to identify how joint (multi-messenger) GW and
EM observations of gravitational lensing can reveal properties of the foreground
lenses, background sources, and the lensing phenomenon itself that would be
inaccessible to GW or EM observations individually. This research will promote
the progress of science by significantly advancing the understanding of
gravitational lensing as a multi-messenger phenomenon. This research program
will also benefit society by supporting education and public outreach. It will
fund research assistantships for two graduate students in the physics PhD
program at the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) and also provide
opportunities for undergraduate research. Einstein’s legacy (especially the
research topics in this proposal) has always fascinated the public and thus
serves as a valuable tool for outreach to underrepresented groups. The team will
present this research to diverse audiences including the TAG Magnet School in
Dallas ISD, the UTD Women in Physics summer camp, the Texas Astronomical Society
of amateur astronomers, and the Frontiers of Flight and Perot museums in
Dallas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current and future GW detectors will observe three
classes of sources: (1) stellar-mass binary BH mergers like those seen by
LIGO/Virgo, (2) supermassive black-hole (SMBH) mergers that are the primary
target of LISA, and (3) extreme-mass-ratio inspirals (EMRIs) of compact objects
into SMBHs. The proposed research will investigate strong gravitational lensing
of these sources in three interrelated projects. (1) the PI's group will
calculate the distribution of lensing amplification factors for sources at
cosmological redshift, using wave or geometric optics as appropriate. They will
then use this distribution to determine how strong lensing affects the three GW
sources including the changes to the signal-to-noise ratio and the mismatch with
the unlensed GW templates used for searches. (2) The team will explore the
degeneracies between gravitational lensing and changes to the source parameters
that define unlensed waveforms. In particular, they will determine the extent to
which GW amplitude modulation due to misaligned spins can mimic the interference
between multiple images, and whether changes to the waveform inclination and
polarization angle can be distinguished from the coherent sum of lensed images
with different polarization angles and parities. (3) The group will investigate
the synergy between GW and EM observations of strongly lensed systems. This
study will address whether upcoming EM surveys like LSST can provide catalogs to
help identify the host galaxy of lensed GW events, if lensing reconstruction
from EM observations can help identify time-delayed “images” in GW data, and
whether combined EM and GW observations can improve the constraints on lens and
source models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.