* 2011353
* I-Corps:  Software platform to bridge the gap between code editors and visuals editors in digital marketing agencies
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Ravi Chugh, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technologies that can bridge the gap between code editors
(Programming languages such as Excel formulas, LaTeX, HTML, PHP, C#, Python) and
visuals editors (Excel, PowerPoint, Word, Website builders). The software
platform makes it much easier for novice users to transition from visual editors
to code editors. More specifically, this software technology may provide the
ability for businesses to edit a website visually, even if it is made of custom
code or based on complex content management systems. The time savings it may
make would mean billions of dollars saved for the U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores translation of a
technology providing the ability for visual editors to understand code
programming languages like a code editor/developer. This technology enables
propagation of changes back from the output to the source file itself, in a
flexible way. It has been proven that related algorithms can be applied to real-
world programming languages, with robustness guarantees. Elements of the
solution include an add-on for live-editable formulas in collaborative docs, a
reversible build engine, and a reversible HTTPS
server.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.