* 2011307
* Coherence Effects: A Sensitive Tool to Study the Few-Body Dynamics in Simple Atomic Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Michael Schulz, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,827.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the laws of Nature
on a fundamental level is the most important prerequisite for technological
development. To this end, two major topics have to be addressed: a) a thorough
understanding of the forces acting in Nature needs to be obtained. It is well
established that, on an elementary particle level, the mediation of these forces
can only occur between two particles at a time. This directly leads to the
second topic: b) the description of the evolution of systems consisting of three
or more particles under the influence of these pairwise acting forces. This is
known as the Few-Body Problem (FBP) in physics and it remains one of the most
fundamentally important, and yet unsolved problems in physics. The research
supported by this grant aims to advance the understanding of the FBP by studying
collision processes between ions and simple atoms or molecules. Such collisions
represent systems consisting of a relatively small particle number (typically 3
to 5 particles), which are nevertheless sufficiently complex to be strongly
affected by the unsolved FBP. This research will involve several graduate and
undergraduate students and prepare them for the scientific and technological
needs of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the Few-Body Problem (FBP), the
research team will perform kinematically complete experiments on several atomic
fragmentation processes. Their interest is focused on two aspects of the few-
body dynamics: the importance of higher-order contributions and the role of
projectile coherence effects. Until recently, theory focused on perturbative
methods in describing such processes. In these models understanding the FBP
means accurately describing the contributions of higher-order versus first-order
contributions. Their experiments are designed to sensitively test perturbative
models and to determine the limitations of such approaches. Regarding the second
aspect, prior to recent work by this group and others, theory had assumed that
the incoming projectiles are always fully coherent. In studies over the last 8
years the researchers have demonstrated that for heavy particles this is not
always a realistic assumption because of the particles' very small deBroglie
wavelengths. In the research supported by this grant the research team will use
coherence effects as a sensitive tool to study interference effects in greater
detail than was possible previously. Interference structures, in turn, usually
contain rich information on the few-body dynamics underlying the collision
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.