* 2011262
* RUI: Positronium Scattering By Atoms, Molecules and Surfaces
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Robyn Wilde, Oregon Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

Positronium (Ps) is the bound state of an electron and positron. In this project
the PI will study the interaction of the Ps atom with a variety of atoms and
molecules, by developing models of these interactions and then calculating
scattering cross sections with these targets. Electron and positron scattering
has been studied quite extensively while Ps scattering has been studied
relatively little in comparison. This is partly because Ps is a composite object
which makes both theory and experiment more difficult. Recently, experiments
have shown that electron and Ps scattering are surprisingly similar over a wide
range of projectile velocities. At very low Ps velocities there is some
discrepancy between experiment and theory, and fundamental questions remain to
be answered. This work can help to understand the similarity at higher
velocities and to resolve the discrepancy at low velocities. These studies can
provide insight into the fundamental interactions between matter and anti-matter
and help to provide a better understanding of technologies that involve Ps such
as Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and the probing of defects in materials.
Undergraduate students are involved in this research with the goal of providing
them with an opportunity to apply mathematical methods to solve real world
physical problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will study Ps
collisions with atoms, molecules and surfaces. The plan is to calculate elastic
scattering cross sections as well as ionization (Ps break-up) cross sections for
a variety of atomic and molecular targets. To describe the interaction between
Ps and the target atom or molecule the PI will use a free electron gas model
that has been previously successfully used to describe the exchange and
correlation effects in Ps collisions with rare-gas atoms and molecular nitrogen.
The PI will also employ an orthogonalizing pseudopotential model to take account
of the repulsive effect of the Pauli exclusion principle. The focus will be on
extending these models to molecules, as well as to atomic targets besides the
rare-gases. The PI will also seek to better understand the Ps-atom/molecule
interaction by seeking to improve the approximations inherent in the models. The
PI has previously developed a binary encounter model for calculation of the
ionization cross section which will allow calculation of total cross sections
for new atomic and molecular targets. The PI also plans to extend the models to
study the scattering of Ps with surfaces such as LiF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.