* 2011791
* Targeted Infusion Project: Overcoming the Mathematics Barrier
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Sherry Painter, Le Moyne-Owen College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2023
* USD 399,579.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students to pursue STEM graduate
programs and/or careers. LeMoyne-Owen College proposes to enhance the
performance of its students in mathematics by utilizing the intelligent adaptive
software (iALS) known as “ALEKS” (which stands for Assessment and Learning in
Knowledge Spaces) in its mathematics courses. The project is in line with other
efforts across the nation that aim to innovate the delivery of mathematics
courses and effect improved student performance that translates to increase
numbers of STEM scholars who are typically underrepresented in those fields. It
will provide insight into the impact of iALS at HBCUs. The project targets three
introductory math courses that are taken by all students at the institution. If
successful, this project will be integral to reducing the student attrition rate
in math courses, and ultimately improve the numbers of STEM majors who are
retained and graduate with STEM degrees.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to increase passing rates of LeMoyne-Owen College’s students who
enroll in mathematics courses by utilizing technology-based, active learning
math interventions. The three objectives that will accomplish the overall goal
are as follows: (1) to increase the average pass rates for the remedial math
course (MATH 011) by 20% above the baseline over three years; (2) to create an
engaging system to support students who enter college underprepared for college
level mathematics; and (3) to increase retention rates of freshmen STEM majors
in mathematics through College Algebra by 20% above the baseline over three
years. The PIs will adopt evidence-based learning pedagogy into the mathematics
curriculum using ALEKS as both a placement tool and as an active learning
strategy in the selected math courses. An existing computer lab will be
redesigned and designated as the ALEKS lab where students can receive assistance
from trained peer tutors. Faculty will have access to real-time data to monitor
student progress through the ALEKS dashboard and be able to customize their
class-times to address the most critical needs. Students will be able to self-
pace through the enhanced, introductory math courses, and potentially complete
three math courses in two semesters. Additionally, students will be provided
access to the ALEKS placement tool during the summer prior to their freshman
year. In sum, the project promises to positively impact students who are
typically underrepresented in STEM fields, and ultimately increase the number of
STEM scholars from underserved populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.