* 2011334
* WoU-MMA: Enabling Multi-Messenger Astrophysics with Advanced LIGO: from Detector Calibration to Interpretation of Gravitational-Wave SIgnals
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Marco Cavaglia, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 465,025.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
first detections of gravitational waves from coalescing black holes and binary
neutron systems have established multi-messenger astrophysics as a powerful tool
for the exploration of the cosmos. Multi-messenger astrophysics allows
scientists to explore in depth the origins and structure of black holes and
compact stars, test Einsteinâ€™s theory of general relativity, probe the
fundamental nature of gravity and measure the evolution of the Universe. This
project will contribute to this endeavor by sustaining the scientific operations
of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) and by
developing new enhanced methods for gravitational-wave data analysis. These
activities will enable LIGO to operate effectively and perform core science
during observing runs. Along with the scientific component of the project, this
award will sustain public outreach initiatives in the local community and
participation in state-wide educational programs aimed at promoting science
among diverse segments of the Missouri population, in particular women and other
under-represented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to LIGO scientific operations by running astrophysical multi-
messenger searches for gravitational-wave burst sources, characterizing
instrumental data, calibrating the LIGO detectors, assisting operations on site,
and improving existing data analysis algorithms. Contributions to Research and
Development (R&amp;D) activities will consist in developing new machine
learning-based methods for de-noising LIGO data, extending the reach of
astrophysical searches for un-modeled, burst-like gravitational-wave signals,
and characterizing gravitational-wave observations from multi-messenger
astrophysical sources. These activities will improve LIGO search pipelines and
provide new, effective methods to extract physical information from detector
data in the next LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA observing run.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.