* 2011865
* Discovering Black Holes and Neutron Stars with LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Chad Hanna, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 559,167.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. This
award supports studying the universe through a new field: gravitational wave
astronomy. Unlike conventional astronomy, which relies on light from distant
astronomical sources, gravitational wave astronomy measures tiny ripples in the
fabric of space itself caused by massive objects such as black holes. A black
hole's strong gravity prevents even light from escaping its grasp, and
consequently, gravitational wave astronomy reveals the dark side of the universe
by enabling the discovery of phenomena that were previously invisible. This new
field began in 2015 when the NSF-funded LIGO observatory detected two black
holes crashing together a billion light years away and has since opened a new
window on the universe with more than a dozen confirmed cosmic collisions.
Discovering the tiny ripples of a black hole collision billions of light years
away requires sophisticated data analysis. This award funds analysis of LIGO
data with the direct goal of detecting hundreds of new black holes and neutron
stars in the next three years. These new discoveries will help to reveal how
stars are born, how they die, and if the universe has anything hidden in its
dark side.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here furthers the mission of
the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, which is focused on the direct detection of
gravitational waves, using them to explore the fundamental physics of gravity
and developing the emerging field of gravitational wave science as a tool of
astronomical discovery. The award will deliver analysis of LIGO data over the
next three years, resulting in the detection of binary neutron stars, neutron
star/black hole binaries and binary black holes. These new gravitational wave
detections will comprise the deepest gravitational wave transient catalog to
date, with potentially hundreds of new discoveries occurring during the period
of the proposed work. Each new compact binary merger will provide a new test of
General Relativity, and in aggregate, the discoveries will provide a precise
assessment of the population of compact objects in the nearby universe. From
this population it may be possible to infer the formation mechanism of the
detected binaries and in doing so reveal details about their creation and
evolution. With all gravitational wave discoveries, there is an opportunity to
observe an electromagnetic or neutrino counterpart. New discoveries of binary
neutron star mergers with optical counterparts like GW170817 will, among other
things, deepen the understanding of heavy element production as well as pin down
the expansion rate of the universe. The proposed research has substantial
inherent opportunities for public engagement as black holes are often met by a
captivated audience. The personnel on this proposal are committed to making a
direct impact through hosting a gravitational wave summer camp in central
Pennsylvania. This camp will attract a diverse group of high school students who
will have an opportunity to engage with Penn State researchers and learn about
gravitational wave physics and astronomy. They will also learn about the role of
high performance computing in scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.