* 2011884
* Collaborative Research: Adaptation and resiliency of food web structure and functioning to environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Oswald Schmitz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2025
* USD 626,577.00

There is widespread concern that environmental warming will be harmful to
species, resulting in the loss of the functions and services they provide to
support human health and well-being. However, recent scientific thinking
proposes that different individual members of a species, living in different
locations within the species’ geographic range, have different behavioral and
physiological adaptations to warming. This study will experimentally test how
geographic differences in these adaptive abilities influence how well
individuals can maintain their functioning when moved to new geographic
locations with different temperatures. The findings will improve scientific
understanding about the adaptive performances of different individuals in the
face of environmental changes. This new knowledge can be used to help society
adapt to environmental change by informing how to conserve different members of
species across their geographic range to sustain ecological functioning. This
new line of research will enhance the training of undergraduate and graduate
STEM students in the latest scientific ideas, technology and methodologies aimed
at understanding nature’s resilience to global environmental changes, and in the
development of nature-based solutions that can be applied to these address
environmental problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental principle in
evolutionary ecology is that species residing in the middle of food chains
maximize fitness via trait plasticity to balance the benefits of eating (growth)
against the costs of being eaten by predators. This foraging-predation risk
trade-off can strongly shape community structure and ecological functioning.
Yet, environmental stressors (e.g., temperature) can interact with this trade-
off, thus complicating efforts to predict its consequences for community
structure and functioning. This project addresses this complexity by studying a
dominant herbivore (grasshopper) species that influences the structure of New
England old-field communities via this trade-off. Grasshopper populations
display geographic variation in plastic responses (physiological vs. behavioral)
to temperature and predation risk with decidedly different effects on community
structure. The study tests the hypothesis that high and low temperature
variation favor behavioral and physiological plasticity, respectively.
Laboratory and field experiments with populations having different temperature
regimes will assess (i) how geographic variation in plasticity shapes the
influence of thermal physiology and predator avoidance on food chain
interactions and (ii) how such plasticity shifts after long-term exposure to
different climate regimes. The results will provide novel insights into how
local adaptation may alter the functional role that species play in ecological
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.