* 2011848
* Experimental Particle Physics Research at High Energies
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Darien Wood, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,860,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all the elementary particles known at the time into a hierarchy
of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this model to date
was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC). However, the Standard Model as it currently exists leaves open many
questions about the universe, including such fundamental questions as to why the
Higgs mass has the value it has. One of the primary functions of the Compact
Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the LHC, which remains the premier Energy
Frontier particle accelerator, operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva
Switzerland, is to discover new physics beyond the Standard Model. This project
will analyze data from the CMS experiment looking for signals of beyond the
Standard Model. The work that will be accomplished with this award will impact
three broad areas: 1) Upgrading the highly technical components of the CMS
detector 2) workforce development and outreach to the broader community and 3)
furthering the analysis techniques that might well discover new physics at the
LHC. With the strong cooperative education program at Northeastern University,
the group will continue to routinely involve undergraduates in meaningful six-
month projects at CERN. The PIs will also continue their involvement with the
Boston Area QuarkNet group (now in its 17th year) where they are able to reach
out to local high school teachers and their students. The group members also
share the excitement and knowledge of the discoveries and results with the
broader public through lectures and presentations to audiences outside of
particle physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expertise of this group has expanded
to include electric calorimetry as well as muon detection. This broadens the
physics analysis capability as they search for new physics beyond the Standard
Model. This includes physics channels with unifying themes based around W+jets,
Z plus missing transverse momentum, exotic Higgs boson decays, unifying themes
based around W+jets, Z plus missing transverse momentum, exotic Higgs boson
decays, leptoquarks, and di-Higgs production. leptoquarks, and di-Higgs
production. The work funded through this award will search for a number of new
particle physics sectors where there are theoretical models of beyond the SM
physics. A discovery of leptoquarks would provide a link between the quark
sector and the lepton sectors and help to explain why both sectors contain three
generations of matter. Detection of substantial invisible decays of the Higgs
boson would answer important questions about the nature of electroweak symmetry
breaking. Invisible decays of the Higgs are a signature of various beyond the
standard model physics theories. In these, the Higgs can interact with new heavy
particles which decay into particles that are usually not detected by the
experiment (like neutrinos). Limits on the invisible decay rate of the Higgs
boson also provide constraints on models of Dark Matter. This project's studies
also include measurements of the differential cross section measurements of
Standard Model processes, such as ZZ production, and W+jets production, that
have sensitivity to new physics. These studies are tightly coupled with the new
physics searches because the processes they measure are important backgrounds to
the specific searches targeted. The presence of a signal in any of these
channels would have profound impact on our understanding of particle physics,
while establishing its absence would provide important constraints on models of
physics beyond the Standard Model of particle physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.