* 2011500
* Dynamic mini-chromosomes: mechanisms of exchange, stability and causation of fungal pathogen adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Barbara Valent, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Food crops are constantly threatened by new variants of established pathogens
and by newly-emerged pathogens. The rice blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae has a
long history of variation to overcome resistance deployed in rice crops, and a
new M. oryzae variant emerged in 1985 to cause devastating disease on wheat in
Brazil. Wheat blast disease is proving even harder to control than rice blast
because potential resistance genes identified using strains from the 1980s are
no longer effective in controlling recent aggressive isolates. Global spread of
the disease and lack of control measures enhance fears about global food
security. Recent studies indicated that dispensable supernumerary chromosomes
from blast field isolates might accelerate adaptive evolution and contribute to
virulence of the fungus. Supernumerary chromosomes are hypothesized to play
roles in the evolution of pathogen genes that are critical for resistance in
host plants, including host specificity at the plant species/genus and the crop
cultivar levels. The project will study supernumerary chromosomes to understand
their prevalence, movement between strains, DNA exchange with core-chromosomes,
stability, and contributions to pathogenicity and virulence. Outcomes will be
valuable for understanding genomic dynamics of the blast pathogen and help
reveal roles of supernumerary chromosomes in many plants, animals and other
fungi. Graduate students and undergraduates will receive broad training in
genomics, bioinformatics, molecular plant-microbe interactions, and plant
biosecurity. Undergraduates will participate in an 8-week summer research
experience in plant disease diagnostics involving collections in the field and
identification of disease organisms using cutting edge sequencing technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fungus Magnaporthe oryzae causes blast diseases on
more than 50 grass species, which include the ancient rice blast and the newly
emerged wheat blast. Global agricultural threats posed by blast diseases and
evolving pathogens make it important to understand genome dynamics of blast
pathogens. The blast fungal genome includes hundreds of putative effector genes
that are specifically expressed during host invasion and that generally encode
small secreted proteins involved promoting disease. A subset of these effectors
is recognized by host resistance gene products, which triggers resistance and
blocks infection of that host. Such effectors play a major role in determining
host specificity in blast fungal pathogens, both at the host species/genus
level, and at the crop cultivar level. The recent genomic data of dispensable
supernumerary chromosomes from the wheat blast field isolates showed that the
supernumerary chromosomes contain many effector genes that are often found on
indispensable core-chromosomes in other strains, as well as other genes that may
play a role in pathogen aggressiveness. This project proposes to further
understand supernumerary chromosomes with respect to their prevalence, inter-
strain movement, DNA exchange with core-chromosomes, stability, and
contributions to pathogenicity and virulence. The hypothesis will be tested that
supernumerary chromosomes play roles in effector mobility by serving as a
repository for effector genes that are deleted from core-chromosomes, and a role
in mediating their relocation on core-chromosomes. The project will combine
methodologies in blast disease biology, including adaptive evolution strategies,
parasexual transfer between fungal strains, molecular biology, genomics, and
cytology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.