* 2011326
* WORKSHOP: ACM GROUP 2020 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Mark Ackerman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2024
* USD 22,302.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for approximately 10
promising graduate students along with a panel of 4 distinguished research
faculty as mentors. The event will take place in conjunction with the 2020
International Conference on Supporting Group Work (GROUP 2020), to be held
January 4-8 on Sanibel Island, Florida, and sponsored by ACM's Special Interest
Group on Computer-Human Interaction (SIGCHI). For over 25 years, the bi-annual
GROUP conferences have been a leading international forum for the presentation
and discussion of research and practice on organizational behavior, information
systems, social informatics, human-computer interaction (HCI), and computer
supported cooperative work (CSCW), providing a showcase for innovative work on
the development, introduction, management, deployment, and analysis of computer-
based collaborative systems. Research reports published in the GROUP conference
proceedings are rigorously reviewed and widely cited. More information is
available online at https://group.acm.org/conferences/group20/. The Doctoral
Consortium focuses on participating students' doctoral dissertations and
provides both an opportunity for these projects to be shaped through
intellectual exchange as well as an opportunity to communicate the character of
the work to a key group of early career researchers. There are both short- and
long-term benefits to the GROUP research community and to society from this
workshop. In the short term, the event will bring together the best of the next
generation of researchers exploring the fields relevant to the conference, will
allow the students to create a social network both among themselves and with
several senior researchers, and will facilitate their enculturation into the
field. Furthermore, the workshop will provide an avenue for advanced Ph.D.
students to advertise themselves and their work to conference attendees, many of
whom may be hiring. Finally, the students and faculty are anticipated to be a
diverse group on several dimensions (e.g., scientific discipline, gender,
institutional affiliation, underrepresented minority status), which will help
broaden the students' horizons at a critical stage in their professional
development. In the longer term, the organizers expect that students who have
participated in the Doctoral Consortium will give back to the community by
engaging as mentors themselves to future generations of students, and that these
exceptional students will be the future leaders of the GROUP
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GROUP 2020 Doctoral Consortium will begin
with a full day pre-conference research-focused workshop on Sunday, January 5,
followed by events integrated throughout the conference, including presentations
at the posters/demos reception and a reflective wrap-up session. The student
participants will be later stage doctoral candidates primarily from the United
States, and will represent a variety of disciplines including computer and
information science, information systems, and communications. Each student will
present a summary of their work for public critique and will discuss currently
open questions; this will help the students understand and articulate how their
work is positioned relative to other research, whether their topics are
adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are
correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are being appropriately
analyzed. The working lunch will focus on managing one's committee and learning
how to "finish well" while the working dinner will focus on career development
plans, including best strategies for the job search in academe and industry. The
goals of the workshop are to build a cohort group of young researchers who will
then have a network of colleagues spread across the world, to guide and shape
the work of the new researchers by having experts serve as mentors and give
advice, to provide encouragement and support for the selection of GROUP research
topics, to make it possible for promising new entrants to the field to attend a
leading research conference and to illustrate for them the interrelationship and
diversity of GROUP research, and in general to make the new entrants' experience
at the GROUP conference enjoyable and rewarding so that they will be encouraged
to return and submit to future conferences in the
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.