* 2011695
* Collaborative Research: After the Bridgerian Crash: An Integrated Analysis of Mammalian Paleocommunities and Paleoecologies During the Middle Eocene.
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Kathryn Townsend, Midwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 04/30/2024
* USD 239,596.00

The modern climatic crisis appears unprecedented as it represents a spike in
global warming during an overall cooling period that began during glacial times.
Yet, numerous rapidly occurring global warming events are recorded in deep time.
This project will study how ecosystems respond to extreme warming by
investigating changes in mammalian diversity, vegetation, and soil development
in ~45 million-year-old deposits found in northeastern Utah. The results of this
work will provide an opportunity to use the past to understand the present
response of mammalian and plant communities to rapid warming events in the long
term, information that is critical for the management of habitat resources.
Additional broader impacts of this study include the development of scientific
expertise in undergraduate students; science outreach at multiple museums via
exhibits and modules; sharing data, methods, and results via scientific
dissemination, open access publications and social media; and curriculum
development for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Middle Eocene Climatic
Optimum (MECO), increased global surface temperatures by 4 degrees Celsius,
which is the same increase predicted for our modern climatic crisis by 2100. The
goal of this project is to generate a multi-faceted model that will correlate
patterns of biotic change bracketing the MECO and thus learn more about a
warming event that is similar in thermal scope to our own. This will be
accomplished by integrating stratigraphic and geochemical data with
biostratigraphic and ecomorphological analyses to evaluate changes in habitat
and mammalian community structure in the Uinta Basin, Utah, before, during, and
after the MECO event. To achieve the project goals a team of sedimentologists,
geochemists, palynologists, and paleontologists will use their integrated
approach to evaluate how ecosystems responded to an extreme warming event. The
success of this integrated approach is expected to transform our knowledge of
mammalian species and habitat response to a global warming
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.