* 2011938
* Implementation Project: Improving Minority Student Persistence in STEM Fields Through Active-learning, Peer-mentoring, Undergraduate Research and Community Outreach
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Melanie Van Stry, Lane College
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,843,496.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthen education and research. The
project at Lane College seeks to build on previous successful efforts to
increase participation of African-American and other students from historically
disenfranchised groups in STEM disciplines. The goal of the project is to
increase the number of students entering graduate and professional school in
STEM fields. The project will impact all STEM majors at the institution. The
project includes a strong outreach component to local K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the objectives to: enhance course
delivery by engaging students in active learning, including course-based
research and an expanded peer mentoring program with supplemental instruction
for the foundational STEM courses; expand community outreach projects to local
K-12 schools by engaging students in science literacy and providing hands-on and
inquiry-based experiences; and study the impact of program activities on student
perceptions of science, sense of belonging, and scientific literacy. The project
also seeks to implement reformed teaching and learning strategies within
critical gateway science courses and will provide professional development in
pedagogy for faculty. A research study, using mixed-methods, will be conducted
to investigate the effectiveness of these activities on student persistence in
STEM fields within the context of an HBCU. The project will be guided and
evaluated by internal and external advisory boards and
evaluators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.