* 2011004
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jeremiah Minich, Minich, Jeremiah
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Globally, fish are second only to swine for
animal protein production. Aquaculture, fish farming, is the fastest growing
agricultural sector in the world with both fresh and saltwater fish as major
components. One of the distinguishing factors of fish from other vertebrates is
the utilization of gills. In addition to respiration, fish use gills for gas and
waste exchange. Gills cover a large surface area and are also the home to many
microorganisms including eukaryotes, bacteria, archaea, and viruses collectively
known as the microbiome. Understanding the relationship between the gill
microbiome and the host physiology is critical for fish health. This research
will identify the consequences of microbial communities that reside in the gill
of the fish and provide ways to manipulate these communities for the benefit of
the fish through host genetics and microbial communities. The study will allow
an ideal educational interface with outreach activities (science communication)
that include tours with underrepresented minority elementary school students.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research will use multi-omic methods
such as genome sequencing, microbiome sequencing, and transcriptomics to
evaluate the genomic landscape of the fish gill. The Fellow has collected 100
local fish species from Southern California, representing 25% of the total
marine diversity and will sequence and compare the fish genomes and gill
microbiomes. The proposal seeks to achieve the following objectives: (1)
quantify environmental and biological (host) factors regulating gill microbiome
development, (2) investigate microbial spatial distribution in fish gills across
tuna, mackerels and fast swimming pelagic species, and (3) compare microbial
biofouling impacts on metabolic rate in mackerel, a model Scrombrid (Scomber
japonicus). By developing methods to knock out and knock in the microbiome of
the fish gill, the Fellow will then evaluate how microbial density or biofouling
negatively affects respiration. Future research from this project could use
these data to develop probiotics or therapeutics to enhance gill health. The
Fellow will learn methods in comparative fish genomics, transcriptomics, and
physiology, building upon prior experience in microbiome research while
promoting outreach specifically with teaching these concepts to LMIC and
underserved communities through workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.