* 2011874
* RUI: Building a Robust Software Infrastructure for Parameterizing and Measuring the Neutron Star Equation of State
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Leslie Wade, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 151,749.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Two
years ago, the historic detection of colliding neutron stars sent physical and
figurative waves through the scientific community. Shortly after, the LIGO-Virgo
Collaboration made the first direct measurement of the neutron star equation of
state from gravitational waves. Many more binary neutron star mergers will be
seen as ground-based interferometers continue operating and increasing in
sensitivity. This promises to provide even tighter constraints on the equation
of state. A critical component of this process will be developing the software
infrastructure for modeling and measuring the neutron star equation of state.
The Kenyon College LIGO group will develop and incorporate a full suite of
equation of state models available not only to the collaboration, but also
available to the broader scientific community who rely on these results for
followup analyses. This award intimately involves undergraduates in LIGO
research and supports a no-barrier-to-entry astronomy research program that can
recruit and bridge students into important LIGO
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award focusses on four types of equation of
state models that will be used for parameter estimation: 1) piecewise polytopic
models, 2) spectral decompositions of the adiabatic index, 3) models with built-
in sharp, first-order phase transitions, and 4) models with nuclear physics
parameters. Polytropic and spectral decomposition models have already been
incorporated into lalsuite, which is LIGO’s algorithm library. However, they
still require important development to make them more robust, which are great
projects for training young undergraduates for more substantial research. Models
with phase transitions and nuclear physics parameters have not yet been
incorporated into lalsuite and will require a lot of development to get working
seamlessly with the collaboration’s flagship parameter estimation software. Both
sets of projects, though varying in required development, are essential
additions for interpreting the physics of neutron star interiors. These projects
could potentially lead to conclusive evidence of a first-order phase transition
in the neutron star equation of state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.