* 2011442
* RUI:Collaboration for Studies of Cosmic Ray Muon Radiation and its Application to Archaeometry
* MPS,PHY
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2024
* Joseph Sagerer, Dominican University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 10/31/2024
* USD 328,614.00

This award supports a project of research and education in experimental physics
and archaeometry. The project's goal is to develop hardware, electronics, and
data analysis tools to measure the quantity and direction of the atmospheric
muons that go through archaeological structures. These measurements will allow
the mapping of cavities inside these structures. Using this technique, the
project team will explore El Castillo pyramid and Las Monjas in Chichen Itza.
The applications of muon radiography go beyond archaeometry. It can be used in
geology (to monitor the lava domes inside volcanos), in national security (to
determine the presence of the heavy materials inside containers), in industry
(to image the inner structure of inaccessible structures, like nuclear
reactors), etc. The funding for this award contributes to the advancement of the
technology that promotes these applications. In addition, recruiting, retaining,
and educating science and mathematics students and teachers is critical to
advancing scientific literacy, maintaining economic growth, and continuing
scientific discoveries. This project will involve students from Chicago State
University, a Predominantly Black Institution, and Dominican University, a
Hispanic Serving Institution. Thus, it will advance the participation of groups
traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of non-intrusive remote sensing techniques has been one of the great
interdisciplinary successes of archaeometry. Ground-penetrating radar and
electrical resistivity tomography are examples that are mostly used for
subsurface explorations. The group will build imaging capabilities using a
complementary technique: the measurements of the distribution of the muon flux
from cosmic ray muons through archeological structures. The tracker detector
that the team will build with this award will locate variations in the density
in regions as small as one cubic meter situated at any position inside a large
structure. El Castillo pyramid is ideal for implementing the capabilities of
muon detection. It has two substructures; the first substructure presents two
known chambers; the second substructure remains un-excavated and could expose
other chambers. The interior of the pyramid is granted by two base tunnels that
can house the detector. The three-dimensional density mapping of El Castillo
will impact the architectural understanding of this pyramid and set the basis
for further archaeological explorations. The group will also investigate the Las
Monjas building; this smaller, less studied construction may also have
undiscovered chambers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.