* 2011908
* National Physics REU Leadership Group Workshop and Community-Building
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Sathya Guruswamy, American Physical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2024
* USD 187,733.00

Engaging undergraduates in research is a critical component of a high-quality
undergraduate physics education, providing hands-on training on methods used by
practicing physicists and exposure to cutting-edge science. The NSF Physics
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program includes over 50 Physics
REU site programs serving over 1,000 students each year, and nearly one-quarter
of all physics majors report participating in a REU experience before they
graduate. In order to realize the large potential for impact across Physics REU
sites, Physics REU site directors came together as a community and formed the
NSF Physics REU Leadership Group (NPRLG), which is committed to enhancing
undergraduate student research experiences. The American Physical Society (APS)
provides infrastructure support needed for this community of practice to thrive.
This project aims to enhance the collective efforts of NPRLG and APS to improve
undergraduate research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the wide range
in REU sites with respect to longevity, personnel, and programming, a regular
in-person gathering of site leaders is critical to fostering excellence in
Physics REU programs. Such a workshop is needed to provide an opportunity for
physics REU site directors to share effective practices, to learn from relevant
experts, to develop a network of site leaders, and to identify and pursue
community-wide initiatives. Sharing of effective practices among REU site
leaders ultimately supports the professional development of undergraduate
physics researchers and their mentors. In addition, the project aims to improve
inclusion of underrepresented minority students at Physics REU sites, foster use
of a high-quality assessment tool for evaluating programs, and identify other
opportunities to improve REU programs through coordinated action. Finally, the
impact of this project has the potential to transfer beyond Physics REU programs
to benefit other undergraduate research activities at host
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Physics REU Leadership Group (NPRLG)
is a community of over 50 Physics REU site directors committed to enhancing
undergraduate student research experiences through sharing of effective
practices and community-wide initiatives. The project will carry out: (i) an in-
person workshop for the NPRLG, (ii) ongoing virtual engagement of the NPRLG via
an online forum and videoconferences, (iii) a workshop report and web resources
for dissemination of effective practices, (iv) the implementation of a common
assessment instrument, and (v) delegate exchanges with minority serving
organizations to facilitate recruitment and inclusion efforts. The project will
promote sharing of effective practices among REU site leaders, which ultimately
supports the professional development of undergraduate physics researchers and
their mentors. To promote participant learning and relationship building, the
in-person workshop will emphasize interactive formats such as small-group
discussions, panel discussions, and structured networking activities, among
other activities. An evaluator external to the NPRLG will survey in-person
workshop participants to assess outcomes, including adoption of effective
practices and follow-up on proposed collective actions. The project will promote
dissemination through a workshop report with identified goals and best
practices, which will be shared via conference presentations and a webpage
within the broader physics community and with REU programs outside of
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.