* 2011846
* Bioinspired Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Seth Fraden, Brandeis University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2026
* USD 12,000,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The Brandeis Bioinspired Soft Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center (MRSEC) seeks to engineer new materials that capture the
remarkable functionalities found in living organisms. To realize this vision the
Center synergistically focuses on two topics at the forefront of Soft Materials
research. The first, Self-Limiting Assembly, adopts a bioinspired approach to
develop a suite of building blocks which undergo equilibrium self-assembly that
terminates at a prescribed finite-size. Learning to engineer self-limiting
structures is enabling the scalable design of new functional and adaptable
materials, such as paintable photonic coatings and capsids for drug therapy
including general strategies to deactivate virus infection, including covid-19.
The second, Soft Active Materials, is inspired by the remarkable capabilities of
living cells, with their abilities to sense, self-heal and move. This MRSEC is
establishing the principles to design, measure and control the forces in active
materials to generate rapidly reconfigurable life-like materials, with
applications in fields as diverse as robotics, microfluidics and adaptive
optics. The MRSEC emphasizes human resource development for the STEM workforce.
To facilitate this is the MRSEC’s SciComm Lab comprising science graduate
students and postdocs trained to become effective communicators and peer
mentors. These SciComm Lab mentors train their peers in the skills they need to
communicate their science to disparate audiences ranging from future employers
to a diverse, non-scientific public. The Path-to-Professorship Program, aimed at
providing superior postdoctoral fellow training for underrepresented minorities
in cutting-edge materials research and designed to prepare individuals for
assuming full-time faculty positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
The Brandeis Bioinspired Soft Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC)is engineering new materials that capture the remarkable functionalities
found in living organisms. The Center is organized into two Interdisciplinary
Research Groups (IRG). IRG1, Self-Limiting Assembly, addresses a grand challenge
in soft materials science, the self-assembly of complex and functional
materials. While living systems routinely achieve size-controlled assembly,
synthetic approaches lag far behind. IRG1 adopts a bioinspired approach to
develop a suite of building blocks which undergo equilibrium self-assembly that
self-terminates at a prescribed finite-size. Learning to engineer self-limiting
structures is enabling scalable design of new functional and adaptable
materials, such as paintable photonic coatings and capsids for drug and gene
therapy. IRG2, Soft Active Materials, is inspired by the remarkable capabilities
of living cells, such as crawling, reconfiguring, and regenerating which are
driven by energy-consuming molecular motors. An unmet grand challenge is to
construct artificial active materials with active stresses designed to produce a
desired function. This is leading to the next generation of active materials
that are robust and exhibit long-lived programmable dynamics, thus paving the
way to applications. This MRSEC emphasizes human resource development for the
STEM workforce. To facilitate this is the MRSEC's SciComm Lab comprising science
graduate students and postdocs trained to become effective communicators and
peer mentors. The Path-to-Professorship Program, aimed at providing superior
postdoctoral fellow training for underrepresented minorities in cutting-edge
materials research and designed to prepare individuals for assuming full-time
faculty positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.