* 2011725
* WoU-MMA: Multimessenger Parameter Estimation for Binary Neutron Star Mergers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Radice, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
detection of gravitational waves and photons from a binary neutron star merger
by NSF-funded LIGO and partner observatories in August 2017 ushered in the era
of multimessenger astronomy. Since then LIGO has detected a few more binary
neutron star systems and many more are expected in the future. These discoveries
are starting to revolutionize our understanding of, among others, high energy
astrophysics phenomena, such as short gamma-ray bursts, the properties of matter
under extreme conditions, and the origin of heavy elements, such as gold and
platinum. However, to make fundamental progress observations need to be
complemented by theoretical understanding. This project aims to build a pipeline
for the joint analysis of the different messengers in multimessenger
observations of neutron star mergers. To this aim, data analysis techniques and
large-scale supercomputer simulations of neutron star mergers will be combined.
The project will constitute the bulk of the PhD thesis of one graduate student
at Penn State, who will acquire skills in high demand in the academic and
industry job markets. Numerical methods developed for these simulations could
also find applications in other STEM fields. Numerical simulations of neutron
star and black hole spacetimes will also be used to create an immersive and
interactive virtual reality exploratorium for compact objects to be used for
classroom teaching and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most common
multimessenger observations of neutron star mergers are expected to combine
gravitational waves and UV/optical/infrared photons generated as radioactive
byproducts of the nucleosynthesis process decay. This is the so-called kilonova.
This project will deliver improved gravitational wave and kilonova models based
on first-principle simulations and use them in the context of a joint Bayesian
parameter estimation pipeline. Many-orbit high-resolution inspiral and merger
simulations will be performed in full general-relativity using newly developed
high-order numerical techniques based on the entropy viscosity method to deliver
convergent gravitational wave strain data extending down to the post Newtonian
regime and up to the kilohertz regime, where current models start to fail. The
numerical relativity data will be used to construct new frequency domain
phenomenological waveform models suited for Bayesian parameter estimation. Long-
term merger and post-merger simulations with microphysics and subgrid turbulence
models will be performed to predict the quality and quantity of the outflows
that ultimately power the kilonovae as a function of the binary parameters, such
as the total mass, the tidal deformability, and, in particular, the binary mass
ratio. The numerical data will be combined with a semi-analytic kilonova model
calibrated against full radiative transfer calculations to construct a model of
the kilonova emission as a function of the binary parameters. Kilonova and new
gravitational wave models will finally be combined to perform joint parameter
estimation analysis of neutron star merger events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.