* 2011736
* Targeting Infusion Project: LU- FIELDS: Lincoln University -  Food Intersectional Education Linked to Diversify Sustainability
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Anna Hull, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 438,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. This project at Lincoln University LU-
FIELDS will broaden participation in STEM through the implementation of an
interdisciplinary sustainability minor rooted in food studies at the nation’s
first HBCU. The local community as well as the broader sustainability community
will be engaged through outreach activities, social media engagement, and a
certificate course in food sustainability offered at Lincoln as a required
course for sustainability minors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of LU-FIELDS
(Lincoln University – Food Intersectional Education Linked to Diversify
Sustainability) is to increase and broaden STEM engagement through the design
and implementation of a state-of-the-art sustainability curriculum around
interdisciplinary food studies and social media engagement with built-in
assessment. The interdisciplinary approach to curriculum development will ensure
an inclusive methodology that engages students across disciplines while
fostering science thinking. Outcomes of the project will include a new
sustainability minor at Lincoln University, a certificate course in Food
Sustainability open to both Lincoln students and the greater community, student
research projects in sustainable garden practices, food justice,
intersectionality assessment, and app development, as well as community
engagement around sustainable food production, food security and food justice.
Students and faculty will present their research at local and national
conferences and publish outcomes in peer reviewed journals. The project app will
be used to engage students by utilizing the capabilities of gamification mixed
with the accessibility of mobile technology and social media connection. The app
will also be used to collect assessment data on student learning outcomes and
sustainability engagement. Contributions to the fields of sustainability and
intersectionality research will include new frameworks of methodologies and
assessment pertaining to minority populations and community engagement in
sustainability studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.