* 2011733
* Advancements in Divergence-Free Approximations for Incompressible Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Michael Neilan, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 286,039.00

Accurate computations of fluid flow models have a direct impact on simulations
and predictions in various applications, e.g., weather and climate, aircraft
design, etc. Typically, such computations are based on discretizations of
partial differential equations that model the physics of the underlying system.
These approximations introduce errors into the simulations that need to be
rigorously quantified in order to make reliable simulations and predictions.
This project will construct accurate, structure-preserving computational schemes
that exactly enforce the underlying physical laws at the discrete level in fluid
flow models. This attribute leads to high fidelity schemes that are robust with
respect to several model parameters. A particular focus of the project is to
develop and analyze computational algorithms that reduce geometric error and
thus yield provably accurate answers. In addition, the project aims to provide
user-friendly methods; in particular, the project will incorporate modules into
current computational and open source software to improve usability,
portability, and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will construct
finite element methods for the Stokes and Navier-Stokes equations that exactly
enforce the divergence-free constraint at the discrete level. Such
discretizations have several desirable properties, for example, improved
stability and error estimates with respect to model parameters, exact
conservation properties for any discretization parameter, and characterizations
of discrete divergence-free subspaces. However, current divergence-free finite
element methods are impractically high-order and arduous to implement. This
project will identify and construct simple divergence-free finite element
methods with an emphasis on the three-dimensional setting and on methods that
can be incorporated into current finite element software. Divergence-free finite
element methods on domains with curved boundaries that are robust with respect
to both model parameters and the geometry will also be developed and analyzed.
This will consist of studying both isoparametric divergence-free finite element
methods and fictitious domain approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.