* 2011214
* Searching for Magnetic Monopoles with MoEDAL
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Igor Ostrovskiy, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2024
* USD 222,419.00

Magnetic monopoles are particles suggested to exist by Dirac to explain the
quantization of the electric charge. The existence of magnetic monopoles is well
motivated, but their mass and production mechanism are highly uncertain. Their
detection would constitute a major transformational discovery in physics.
Magnetic monopoles are also predicted in many variants of Grand Unification
Theory (GUT) and in Supersymmetric (SUSY) models. This project will search for
magnetic monopoles at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN with the MoEDAL
(Monopoles and Exotics Detector At the LHC). The search for the magnetic
monopoles crosses many disciplinary boundaries in physics: from accelerator-
based physics to astro-particle physics. A detection would have a profound
impact on our understanding of Natureâ€™s building blocks and would attract broad
attention. This project will stimulate the imagination of undergraduate students
and high school students in Tuscaloosa county by allowing them to participate in
a modern international particle physics experiment. The educational objective of
this proposal includes engaging a diverse group of undergraduate and high school
students in citizen science analysis of the MoEDAL data. This project will also
provide students with the opportunity to learn and apply the latest machine
learning techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables the University of
Alabama Tuscaloosa group to contribute to the calibration of the MoEDAL
experiment, analysis of the data, and convening the machine learning analysis
group. This project will make a leading contribution to the analysis of the
MoEDAL's proton-on-proton data from the second LHC run. In addition, the LHC
lead-on-lead collision data will be analyzed by the group for the potential
production of magnetic monopoles by the Schwinger mechanism, which will be the
first time this process is investigated experimentally in this context. Finally,
the group will contribute to the hardware extension of the MoEDAL detectors,
which are currently being prepared for the next LHC
run.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.