* 2011421
* Student Support for the Eighth International Brain-Computer Interface Meeting
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Charles Anderson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 29,945.00

Brain-computer interface (BCI) research explores avenues of controlling devices
directly from brain signals. Thus, BCI technology is a powerful control option
for neuro-prosthetic limbs, as well as a potential communication option for
people with severe motor disabilities or disorders such as amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), brainstem stroke, cerebral palsy, and spinal cord injury, who
may have little or even no muscle control and therefore no means of
communication with the external world. The International Brain-Computer
Interface (IBCI) meeting is the flagship conference for the field. Effective BCI
research requires interdisciplinary interactions involving neuroscience,
psychology, engineering, mathematics, computer science, and clinical
rehabilitation, and the IBCI meetings serve as critical catalysts for technology
dissemination, new collaborations, and educational opportunities for students.
The IBCI conferences are under the auspices of the BCI Society, and in light of
the significant progress that has been made towards restoring communication and
mobility the 2020 International BCI meeting will focus on emerging applications
and techniques with the theme "BCIs: The Next Frontier." NSF funding will enable
an additional 25 students, including undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, to participate in the conference. Student participation in
previous IBCI meetings has been very fruitful; many of those students have now
graduated and are prominent researchers in the BCI field. The organizers are
actively working to recruit student attendees from traditionally
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reflecting the growth of the field
of BCI research, 400 or more participants are expected to attend this year's
meeting, including investigators from at least 100 BCI research groups. All
attendees commit to the entire meeting. A main objective of the conference is to
give students a significant educational and professional experience in the BCI
field, and to provide opportunities for them to gain depth in their specific
interest areas. To these ends, and guided by feedback from a survey of 2018 IBCI
attendees, the conference will include interactive events such as workshops and
poster sessions along with 7 plenary keynote talks which will be complemented by
research sessions and master classes, a BCI users forum as well as BCI didactics
sessions, and a Women in BCI social.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.