* 2011782
* High Throughput Structure Determination for Low Thermal Noise Coatings
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Martin Fejer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2023
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
now weekly observations of gravitational waves from coalescing black holes and
neutron stars by the Advanced LIGO and Advanced Virgo interferometers represent
a new era of astrophysics, launched by the first detection four years ago.
Planned upgrades to Advanced LIGO, in addition to planned future generations of
international gravitational wave observatories, will seek to extend the range of
the detectors and enable further discoveries within gravitational wave
astronomy. However, all future detector upgrades and concepts rely on the
development of new mirror coating materials to reduce thermal noise. The PI's
group at Stanford has efforts devoted to theoretical and experimental studies to
develop a better understanding of the structure of amorphous coatings to help
guide the search for improved coatings with lower thermal noise. This research
program will significantly enhance our ability to collect atomic structure data
at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL) in collaboration with
SSRL scientists, and will accelerate our ability to find coating materials with
lower thermal noise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent progress in determining lower
thermal noise coatings has been realized from the determination of the atomic
structure of amorphous oxide films through X-ray scattering methods at SSRL.
This data is used as experimental input to molecular dynamics modeling to study
the atomic structure, identify the mechanisms responsible for coating thermal
noise, and identify ways of reducing their effects. The proposed program
addresses the opportunity to develop, in conjunction with collaborators at the
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, an improved beamline at SSRL and with it
initiate high-throughput Grazing-Incidence X-ray Pair Distribution Function
(GIPDF) measurements to speed the rate at which we can recover structural
information on new coating materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.