* 2011729
* Numerical Relativity Simulations with the New Mesh Code
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Wolfgang Tichy, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 60,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
first direct detection of gravitational waves emitted from merging black holes,
by the NSF's LIGO detectors, was a historic breakthrough in gravitational
physics, and led to the Noble prize in physics in 2017. Equally stunning was the
detection of both gravitational waves and signal across the electromagnetic
spectrum from gamma rays to radio waves, from the inspiral and merger of two
neutron stars. With these and numerous subsequent similar detections a new
window to the universe has been opened. More detections from a variety of other
astrophysical sources are also anticipated. This project aims at making
predictions about compact objects such as black holes and neutron stars, by
running numerical simulations of the basic equations that govern such very dense
and exotic objects. For this purpose a new computer program called Nmesh is
being developed. Nmesh will be run on large scale supercomputers that nowadays
consist of millions of compute cores. Making full and efficient use of so many
cores involves various advanced programming techniques to run Nmesh in parallel.
While the primary and immediate scientific goal of this project is the
simulation of black holes and neutron stars, Nmesh can also be used to simulate
other types of equations. Once it is well tested, Nmesh will be made publicly
available. This will directly benefit other researchers in the area of numerical
relativity, but since Nmesh is quite general it should also benefit others that
need to solve different problems that are governed by different equations. Part
of the research will be carried out in close collaboration with the relativity
group at the University of Jena in Germany. Visits by faculty and students from
both institutions are planned. This exchange will have educational benefits for
students from both Florida Atlantic University (FAU) and the University of
Jena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project mainly focuses on binaries made up of
black holes or neutron stars. When the two objects get close, fully non-linear
numerical simulations of the Einstein equations are required to make predictions
about the final part of the inspiral and subsequent merger. The project is aimed
at gaining a detailed understanding of such compact-object binary inspirals and
mergers by performing numerical simulations. Using the Nmesh program it will
provide gravitational waveform catalogs, as well as information about ejecta
when matter is involved. To achieve high accuracy results it is thus planned to
further develop and upgrade Nmesh. This will enable the study of high mass ratio
black hole inspirals, as well as binary neutron star simulations with improved
accuracy. The results will also be used to improve and calibrate analytical
waveform models to predict gravitational waves without needing to perform
expensive numerical simulations. The upgrades to Nmesh will not only include
advanced parallelization methods, but will also include the development of
methods to treat shocks, within the framework of discontinuous Galerkin methods.
The latter method is still new in numerical relativity, and thus requires
special attention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.