* 2011669
* A Vision of Our Own: Developing a Red Lake Nation College Vision and Strategic Plan for Increased STEM Capacity and Student Success
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mandy Schram, Red Lake Nation College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,985.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, allowing the institution's faculty and
administrators to design and develop a comprehensive plan for improving and
expanding STEM instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Red Lake Nation College (RLNC)
serves the Red Lake Reservation in Minnesota. The project leaders will conduct
deliberate assessment and exploration of needs, capacity, interests, and
opportunities in the region in order to develop its own STEM vision, goals, and
a strategic plan. The project will entail 3 phases: Phase 1 will consist of
information gathering about RLNC, community, and regional employer capacity,
needs, and interests. Phase 2 will consist of exploring TCU STEM programming
success and possible collaborations with various institutions in the region and
around the country. Phase 3 will consist of compiling and analyzing the data
gathered in phases 1 and 2 and then developing an RLNC STEM vision, goals, and
strategic plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.