* 2011038
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Cornelia Fanter, Fanter, Cornelia E
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research explores the genetic basis of
mammalian hibernation. It is unclear if hibernating ability evolved separately
in multiple mammalian lineages, or if it was retained in hibernators while lost
to non-hibernating species. Because other mammals can enter short periods of
dormancy, hibernating activity may be rooted in genetic sequences passed down
from a common, ancestral mammal. To understand the origins of hibernation, this
research investigates genetic regions unique to mammals that undergo dormancy
and tests if these regions are linked to molecular responses observed in
hibernators. This research will potentially identify novel genes tied to energy
conservation and surviving dormancy, resulting in opportunities for future
investigative work. This action also supports scientific communication and
outreach within the Las Vegas Community. This research is being executed at
UNLV, a minority-serving institution that is rooted in local, scientific
advocacy and that regularly sponsors scientific talks attended by the public.
Furthermore, undergraduates from underrepresented groups will be incorporated
into this research and trained in multiple areas, including computer science,
molecular lab work, animal experiments, networking, and scientific writing and
presentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, to examine the hibernation phenotype
as an ancestral trait, this research will identify conserved genomic sequences
and test whether they reflect hibernating ability. An analysis of aligned
mammalian genomes will pinpoint conserved genomic regions unique to mammals that
hibernate and exhibit daily torpor. To determine phenotypic predictability,
these regions will be sequenced in species with known hibernation ability and
with unsequenced genomes. If the hibernation phenotype is indeed an elaborated,
basal trait, these sequences will remain conserved in species that hibernate or
undergo daily torpor but will be relaxed in homeothermic species. Secondly, to
differentiate between the cellular responses indicative hibernation and daily
torpor, the transcriptional and epigenetic responses will be profiled in a
facultative hibernator during induced hibernation and daily torpor. If these two
states share gene expression patterns, it is possible that they both reflect an
ancestral phenotype. Together, these approaches will investigate the evolution
of the hibernation phenotype by characterizing it at the genomic and molecular
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.