* 2011872
* RAPID: Public Support for Disaster Risk Reduction Policies in the Bahamas after Hurricane Dorian
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Richard Olson, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 39,228.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project creates new knowledge that is
crucial for developing more resilient communities. It improves understanding of
how experiencing a disaster affects people’s attitudes towards, and support for,
disaster risk and disaster risk reduction (DRR) policies, particularly building
standards and construction regulations. Project researchers collect and analyze
waves of public opinion data from the Bahamas, parts of which were devastated by
the Category 5 Hurricane Dorian in early September 2019. The project will
advance scientific understanding of post-disaster public opinion dynamics and
help support strategic efforts to strengthen policies and programs to reduce
human and economic losses from disasters. It will also serve U.S. humanitarian
and security interests, since losses from hazard events in the Caribbean region
affect U.S. foreign assistance, immigration flows and patterns, and, ultimately,
national security. Finally, this project will increase public engagement with
and appreciation of science and technology, as researchers will disseminate
public-facing reports on key findings about hazard event experiences, public
support for risk reduction, and “windows of opportunity” for achieving enhanced
building survivability and safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data for this
project will be collected over a 12 month period in multiple waves of telephone
surveys in the Bahamas, and then analyzed by researchers at Florida
International University’s Extreme Events Institute. Findings will reveal
whether and how “focusing events” like disasters cause event-driven shifts in
public awareness and opinion—a question for which existing research has offered
mixed or at best inconclusive results. Concretely, the project seeks to
understand a) whether—and how—disasters increase perceptions of risk and public
demand for risk reduction policies, and b) the extent and duration of any such
changes in public opinion (e.g., whether these changes in attitudes are long-
term or short-term, whether attitudes tend to return to baseline pre-event
levels or settle at a new equilibrium). The project will contribute to the
accumulation of knowledge not only in disaster research but also in public
policy and administration, the psychology of risk, and political
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.