* 2011069
* US-UK Collaboration: Integrating ecology, epidemiology, and human interests to guide strategic management of zoonoses in complex wildlife reservoirs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robin Russell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,695,154.00

Wild animals host a wide variety of pathogens that can spread to other animals
and humans. Such&lt;br/&gt;diseases, including Ebola and COVID-19, significantly
affect human health, agriculture and wildlife&lt;br/&gt;conservation.
Historically, disease control methods (e.g. vaccination, therapeutics) have
focused on&lt;br/&gt;humans or livestock rather than wild animal reservoirs.
Focusing on disease control in wildlife could&lt;br/&gt;be more effective in
preventing disease emergence in humans, but that approach is currently
limited&lt;br/&gt;by three factors. First, many diseases are maintained in
cycles that spread across landscapes, but&lt;br/&gt;wildlife diseases are
notoriously difficult to assess at these large spatial scales, making responses
to&lt;br/&gt;interventions unpredictable. Second, tools like vaccines have been
difficult to administer to sufficient&lt;br/&gt;numbers of animals to actually
reduce disease transmission in the wild. Third, interventions
are&lt;br/&gt;usually bounded by societal constraints, both financial (e.g.,
limited funds to invest) and sociological&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., conflicting
stakeholder interests). New technologies, including vaccines that can spread
among&lt;br/&gt;wildlife and miniaturized animal-borne tracking systems, have
unrealized potential to overcome these&lt;br/&gt;limitations. This project will
focus on reducing vampire bat transmitted rabies, which has
significant&lt;br/&gt;human health and agricultural impacts across Latin
America, but the methods developed for this study&lt;br/&gt;could be applied to
other important wildlife diseases. The project will strengthen
research&lt;br/&gt;capacity through training of students and early career
scientists in field, laboratory and quantitative
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct field and
laboratory research to test specific hypotheses about the&lt;br/&gt;epidemiology
and management of vampire bat-transmitted rabies. The researchers will: (1) Use
field&lt;br/&gt;experiments with animal-borne GPS tags and large-scale data on
bat presence from questionnaires&lt;br/&gt;and historical rabies outbreaks to
generate models that can be used to determine how human&lt;br/&gt;disturbance
influences bat abundance and dispersal; (2) Conduct studies using captive and
wild&lt;br/&gt;vampire bats to determine host and ecological factors that will
influence the use of self-spreading&lt;br/&gt;rabies vaccines that target bats;
and (3) Use parameters estimated from fieldwork and captive studies&lt;br/&gt;to
optimize strategies for localized control and regional elimination of vampire
bat rabies that preserve&lt;br/&gt;diverse stakeholder requirements, e.g.
wildlife conservation goals as well as improved human and&lt;br/&gt;livestock
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.