* 2011426
* I-Corps:  A Technology for Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductors (CMOS)-Integrated Vapor Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Ioannis Kymissis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
development and commercialization of a new highly sensitive technology for vapor
sensing. This technology offers several advantages, including low power draw and
high sensitivity, which allows for its integration in a range of persistent,
wireless, portable, and autonomous monitoring applications. These vapor sensors
are anticipated to have application to a wide range of fields including
agriculture, threat detection, health, indoor air quality, analysis of
pollutants, and industrial chemical safety. The developed technology is further
expected to impact a range of fields leading to significant improvements in the
quality of agricultural products, public health and safety, the efficiency of
indoor climate control, and a broad range of medical technologies.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a high sensitivity,
microfabricated mass sensor functionalized with advanced sensor materials to
create low-cost, low-power vapor sensing system. The proposed architecture
fabricates a high frequency bulk acoustic resonator directly on the back-end of
a Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductors (CMOS)-Integrated Chip (IC), which
further improves the noise characteristics of the sensor. The direct integration
approach proposed simplifies the architecture for bulk acoustic wave vapor
sensors, allows for less noise, and reduces the parasitics present in the
structure. The direct co-integration also allows for the fabrication of an array
of mass sensors that permits the creation of an electronic nose, in which the
response to multiple receptors can be used to classify vapor materials and
reduce the effect of nonspecific responses. The silicon IC also may compensate
for thermal drift, further improving the noise floor.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.