* 2011655
* WoU-MMA: Exploring the Universe with Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Duncan Brown, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 360,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Black
holes and neutron stars are nature's most compact objects and their collisions
are a transformative laboratory for fundamental physics and astrophysics. The
highly relativistic speeds and strong gravitational fields of black hole and
neutron star mergers generate gravitational waves that encode the properties of
the objects as they collide: how massive they are, how far away they are, and
how fast they are spinning. This project will use the information encoded in the
gravitational waves detected by the National Science Foundation's Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) to understand how massive
stars live and die, and to help understand the properties of dense matter and
the atomic nucleus. This project will drive the development of scientific
workflow tools and high-throughput computing that have broad impact across the
scientific community. Students will be trained in the tools of data analysis and
high-performance computing, which will enable them to become valuable members of
the 21st century workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
combine multi-messenger observations of compact objects with nuclear theory,
fundamental gravity, waveform modeling, and open data to help answer some of the
most pressing questions in the gravitational-wave astronomy, and to prepare for
the next generation of gravitational-wave observatories. This project will help
to elucidate the equation of state of matter at nuclear densities, and explore
whether exotic phases of matter, such as hyperons, kaons, and quark-gluon
plasmas reside in the inner cores of neutron stars. New searches for
gravitational-wave sources will determine if our understanding of the compact-
object mass and spin distributions is restricted by the limits of current
searches for gravitational-wave signals and, possibly, will discover new classes
of compact-object binary. This project will use gravitational waves to explore
the nature of gravity and constrain or confirm the existence of exotic compact
objects in the universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.