* 2011044
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,03/31/2021
* Matthew Bond, Bond                    Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 03/31/2021
* USD 0.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Human health depends on plants around the world, with many
people making their own medicines from plants and also acquiring up to 90% of
their required energy from plant-based foods. This project explores why people
use some plants for medicine and food rather than other plants. The Fellow will
collect measurements and DNA sequences from some of the 1.23 million dried plant
specimens at the California Botanic Garden collected over centuries by
scientists. The research will test whether plants that are easy to find, fast-
growing, or genetically related are more likely to be used as food and medicine
by Native American tribal groups. The research will also test whether Native
American tribal groups that are culturally related or nearby are likely to use
similar plants. Project results will reveal ways to protect plant diversity and
our knowledge about them; this includes the ability to identify plants that
contribute to nutrition or new medicines that remedy conditions such as heart
disease. The study will also incorporate educational outreach activities at the
host institution and use internships to involve undergraduates from
underrepresented minorities in the research objectives. The Fellow will collect
DNA sequence data and availability and growth rate traits from herbarium
specimens of all 5,258 California native plant species, and all 342 species in
the buckwheat subfamily Eriogonoideae. Plant trait and genetic data will be
combined with linguistic and geographic data from all 291 Native American tribal
groups across the United States and Canada to predict the distribution of 40,000
Native American medicinal and food uses across different plant taxa and tribal
groups. This interdisciplinary approach will provide the first tests of how
plant availability (across space and time), plant growth rate, plant genetics,
cultural evolution, and cultural proximity shape human knowledge of useful
plants. The Fellow will receive training in DNA sequence extraction,
phylogenetic reconstruction, cross-cultural analysis, and Bayesian analytical
techniques. This project will inform conservation of both biological and
cultural diversity; expand databases of plant traits, genetic sequences, and
Indigenous ecological knowledge; and promote diversity in STEM through
mentoring. This project also incorporates community outreach for middle and high
school students based on native plants, biological collections, and Native
American ecological knowledge.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.