* 2011778
* The 14th International Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics (WAFR'20) Student Travel Awards
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Dylan Shell, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 04/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The award will support student attendance of the three-day single-track
Fourteenth International Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics
(WAFR), along with mentoring activities associated with the event. The
conference will be held in Oulu, Finland, between June 15th and June 17th in
2020 at the Sokos Hotel Eden, two miles from the city center of Oulu and the
supporting local institution the University of Oulu. The funds will be used to
provide financial support to help approximately 15 U.S. students to attend the
WAFR 2020, helping to ensure good representation of students from U.S.
institutions at this leading research venue. Participation in the conference
will boost motivation and excitement for graduate students and advanced
undergraduate students as they continue their research journey into the
foundational aspects of robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this grant
for student travel to enable U.S. students, who otherwise might be unable to
attend the WAFR conference, to present their work and forge connections with
colleagues from around the world. In addition to paper presentations, the event
will feature 3â€“5 keynote presentations by influential and internationally
renowned roboticists. These presentations will provide succinct, first-hand
information on historical perspectives, current state-of-the-art, and future
trends of robotic planning, optimization and control, computational geometry and
algorithms. With a long-established history, in the past WAFR has been among the
best venues to focus on fundamental computer science topics and technical
questions which underpin robotics, being known as the place where several
foundational breakthroughs were presented in the past. In particular, themes
covered by WAFR submissions and presentations previously have addressed
fundamental algorithmic issues, such as complexity, completeness, machine
learning, and probabilistic reasoning. Work has also been presented with
applicability to manufacturing, legged locomotion, distributed robotics, human-
robot interaction, surgical robots, and intelligent prosthetics, and even
domains beyond the traditional scope of robotics, e.g., computational biology,
computer animation, sensor networks. These match NSF's robotics priorities very
closely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.