* 2011997
* From Single to Statistical:The Dawn of Gravitational-Wave Astrophysics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Daniel Holz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 69,995.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. In a
fraction of a second on September 14, 2015, the field of gravitational-wave
astrophysics was born with the detection by the LIGO instruments of two black
holes colliding over a billion lightyears away. Less than two years later, over
the span of 12 hours on August 17, 2017, the field of gravitational- wave multi-
messenger astronomy was born with the detection of both gravitational-waves and
light from the collision of two neutron stars. Over the next years many
additional collisions will be detected, and this project will explore what these
sources will teach us about physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. The project
focuses on learning about how the distribution of the masses of the detected
systems help us understand how the Universe makes black holes and neutron stars.
This relates to how the Universe makes stars, which in turn relates to how the
universe makes the elements which are crucial to life. In addition to exploring
these fascinating questions and publishing results to help move the field
forward, the group will also perform extensive education and outreach activities
related to gravitational-waves and black holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will analyze the source catalogs and determine underlying population
distributions. The PI will examine the mass distribution of the component
compact objects in the detected binaries. In particular, the PI will explore
both the putative lower mass gap (between the most massive neutron star and the
least massive black hole), as well as the upper mass gap (a dearth of black
holes of mass 50 solar masses ). Similarly, the PI will explore the spin and
mass ratio distributions of the population, as well as the redshift evolution of
all of these distributions. Characterizing these distributions, and their
evolution, will teach us about the formation and evolution of black holes and
neutron stars, as well as binaries that contain them. As our understanding of
the distributions improves, the ability to characterize outliers from these
underlying distributions also improves. The PI will further study this process,
both highlighting the nature of outliers, as well as developing population-based
parameter estimation. Furthermore, the PI will study associated astrophysical
constraints based on these distributions, including forward modeling of these
detections using population synthesis, and machine learning approaches to the
equation of state of neutron stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.