* 2011212
* Collaborative Research: FoMR: Enabling High Instructions-per-Cycle (IPC) Counts in Future Multi-NUMA (Non Uniform Memory Access) Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Steven Swanson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 140,000.00

Emerging memory technologies, such as three-dimensional die-stacked dynamic
random access memory (3D-DRAM) and non-volatile random-access memory (NVRAM),
introduce promising opportunities in achieving high performance for computer
processors. Computer servers with mixed memory technologies introduce a new
multi-dimensional non-uniform memory access (“multi-NUMA”) method, where the
computer memory hierarchy has widely varying performance and efficiency
characteristics depending on the type of memory and where it resides in the
system. Despite the promising benefits, multi-NUMA systems impose significant
architecture design challenges due to the level of heterogeneity they introduce.
The multi-dimensional heterogeneity, which ranges from access latency,
bandwidth, and access granularity to reliability and functionality, makes memory
hierarchy performance and access behavior difficult to predict and manipulate.
Addressing these issues can influence the architecture design for building
efficient multi-NUMA systems and also spawn new applications that can deal with
larger volumes of heterogeneous data than what is possible at
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve the performance of
future server systems that incorporate mixed memory technologies. To achieve the
objective, this project consists of three phases. The first phase seeks to
reinvestigate the basic performance models, assumptions, and metrics of memory
hierarchy architecture design, across memory system performance, reliability,
and scalability, by encompassing the multi-NUMA scenario. Guided by the multi-
NUMA-aware architecture design strategies, the second phase will focus on
reconsidering the design of memory hierarchy architecture components that are
critical to the application’s instructions-per-cycle (IPC) performance. Finally,
the third phase seeks to ensure scalable IPC performance in both multi-socket
and memory-fabric-based multi-NUMA systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.