* 2011518
* GLOBE Earth System Science Partner Collaborative Planning Workshop; Boulder, CO; Spring 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Anthony Murphy, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2023
* USD 99,549.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The University Corporation of Atmospheric Research (UCAR) GLOBE
Implementation Office (GIO) and the UCAR Center for Science Education propose to
host a two and a half-day conference and three follow-up web meetings to share
ideas, lessons learned and to create and implement a plan for developing and
sustaining statewide GLOBE Earth System Science (ESS) Partner Collaboratives in
each of the six GLOBE regions of the United States. The conference will provide
GLOBE Partners with an adaptive model to work collaboratively and leverage
existing resources to increase impact on STEM Earth System Science. The
conference will be facilitated by members of the Colorado ESS GLOBE
Collaborative, the US GLOBE Country Coordinator, GLOBE Regional Representatives
and GLOBE partner leaders chosen from one or more states in each GLOBE
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;The University Corporation of
Atmospheric Research (UCAR) GLOBE Implementation Office (GIO) and the UCAR
Center for Science Education propose a planning workshop that will use the
Collective Impact Framework to provide GLOBE Partners with an adaptive model to
work collaboratively and leverage existing resources to increase impact on STEM
Earth System Science with direct connections to the GLOBE Program strategic
plan. This proposed work directly aligns with the GLOBE Program Strategic Plan
Community Goal 2 CG2): “Increase interactions and collaborations among local,
regional and international GLOBE communities through events and activities.” In
the implementation plan, three of the related CG2 strategies that could be
addressed includes: 1)Community members encourage and enable each other to
support GLOBE activities and events. 2)Support GLOBE-community events: i.e.
short-term thematic data collection 3)Increase GLOBE community’s awareness of
collaboration opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.