* 2011582
* Controlling Nonclassical Atomic Spin Ensembles via Cavity-Enhanced Polarization Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ivan Deutsch, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 303,866.00

Quantum Information Science (QIS) is an emerging field that will fuel the next
digital information revolution. It is based on the revolutionary idea that when
information is manipulated at the microscopic level of atoms and photons the
strange laws of physics enable ultrafast computers, enhanced cyber security, and
ultraprecise sensors. Accelerating progress in QIS is the goal of the National
Quantum Initiative Act of 2018, to enhance the nationâ€™s security and economic
growth. This grant helps to achieve these goals by developing a new atom-photon
interface with potential applications in quantum computing, communications, and
sensing. It does so through basic research in theoretical atomic physics which
is essential for the development of next-generation information processing
technologies. The project involves the training of students who will create the
new quantum-smart workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to develop a new platform for an entangling atom-light interface that can be
used to create nonclassical states of atomic spin ensembles for applications in
metrology, quantum communication, quantum computation, and fundamental studies
of complex many-body dynamics. This platform is based on a ring-cavity geometry
that enables a strong birefringent dispersive interaction between atomic spins
encoded in magnetically insensitive clock states of cesium atoms and the
polarization of the light. Measurement of the light polarization at the cavity
output port induces quantum backaction of the collective atomic spin. The
project will explore both Gaussian (homodyne) measurements of the light to
induce Gaussian entangled states of atoms (spin squeezing), nonGaussian (photon
counting) measurements to induce nonGaussian atomic spin states (Dicke states),
as well as hybrid approaches analogous to photon addition on a squeezed vacuum
state. The group will develop new approaches to quantum state verification and
tomography based on detailed understanding of continuous measurement quantum
trajectories. Additionally, the group will develop a new approach to
measurement-based feedback to create complex dynamical maps of the collective
spins and enable studies of quantum chaos, the quantum-to-classical transition,
and quantum simulation of many-body physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.