* 2011481
* The influence of Comb Jellies (Mnemiopsis leidyi) on Harmful algal blooms, and Vibrio spp. in the Maryland Coastal Bays.
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Salina Parveen, Rosales, Detbra
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 02/28/2023
* USD 199,980.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for the Integrated Study of Coastal
Ecosystem Processes and Dynamics (CISCEP) at the University of Maryland Eastern
Shore. The goal of this research is to understand the relationship between comb
jelly, Harmful Algae Blooms (HAB), pathogenic bacteria, and environmental
factors in Maryland Coastal Bays. The recipient of this fellowship will
participate in American Association for the Advancement of Science workshops and
learn how to communicate this research to the public. The recipient will also
broaden their knowledge of predictive modeling by attending the Chesapeake
Community Research and Modeling Symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Maryland
Coastal Bays (MCBs) are one of the most diverse estuaries on the east coast
providing habitat for juvenile fish, osprey, and terrapins. Understanding the
relationship between M. leidyi, HABs, Vibrio spp. and environmental factors can
be useful for environmental managers. The proposed project will be analyzing the
effects of M. leidyi on Vibrio spp. and HABs abundance in the MCBs. This data
will be used to develop empirical predictive models on HABs and Vibrio spp.
abundance in the MCBs. Through the collaboration with the Maryland-Department of
Natural Resources, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the
CREST program at University of Maryland Eastern Shore, the proposed work will be
able to combine knowledge and data to further understand and predict the
relationship between HABs and Vibrio spp. The work will inform the public and
local government on the overall health of the Maryland Coastal Bays, regarding
HABs, pathogenic Vibrio spp. and can be used to design management
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.