* 2011231
* Travel Grant to Support Diversity and Inclusion in the ASME MEED Summit and IMECE Conference
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Ashley Huderson, American Society of Mechanical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 01/31/2022
* USD 49,500.00

Sustaining more women and underrepresented minorities in engineering is critical
to developing and maintaining a viable and innovative workforce that is prepared
and empowered to tackle humanityâ€™s most pressing needs. Inclusion of these
groups in every aspect of the career continuum is extremely important,
especially at conferences and meetings of professional societies. Since the
inception in 1968 and 1989, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (IMECE) and the
International Mechanical Engineering Education Leadership Summit (MEED),
respectively, have served as premier forums for information sharing, innovation
and professional growth in the Mechanical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering
Technology fields. However, the representation of women and department leaders
from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) who participate in
these conferences has been low, ranging between two and five percent. This
travel grant will be used to support the participation of mechanical engineering
and engineering technology department heads/chairs and administrative leaders
from HBCU institutions as well as those from historically underrepresented
groups, including women, in the ASME MEED Summit from April 15-18, 2020 and the
ASME IMECE from November 11-19, 2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASME's MEED Summit is
a strategy and management forum for mechanical engineering education leaders at
the department head/chair level and industry and government leaders committed to
shaping the future of mechanical engineering education, industry practice and
fostering public-private research and workforce development collaborations.
ASME's IMECE Conference is the largest interdisciplinary mechanical engineering
conference in the world and plays a significant role in stimulating innovation
from basic discovery to translational application. These convenings provide a
platform for domestic and international department heads and chairs to engage in
discussions of trends, best practices, and challenges that the field is facing
from a departmental level. Ensuring the participation of departmental leaders
from diverse institutional types as well as engaging those from groups
underrepresented in mechanical engineering is critical as ASME works to
establish the policies and educational practices that shape the field. The
cohort selected through this travel grant will contribute to building capacity
for the preparation, development, and sustainment of a diverse set of engineers,
as well as foster a pipeline of leadership talent within ASME and its
representation in ABET and other external entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.