* 2011030
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Roxanne Cruz-de Hoyos, Cruz-de Hoyos, Roxanne M
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Widespread
climate-induced tree mortality is occurring across the planet, greatly impacting
ecosystem function and climate feedbacks to the Earth system. Climate-change-
driven drought can cause tree death via water stress and decline in plant
defense against pathogen attacks. This research will investigate tree mortality
by linking plant ecophysiology, genetics, and remote sensing to forecast and
actively manage rampant tree die-off in the most widely distributed tree species
in North America, quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides). Modeling mortality in
this species is critical for land management and ecosystem services and can be
applied to many plant species. Aspen has significant cultural, spiritual, and
medicinal value to Native American communities that live within the speciesâ€™
range. This research will engage with Native communities directly impacted by
aspen mortality. The Fellow will create a culturally relevant and responsive
workshop teaching Native students about climate change impacts on aspen,
fostering a partnership that centers Native American student engagement and
Native community perspectives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There are likely genetic
differences in the vulnerability of aspen to mortality, a key difference being
ploidy level (chromosome copy number) variation among individuals. Triploids
appear to be at higher risk for mortality, though it is unclear if this is due
to physiological thresholds or because they typically occur in drier microsites.
This project asks: does ploidy level (P), environment (E) or the interaction
between ploidy and environment (PxE) determine response during drought? This
research will examine E, P, and PxE effects on mortality, and then test whether
these effects can be remotely sensed at scale. Carbon allocation traits and
hydraulic vulnerability will be measured in the greenhouse and field.
Multispectral imaging will be used to determine which ploidy-level dependent
traits can be remotely sensed in the greenhouse. Finally, measurements will be
upscaled using drones and satellite imagery. Remotely sensed data will enable
scaling this work to the ecosystem level using established plots where ground-
truthed genetic information is available. Native high school students will be
involved in the scientific process, empowering them into the academy and beyond.
The Fellow will pilot this program in one high school in the first year of this
research, and then to multiple high schools in following
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.