* 2011973
* Testing the Symmetrization Principle with a Pair of Trapped Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hartmut Haeffner, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 394,052.00

Quantum physics introduces the notion that two or more objects, such as
electrons or protons, can be indistinguishable, i.e. they have no properties
which would allow one to tell them apart. While the mathematical consequences of
this idea form the basis of the stability of all matter we know of, such as
nuclei and atoms, it is very difficult to directly verify that two objects are
truly ndistinguishable. For this, one must create a situation where two (or
more) indistinguishable objects exist at each location at the same time. Such a
scenario occurs in molecules, causing the molecule to not absorb and emit light
of a certain color. This project will bring this effect from the atomic scale to
a more human length scale (comparable to the diameter of human hair) by
controllably exchanging the position of multiple Calcium ions spaced 10
micrometers apart. The demonstration of this important quantum effect under very
controlled conditions over relatively large length scales will not only test the
principles of quantum mechanics in a new parameter regime, but also bring
quantum physics to scales accessible to human senses, thereby inspiring students
as well as the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to demonstrate interference between two quantum particles with individual
single-particle wavefunctions that never overlap. For this, two Calcium-40 ions
will be prepared in a quickly rotating quantum state. A laser pulse will impart
angular momentum to the ion string, thereby splitting it into two wavepackets.
After the two wavepackets have rotated with respect to each other by 180
degrees, they will be combined again with a second light pulse. This procedure
interferes one ion with the other and vice versa. It has not been previously
demonstrated that ions can interfere with each other. This project aims at
showing that ions can be made indistinguishable, even if they are always
separated by several micrometers. This unusual situation leads to a vanishing
overlap between the two single-particle wavefunctions, allowing the researchers
to conduct a controlled test of the exchange principle by directly measuring the
phase under particle exchange. Thus it becomes feasible to verify that the
fermionic Calcium-40 ions acquire a phase factor of -1 under particle exchange.
Finally, the project will study under which circumstances the two ions remain
indistinguishable, thereby shedding light on the types of processes which
actually can distinguish between identical particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.