* 2011998
* Homeostatic control of hippocampal synaptic transmission
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Annalisa Scimemi, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,090,000.00

In the hippocampus, a brain region involved in learning, memory, and spatial
navigation, the ability of synaptic connections between neurons to undergo
changes in strength shows circadian rhythmicity. This property of hippocampal
synaptic plasticity suggests that the ability to form new memories similarly is
regulated dynamically over the course of the day. The daily changes in
hippocampal function correlate with cycling levels of hormones, such as
melatonin and corticosteroids. This project examines how these hormones
contribute to the circadian functionality of neurons, astrocytes, which
constitute an important non-neuronal cell type in brain, and excitatory
transmission at different sets of hippocampal synapses. Understanding these
cellular and molecular mechanisms is crucial for understanding why and how
memory formation is modulated across the course of the day. In addition to
advancing knowledge of fundamental aspect of hippocampal function, this project
provides inter-disciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate students,
especially students from under-represented minorities. The project also includes
public engagement as a core activity and allows for the traineesâ€™ families and
friends to learn about the research environment, thereby making a tangible
impact on the lives of many first-generation college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous studies have identified the molecular
underpinnings of different forms of neuronal plasticity, but much less is known
about the plasticity of distinct types of glial cells that closely interact with
neurons: astrocytes. Astrocytes undergo profound morphological changes in the
hypothalamus during lactation, and a growing body of evidence indicates that
astrocyte remodeling is much more common than previously thought. Their close
proximity to synapses and abundant expression of neurotransmitter transporters
allow astrocytes to powerfully control synaptic transmission and plasticity.
Yet, there currently is limited knowledge of how these cells modulate excitatory
synaptic transmission in the hippocampus, and how their modulation varies across
the course of the day. The overall objectives of this project are to: (i)
identify the molecular trigger(s) of neuron and astrocyte remodeling; and (ii)
determine how these forms of remodeling shape synaptic transmission at different
sets of synapses. The central hypothesis is that astrocyte remodeling changes
the weight of proximal versus distal excitatory inputs in CA1 pyramidal cells.
Identification of the molecular mechanisms that underlie circadian regulation of
synaptic transmission and plasticity in the hippocampus and, in particular, the
role that astrocytic cells play therein, will advance understanding of the
complex mechanisms through which brain activity is modulated by non-neuronal
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.