* 2011066
* I-Corps:  Utilization of Moving Target Defenses in Software Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Deanna Meador, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is focused on exploring translation
of proactive defense-in-depth technologies focused on leveraging moving target
defense techniques. The global cybersecurity market is currently valued at $124
Billion with an estimated 8.7% CAGR over the next 5 years. Since most solutions
focus on monitoring and reacting to attacks, an opportunity exists to explore a
proactive approach. Identical software implementations for every system suggest
that an attacker identifying critical vulnerabilities in one program can exploit
this knowledge for every device running that program. This is the fundamental
basis behind the execution of computer viruses, and the primary reason how
cyber-espionage software, such as STUXNET and Pegasus, have been able to
infiltrate and pivot within sensitive systems. The increased use of IoT devices
in safety-critical applications creates risks beyond exfiltrating sensitive
data, such as patient records and credit card information, to larger scale
cyber-terrorist activities conducted remotely and inexpensively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project advances the development of new
cybersecurity systems. The key avenue for exploiting safety-critical software is
often stack-based exploits, most notably buffer overflows, which are directly
responsible for over 60% of IoT device attacks. The key step for any stack-based
cyber-attack to be successful is reconnaissance. The use of moving target
defense to diversify the internal structure of applications is proposed,
ensuring that every program will have a unique identity. Specifically, this
project proposes mitigating stack-based vulnerabilities by utilizing stack
segmentation, address space randomization, data encryption, function shuffling,
dummy code insertion, stack canaries, and variable
obfuscation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.