* 2011715
* CRCNS US-French Research Proposal: Advanced Spatiotemporal Statistical Models for Quantification and Estimation of Functional Connectivity: Q-FunC
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,07/31/2021
* Alexander Petersen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 388,943.00

Studies of functional neuroimaging data have provided compelling evidence that
brains function as highly organized networks. This has prompted the need for
computational and statistical tools to reliably construct networks from imaging
data, and subsequently to discover patterns and differences between individuals
or groups, for instance between cognitively normal subjects and others
exhibiting particular pathologies. The common approach to defining these
networks is to compute temporal correlations between signals measured at
distinct locations (voxels) in the brain, with stronger correlations
corresponding to network connections. Due to temporal trends and noise from
physiological and other sources that can contaminate the measured signals, the
seemingly simple task of quantifying functional connectivity between brain
regions in fact requires careful statistical modeling and efficient
computational tools in order to draw reliable inferences related to brain
networks. The primary aim of this project is to develop flexible statistical
models of fMRI data that build on conventional correlation-based network
construction to provide a more robust and complete picture of connectivity in
the brain. The project will develop a graphical user interface for computing and
visualizing connectivity properties. And the project will provide trainees with
extensive international collaborative experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project consists of three parts. In part 1, fMRI signals are modeled as a
spatio-temporal process, where voxels within the same brain region share a
common stochastic structure. In contrast to conventional methods, the model does
not assume stationarity of the process over time or perform a preliminary
averaging of signals from voxels in the same region. The removal of the
stationarity assumption adds robustness to the method since such a property is
unlikely to hold in experimental conditions. Methods from functional data
analysis allow for estimation using all voxel-wise data. In part 2, a novel
definition of functional connectivity is given that is parameter- and model-
free. For any two brain regions, the distribution of temporal correlations
across all pairs of voxels within these regions constitutes their connectivity
profile, and is termed the correlation density. Methods for analyzing
distributional data, including exploratory, clustering, and regression analyses,
can be used to extract information from this rich representation. Additionally,
network analyses can still be performed as in conventional studies by evaluating
specific quantiles of the correlation density, such as the median. In part 3 of
the project, validation of network construction through reliability and
classification scores will be carried out on real data sets. These will include
established data banks such as the Human Connectome Project, data gathered from
small animals that have been anesthetized, and lesioned brains of individuals
with consciousness disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being
funded by the French National Research Agency (ANR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.