* 2011927
* Targeted Infusion Project: Workforce Development in Cyber-Physical Systems and Machine Learning
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Wagdy Mahmoud, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2024
* USD 374,126.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. University of the District of Columbia
(UDC) aspires to strengthen and enhance undergraduate STEM education at the
university by providing new learning experiences in Cyber-Physical Systems and
Machine Learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integral to the projectâ€™s goal are its
three objectives. The first objective is to complete the development of three
new courses designed to enrich the knowledge base of undergraduate students
majoring in Computer Engineering. The second objective is the recruitment of
prospective students (with special emphasis on students who are typically
underrepresented in STEM fields) from area community colleges to pursue the
Bachelor of Science degree in computer science at UDC. The described outreach
program seeks to prepare, and guide recruited students for careers in STEM in
general, and cyber-physical systems and machine learning, more specifically. The
third objective is to expose DC area high school students, UDC undergraduates,
and UDC faculty to current trends in Cyber-Physical Systems research and machine
learning. The Cyber-Physical Systems Summer Outreach Program will expose, train,
and mentor the DC area high school students to pursue the BS in Computer
Engineering. Ultimately, the project will engage undergraduate students from the
university and surrounding community colleges, university faculty, and area high
school students in these innovative fields so that they are prepared to
contribute to (1) national (and international) conversations and/or innovation
in large-scale cyber-physical systems and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.