* 2011757
* Collaborative Proposal: WoU-MMA: Observations of Gravitational Wave Sources Using the Long Wavelength Array
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* John Simonetti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 242,273.00

The recent world-wide astronomy observing campaign of the merger of two neutron
stars using light, or electromagnetic (EM) radiation, along with gravitational
waves (GW), an event called GW 170817, threw wide open the multi-messenger
window on the universe, producing large advances in knowledge about many fields
of physics and astronomy. But at least one aspect of such a merger is yet to be
explored by observations: the interaction of the magnetospheres, or regions of
space affected by magnetic fields, of the two neutron stars (NS),
contemporaneous with, or just prior to the release of the most intense
gravitational waves and the merger. Various theoretical models suggest that a
bright, prompt, low-frequency radio pulse could be emitted at that time. A
research collaboration between Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University (Virginia Tech; VT) and the State University of New York College at
Old Westbury will conduct a triggered search for fast radio transients
coincident with GW signals from binary NS mergers detected by the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) and Virgo collaboration.
The first station of the Long Wavelength Array (LWA1) radio telescope will be
used in this work. A graduate student at Virginia Tech and undergraduate
students at both institutions will be involved in this research. At SUNY Old
Westbury, where the student body predominantly consists of members of groups
underrepresented in astronomy, a particular effort will be made to involve
students from these groups in the research program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observing a prompt radio pulse in near-coincidence with a
GW event (or setting limits on its brightness) could pin down details of the
environmental physics of the merger which can play a role in understanding the
subsequent accretion, relativistic jet, gamma-ray burst, and succeeding
electromagnetic emission. LIGO will start the O4 science run in 2021, during the
project period. The latency for GW notification will be low enough (3 minutes)
to enable LWA1â€™s automatic response system to begin timely observations. The
research team has extensive experience with dispersed single-pulse detection,
using LWA1. So they are well-positioned to observe any prompt low-frequency
pulse. The researchers will communicate their observations and analysis of any
prompt pulse (or upper limit) as quickly as possible through the LIGO-Virgo
OpenLVEM Forum, probably within about a day of an event. This project advances
the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.