* 2011335
* RUI: Using Atomic Physics to Achieve Strong Electron Coupling in Ultracold Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Duncan Tate, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 197,385.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plasma state is ubiquitous
in the universe - it is estimated that 99% of the atomic matter in the universe
is in the plasma state. Ultracold neutral plasmas (UNPs) are plasmas in which
the initial electron and ion temperatures are significantly lower than any other
known systems yet have densities high enough for their electrostatic interaction
energies to be comparable with their kinetic energies (the so-called “strongly
coupled” regime). In this regime, states of matter with long range structure,
similar to crystallization, may occur. UNPs also have many similarities with
plasmas formed when intense lasers are focused into solids, for instance in
laser-induced fusion. The PI will carry out experiments on UNPs in his lab at
Colby College with the assistance of undergraduate students, and simultaneously
pursue numerical simulations. In the experiments, laser-cooled rubidium atoms in
a magneto-optical trap (MOT) will be photoionized using pulsed lasers, and the
plasma evolution will be observed by detecting the electrons and ions using
time-of-flight techniques. In addition to new knowledge gained from the
experiments, there is a significant undergraduate research training component to
this project. Furthermore, the PI has a strong record of incorporating
instrumentation from his research program in the physics teaching curriculum.
This project is jointly funded by the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical
Experimental Physics program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), and the Plasma Physics
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been significant recent success in
experiments that have revealed the evolution of ion temperature and coupling
strength using optical probes in ultracold neutral plasmas (UNPs) made using
cold alkaline earth atoms. Additionally, lasers have been used to cool the ions
in such plasmas, dramatically increasing the ionic coupling parameter. In
contrast, electrons have several additional heating mechanisms to ions,
primarily due to heating when electrons recombine with ions, that limit the
minimum temperature (and maximum coupling strength) that can be achieved. The PI
and his undergraduate students will use embedded Rydberg atoms to see if cooling
mechanisms already identified in his lab can be tailored to overcome these
heating mechanisms, and push the electron coupling parameter as high as 0.5. A
second goal of the research will be to explore robust methods for measuring
electron temperatures in UNPs. Specifically, spatial and temporal mapping of
plasma electric fields will be carried out using mm-wave spectroscopy of
embedded Rydberg atom sensors, and this method will be compared with direct
spatial measurements of the plasma expansion by quenching the UNP with a fast
electric field pulse and observing the resulting ion time-of-flight
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.