* 2011859
* iPAGE 2.0: Understanding and Supporting Transformative Change Toward Equity in the ISE Sector
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* E. Liesl Chatman, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,969,669.00

The informal science education (ISE) sector has an important role to play in
addressing current societal issues, including changes in environmental
conditions, systemic poverty, and societal responses to natural and manmade
disasters. These complex social problems require engaging all sectors of society
in deep discussions around science, engineering, technology, and mathematics
(STEM) and inclusion, diversity, equity, and access (IDEA). To do this, ISE
professionals need training in how to bring in diverse perspectives, support
inclusive learning, and provide equal access to institutional policymaking,
practices and systems. People from different backgrounds within informal science
institutions (ISIs) and local communities bring new perspectives, identify new
needs, and foster innovation. This broadening of perspectives is critical to
address the complex social problems of the 21st century. A key part of the
needed transformations in informal science institutions is the preparation of
change agents within the ISE sector capable of reimagining what just and
equitable informal science institutions might look like. iPAGE 2.0 is an NSF
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) Innovations in Development project
conducted by the Science Museum of Minnesota and the Garibay Group in concert
with 27 ISIs from across the US. The overarching goal of the project is to
support transformative change toward IDEA in the ISE sector. The project is
based on an extension service model of knowledge diffusion which seeks to bridge
the knowledge-to-action gap by creating intermediaries that can translate
research into practical innovations that can be used by practitioners in ISIs.
The project brings together teams of strategically placed individuals within
ISIs and prepares them to work with their colleagues to enact research-based
practices and practical organizational changes toward greater equity and
diversity. This project is funded by the AISL program, which seeks to advance
new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ISE professional development initiative
will work with annual first-year cohorts consisting of leadership teams from 4-6
ISIs. Each new cohort will spend 11 days together in a 5-day institute and three
2-day colloquia either virtually or at the Science Museum of Minnesota.
Individuals and teams will adapt, implement, and refine ideas, strategies, and
tools from the iPAGE 2.0 framework for use within their specific ISI context and
broader professional networks and engage in ongoing communication and
consultation with the iPAGE 2.0 community. All individuals on the team will
develop skills, such as communication and collaboration expertise, to function
as change agents acting to transform their organizations with respect to
inclusion, diversity, equity, and access (IDEA) in STEM. Participants from
previous cohorts will continue their roles as change agents and enhance learning
in the iPAGE 2.0 community by sharing what they have learned at iPAGE 2.0
colloquia. The iPAGE 2.0 framework focuses on developing participants’
understanding of 1) how structural inequalities function to reproduce social
advantage and disadvantage within ISIs and the ISE sector; 2) the barriers,
supports, and transmission vectors that contribute to or inhibit a continued
shift in the sector toward IDEA within a network of practitioners,
organizations, evaluators and researchers; and 3) how to prepare and support
diversity change agents within the network. The project will employ a creative
evaluation approach that combines developmental, principles-focused, arts-based,
and transformative evaluation and an interactive, mixed-methods research study
grounded in culturally responsive methodologies to address central questions
concerning individual, organizational, and sector change. The project’s primary
audience is ISE professionals, and the secondary audience is researchers and
evaluators working within the ISE sector. The project will work directly with an
estimated 122 individuals from 27 ISIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.