* 2011316
* SBIR Phase I:  A Modular and Reconfigurable Liquid-handling Toolkit for Laboratory Research
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,03/31/2021
* Luri Middleton, AQUEDUCT FLUIDICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2021
* USD 249,996.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a benchtop liquid-handling toolkit to increase
research productivity in physical- and life-science laboratories. Movable
research equipment expenditures in university science and engineering projects
were $2.1 billion in 2016 alone and are anticipated to grow.The proposed toolkit
will increase the output and effectiveness of researchers across many
disciplines in science where significant time and personnel resources are
devoted to highly repetitive protocols. With the proposed technology, a
researcher without experience in robotics and programming may select devices
from the toolkit, create a custom configuration, and then execute specialized
protocols through an icon-based user interface. Digitized protocols can be re-
run or shared to verify results and disseminate process parameters, thereby
facilitating collaboration and enhancing repeatability among labs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the development
of a modular and reconfigurable liquid-handling toolkit. The toolkit consists of
discrete devices including valves and pumps, a central hub synchronizing device
actions and storing recorded data, and an intuitive user interface. The research
objectives include: 1) the development and validation of the devices integral to
the toolkit; (2) the testing and integration of the devices, hub, and user
interface; and (3) conducting usability tests across multiple scientific
disciplines. To meet these objectives, mechanical design of the devices must be
completed, the devices must be assembled, a system-wide communication protocol
must be developed and validated, and a user interface and web application must
be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.