* 2011363
* Quantum Input-Output Modeling in the Ultra-Fast Domain: Theoretical Foundations and Experimental Validation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Hideo Mabuchi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 814,161.00

The primary aims of this project are to develop new theory and new laboratory
tools for analyzing the quantum-mechanical properties of ultrafast (very short)
pulses of light. The project will push beyond familiar conditions, which is
largely limited to long timescales and slowly-varying patterns of light (optical
modes). The advances made will support future quantum engineering efforts to
utilize ultrafast light pulses for computing, communication, and sensing. In the
context of quantum technology, ultrafast quantum light may be expected to
provide advantages over slowly-varying light by increasing the speed of
computation, the rate at which information can be transmitted through a
communication channel, or the bandwidth (response speed) of a sensor. The major
themes of the project are the exploration of practical approaches to generating
ultrafast light pulses with manifestly quantum properties (distinguished from
conventional light pulses, for example, by exhibiting extremely low noise), the
improvement of methods for analyzing quantum entanglement among ultrafast light
pulses, and the development of a new class of laser-like optical devices called
ultrafast optical parametric oscillators, which are of great interest to a broad
spectrum of engineering research for potential use in future quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically speaking, the theoretical
component of this project is structured around concrete studies of new device
concepts for nanophotonic devices and circuits to generate and manipulate few-
photon states of ultrafast optical pulses with non-Gaussian quantum states. The
work will address fundamental issues in the modeling of quantum nonlinearities
in nanophotonic devices with ultrafast pump and signal fields, motivated by
applications such as the synthesis of cubic phase gates (for quantum computing)
and realizing ultrafast optical parametric oscillators with pump thresholds in
the few-photon regime. The latter devices are expected to require significant
advances in efficiently modeling the quantum dynamics of optical systems with
many (tens of thousands) of relevant optical modes. The experimental component
of this project aims at the development and validation of measurement methods
for characterizing time-domain entanglement among signal pulses in
synchronously-pumped optical parametric oscillators, which is expected to
develop strong connections with concepts from condensed matter physics (such as
tensor network states). The experimental component will also include further
work on a prototype synchronously-pumped optical parametric oscillator in which
coherent feedback is utilized to establish programmable structures of
entanglement across the output pulse train.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.