* 2011793
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing Learning Initiatives for Improving the Programming Proficiency of Computer Science Majors at Morgan State University (A Multi-Year Initiative)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Edward Dillon, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,636.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Morgan State University
intends to enhance its computer science curriculum to effect improved student
performance in programming. The project focuses its attention on two “key”
computer courses as they serve as ‘gatekeeper’ courses and/or targeted
programming courses. With a student population that is 84.5% from groups who are
typically underrepresented in STEM fields, the project is poised to prepare
larger numbers of computer scientists from those groups, who will be more
competitive in the computer science industry. Successful execution of the
project also promises to impact analogous programs at peer
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: 1) infuse
two distinct learning initiatives, programming-based problem-solving strategies
and a programming tool usage workflow, into two CS programming courses at Morgan
State University and evaluate the ability for CS majors, enrolled in these
courses, to become proficient programmers based on these employed initiatives,
and 2) conduct a 3-year longitudinal survey that captures information about the
matriculation, confidence levels, developed skill-sets, and future/career
aspirations of all CS majors at Morgan State University. To examine the impact
of both initiatives, measures for evaluating psycho-social attributes,
programming comprehension, programming task efficiency, and tool usability will
be employed. Likewise, relative factors such as retention, GPA, and graduation
rates will be evaluated. The potential contributions of this project are to 1)
evaluate the effectiveness of both learning initiatives on student learning, and
2) show evidence that these practices can aid in the Computer Science majors’
ability to become proficient programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.