* 2011384
* Normal Modes, Multiplicities, and Superfluidity: The Role of the Pauli Principle in Organizational Collective Phenomena
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Deborah Watson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 120,000.00

The Pauli principle, a fundamental tenet of quantum mechanics, states that
identical fermions cannot occupy the same quantum state simultaneously. The
proof of this simple statement, which has profound implications for the
stability of our universe, has remained elusive despite overwhelming
experimental evidence supporting it. The Pauli principle underlies the stability
of both microscopic and macroscopic matter, controlling phenomena at all length
and temperature scales from ultracold Fermi gases to hot neutron stars. In this
research, the PI proposes to study the role of the Pauli principle in the
creation and stabilization of collective behavior such as superfluidity. Earlier
work has suggested that the Pauli principle plays a larger role than expected in
the emergence of collective behavior. Understanding such organized behavior is
important because it could be used to develop engineered quantum systems for
quantum information processing, quantum-enhanced sensors and high temperature
superconductors that could revolutionize electrical engineering applications.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project describes a plan to investigate the forces
in play during the dynamic transition from complex microscopic motion to simple,
collective behavior such as seen in superfluid materials. In particular, the PI
plans to study the role of the Pauli principle in the creation and stabilization
of organized behavior. Experimentalists have produced controlled systems of
ultracold fermions in the laboratory that exhibit universal collective
properties. The goal of this project is to study these systems theoretically as
collective behavior emerges, to elucidate the driving forces behind this
emergence and to propose new ways to produce and control collective behavior in
the laboratory. Using a many-body perturbation method that uses group theoretic
techniques to obtain analytic normal mode solutions at first order, the PI plans
to study the evolution of the character of these normal modes and monitor
recently measured properties including excitation frequencies and thermodynamic
quantities as system parameters approach the unitary regime which is known to
support collective behavior. This work could facilitate our ability to produce
and control these systems and enhance their use in
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.