* 2011615
* Robust Least Squares Discretization for Mixed Variational Formulations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Constantin Bacuta, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 214,994.00

This project aims to enable more reliable, fast, and accurate simulation methods
for a variety of applications in science and engineering, such as
electromagnetism, elasticity and acoustics, fluid flow, and diffusion through
heterogenous porous media. The project focuses on efficient computational
methods based on finite element analysis. Specific applications include modeling
compressible gas dynamics and computational fluid mechanics for atmospheric
prediction and ocean fluid flow behavior, as well as computational solution of
the time-harmonic Maxwell model with applications in nano-optics and analog
signal packages. This project will provide interdisciplinary applied mathematics
training and research experiences for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop, analyze, and implement robust and efficient numerical algorithms
for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) that admit variational
formulations with different types of test and trial spaces. When approximating
the solutions of these PDEs, it is desirable to obtain robust estimates of all
physical quantities in the presence of parameters, such as diffusion coefficient
or frequency. It is also important to obtain good approximations of the
solution, even in the case of low regularity near boundaries or along material
discontinuities, or in the case of low data regularity. The focus of the project
is on approximating PDE models with parameters and discontinuous coefficients.
The project develops a general discretization and algorithm development method
that bridges between the field of symmetric saddle point problems and the field
of preconditioning elliptic symmetric problems. The project aims to: introduce a
new saddle point least-squares theory that allows non-conforming trial spaces to
approximate discontinuous solutions of PDEs; construct locally smooth projection
type of trial spaces that lead to higher order of approximation for the solution
or related quantities of interest; introduce optimal test spaces and balanced
norms that allow robust approximation for parametric problems; and construct
efficient preconditioning techniques for general mixed variational formulations.
The research will broaden the mathematical theory and the range of applications
of the mixed finite-element approximation field and will create new connections
among mixed variational formulations, adaptive and multilevel techniques, and
preconditioning parametric or fractional norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.