* 2011759
* The Multi-Mission Maximum Likelihood Framework (3ML): a Tool to Explore the High-Energy Universe in the Era of Multi Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicola Omodei, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 335,201.00

Astrophysical sources are now observed by many instruments at wavelengths from
radio to high-energy gamma-rays, and using different messengers, including
light, light polarization, neutrinos, cosmic rays, and gravitational waves.
Extracting insight from these data is currently very difficult because each
instrument has its own data format, software, and analysis procedure, each
requiring specialized knowledge and training. The Multi-Mission Maximum
Likelihood framework (3ML) solves this issue, allowing easy modeling using all
available data, independent of origin. Each instrument provides an interface
from their data to 3ML, while 3ML optimizes model parameters to match all of the
data as well as possible. This award supports the continued development of 3ML,
focusing in particular on enabling new science for the High-Altitude Water
Cerenkov telescope (HAWC) through the HAWC Accelerated Likelihood (HAL), a new
3ML component. The project includes tutorials to promote the use of 3ML for
multi-wavelength study, targeting undergraduate and graduate students and
exposing them to competitive research projects and fundamental questions in
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work on 3ML and HAL is necessary to
enable progress on several key scientific questions, such as: 1) cosmic ray
acceleration, and in particular the open question of the source of ultra-high-
energy Cosmic Rays; 2) dark matter annihilation cross sections through the
modeling of the gamma-ray sky; 3) the origin of astrophysical neutrinos; 4)
high-energy counterparts to gravitational wave signals and gamma-ray bursts; and
5) the extra-Galactic background light, by a stacking analysis of the spectra of
many sources simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.