* 2011625
* Partial Support of the Board on Physics and Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2023
* USD 171,385.00

This award provides partial core support to the Board on Physics and Astronomy
(BPA). The physics and astronomy communities cover a broad and diverse set of
research efforts. As a part of the National Academies, the BPA monitors
developments and assesses the health of the fields that make up this area of
research. Its membership is drawn from universities, industry, and national
laboratories, and its members' areas of expertise span much of the breadth of
physics and astronomy. The experts involved are broadly representative of the
community, and they provide their informed perspectives on issues that affect
the progress and vitality of physics and astronomy research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal work to be supported by this award will be
to support the board's semi-annual meetings as well as non-sponsored activities
associated with the board's carrying out its responsibilities to support the
physics and astronomy research communities. Another action will be the work on
the next round of physics and astronomy/astrophysics decadal surveys. This award
is co-funded by the Divisions of Physics, Astronomical Sciences, and Materials
Research, within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.