* 2011849
* Catalyst Award: Revamping the Delivery Method and Environment for Organic Chemistry Courses at Hampton University Through the SCALE-UP Active Learning Method
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Vincent de Paul Nzuwah Nziko, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,834.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution.
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Hampton University will use active learning and peer led learning to increase
success rates in the Organic Chemistry sequence. Increased success rates in
Organic Chemistry is expected to increase the number of students earning STEM
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic Chemistry classes CHE 301 and CHE 302
(General Organic Chemistry) at Hampton University are entry-level Chemistry
courses which influence every STEM student at Hampton. Students’ performance in
Organic chemistry is unsatisfactory with low passing rates. This low performance
is in part due to the teaching methodology which is heavily based on traditional
methods and settings involving amphitheater classrooms that permit little
interaction amongst the students and between the students and the instructor. An
active learning approach is hereby suggested as a remedy to this situation. The
goal of this project is to: amend the teaching method and educational
involvement in Organic Chemistry by consolidating, adapting and implementing
technology and Student-Centered Active Learning Environment with Upside-down
Pedagogies (SCALE-UP) method; improve students commitment and learning through
peer to peer and student to instructor discussion. Base on the success of this
approach in other institutions, it is expected that the SCALE-UP method will
boost students’ performance in organic chemistry, cutdown failure rates, improve
students’ understanding of basic chemical principles which will lead to an
increase in the retention rate of chemistry and STEM majors as a whole. This
project will serve as a pilot for future implementation in other Chemistry and
STEM courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.