* 2011975
* RUI: Expanding our View of the Gravitational-Wave Sky with Machine Learning and Numerical Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Marissa Walker, Christopher Newport University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2023
* USD 149,915.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. A
century after Einstein predicted the existence of gravitational waves, the two
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) detectors opened a
new window on the universe by discovering gravitational waves passing through
Earth, emanating from cataclysmic, distant events: colliding black holes and
neutron stars. The phenomenal precision that LIGO needs to clearly observe these
faint waves requires exquisitely isolated detectors. Capturing the physics of
colliding black holes and neutron stars requires accurate waveform models. This
award will establish a new research group at Christopher Newport University
(CNU) to address both of these challenges, through characterizing LIGO detectors
to better understand the origins of problematic noise in the detectors, and by
improving the waveform models used to interpret the astrophysics of observed
signals. Through these projects, the CNU group will play a crucial role in
improving the quality of the LIGO detector data and the accuracy of the
parameter estimation information that is shared with the astronomical community
and the public. The students supported by this award will be trained in computer
programming, data analysis, and machine learning. These important transferable
skills will prepare the students for a wide range of successful and meaningful
STEM careers in academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;LIGOâ€™s sensitivity
to gravitational waves is limited by non-stationary noise, which fluctuates over
time depending on various environmental influences. This work will extend a
method developed by the PI with collaborators to correlate these variations in
sensitivity with auxiliary instrumental sensors to determine the most possible
causes, using lasso linear regression. This method has already been useful for
identifying noise sources that change over the course of hours, but this work
will target problematic persistent noise transients, which impede gravitational
wave searches and have rates varying over the course of days and weeks. The PI
and students will also contribute to data quality validation of gravitational
wave candidate events, to ensure that the broader astronomical community has
access to necessary data quality information. The expected improvements to LIGO
in the coming years will enable the observation of many more black holes,
doubtless some with interestingly different properties and some potentially
having much higher signal-to-noise ratios. Accurately extracting the
astrophysical parameters of these signals requires comparing to template
waveforms that span the potential discovery space. The PI and her students will
work on surrogate modeling (a way to efficiently interpolate between expensive
but accurate numerical relativity waveforms), working with members of the
Simulating eXtreme Spacetimes collaboration. This work will enhance our ability
to interpret black hole observations, especially those with large
spins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.