* 2011077
* 2020 Climate Engineering GRC and GRS: Newry, ME - Summer 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Douglas MacMartin, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

This grant is for support of the 2020 Gordon Research Conference and Gordon
Research Seminar in Climate Engineering, to be held from June 27 to July 3, 2020
at Sunday River in Newry, ME. The funds will partially cover registration and
travel costs for US-based invited speakers and discussion leaders, and for
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and other early career investigators.
Climate Engineering (CE), also known as Solar Geoengineering, involves
reflecting some sunlight back to space in order to cool the climate, with the
intent of reducing the impacts of climate change. Potential approaches include
stratospheric aerosol interventions (SAI), marine cloud brightening (MCB), and
cirrus cloud thinning (CCT). However, not enough is known about these ideas to
support informed future societal decisions. While reducing greenhouse gas
emissions is an essential part of any response to climate change, it is very
likely too late for this to be sufficient: there is significant risk of
increasingly severe climate change impacts even with rapid global
decarbonization. Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) needs to be part of a long-term
solution, but it is uncertain that these largely untested ideas can be developed
and scaled up quickly enough. Given this context, a limited deployment of CE, in
addition to emission-reductions and CDR, may be the only available pathway to
limit many climate impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science of CE has overlaps
with other aspects of climate science, but there are a number of unique issues,
starting from the fact that it involves an engineering "design" aspect:
different choices will lead to different impacts, leading to questions of how
best to make these choices. Further, for either stratospheric aerosols or cloud
modification applications, the potentially large perturbations can result in
unique science requirements. The urgency of societal need, combined with the
unique science and engineering needs, led to the formation of the Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) series on Climate Engineering, with the first meeting
in 2017. The 2020 GRC focus will be on both processes and impacts, including an
engineering perspective and informed by the societal context. New in 2020 is a
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) that provides opportunities for early-career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.