* 2011767
* RUI: Quantum Sensing and Simulation with Ultracold Atoms in Ring Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kunal Das, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Quantum technologies will play a central role in shaping human and societal
progress in this century, as devices and applications reach limits set by
classical physics, and are inevitably impelled into the realms of quantum
mechanics to sustain continued advancement. Owing to fundamentally different
principles and constraints involved, such migration will be selective rather
than comprehensive, and the arenas of sensing, simulation and computation are
the most promising. This project focuses on the first two aspects as they can
already deliver considerable benefits even in the near term. Quantum effects
have been demonstrated to offer substantial enhancement of sensitivity to
accelerations, while due to the enormous dimensions of relevant Hilbert spaces,
quantum systems are the best simulators of quantum physics with a designer
system serving to mimic hard-to-access scenarios of interest. Underlying all
such goals, however, the defining challenge continues to be the fragility of
quantum states and effects as they interface with the classical world.
Therefore, broad success hinges on finding the right platform. This project aims
to study and develop a novel alternate platform comprised of ultracold atoms
confined to a ring-shaped periodic lattice, a system that is robust, yet
encompasses all quantum-mechanical features relevant for applications. The
closed loop structure makes for a compact unit that mitigates boundary effects,
favors sustained flow, allows easy scaling of size and multiplicity, and
directly manifests the quintessential quantum feature of non-locality. The
variable lattice structure provides a versatile way to manipulate the system
while providing a precise scale for relevant observables. Training of numerous
undergraduate students in physics research will be a priority, building on
success under prior grants to leverage the experience to channel students into
STEM career paths, including many from under-represented demographics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals for sensor development comprise two primary
directions. One is based on a new principle that utilizes a localization
transition that occurs in ring-shaped lattices. In the context of neutral atoms,
the principle can be adapted for rotation detection and measurement.
Alternately, with a charged medium, it can be similarly adapted for sensing
magnetic fields. The second line of research will seek to generate squeezed
states of circulating modes in ring lattices to realize implementations of
interferometers that use quantum correlated states to improve sensitivity, as
exemplified by SU(1,1) interferometers. As a quantum simulator, the system will
be utilized to explore the physics of superfluidity and associated transitions
to insulator states, as well as the impact of topology on quantum states, such
as defined by the quantum Hall effect. With the lattice coupling the circulating
modes in a ring much like a laser field couples electronic states in an atom,
the system will also be developed as a quantum-optics simulator. With natural
periodic boundaries mitigating some finite size effects, cold atoms in ring
lattices can be a new platform for studying non-equilibrium physics, including
questions of thermalization and relaxation of many-body quantum systems.
Interplay of inter-atomic interactions and of the lattice structure in a ring
configuration will allow simulation of various nonlinear dynamical
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.