* 2011577
* Recycling: An Alternative Method for Rapid Gap Junction Plaque Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* James Faeder, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 877,274.00

Gap junctions are cellular channels that are critical for cell-to-cell
communication. The main component of gap junctions are the connexin proteins.
This Project is expected to describe a new mechanism by which gap junctions
assemble at the surface of the cell. This Project will determine the extent that
connexins can be recycled and re-used in the formation of new functional gap
junction channels. It will also identify the molecular mechanisms that regulate
connexin recycling versus degradation. Together, this will provide a better
understanding of the turnover and trafficking of connexins. This knowledge will
be useful for understanding the numerous cellular phenomena in which cell-cell
communication is critical. Experimentally collected data will also be used to
develop software that will mathematically predict how the modification of
connexins determines their biological functions, including movement to different
cytoplasmic compartments. The Broader Impacts of the Project are three-fold,
broadening participation in science, creating novel science-oriented art
exhibits, and providing research training. Participation in science will be
strengthened by providing an opportunity for individuals from the University of
Pittsburgh, smaller colleges from extended rural areas surrounding Pittsburgh,
and minority serving institutions to participate in innovative research
opportunities, to which they would not otherwise have access. Training will be
provided to researchers at all levels, from undergraduates and graduate students
to postdoctoral fellows and visiting professors. They will gain hands on
training in the use of cutting edge imaging and mathematical modeling tools to
study protein dynamics, recycling and degradation. Scientific and computational
workshops, where students will actively use modeling software to analyze
experimental morphological data, will lead to novel insights, as well as
interesting training and career paths. In addition, students will be directed in
the production of installation art depicting protein dynamics and regulated cell
behavior. These art exhibits will be presented at workshops, in the community,
and at local art museums. These exhibits are intended to encourage career paths
in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). In addition, they will
introduce and familiarize the public with the world of research, highlighting
the beauty and intricacy of living cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major protein subunits of gap junctions are the connexin proteins, the most
abundant of which is connexin 43. The Project will test the hypothesis that
recycling of connexin 43 contributes to the formation of new gap junction
channels. Specifically, the first Aim of this proposal will determine the
dynamics of connexin 43 after endocytosis in multiple cell types. In the second
Aim, the hypothesis will be tested that endocytosis and recycling of connexins
can be regulated by multiple kinases and phosphatases. To test these hypotheses,
the PI will use biochemistry, confocal microscopy, morphological, and cell
biological methods, in combination with phosphor-mimetics and pharmacological
activators. Aim 3 will use the dynamic parameters for endocytosis, recycling and
degradation to generate a differential rate-equation model that will
characterize and predict details of connexin trafficking. Information gained
from this study and the training provided will advance the science of cell-cell
communication that is ultimately needed to understand complex physiological
processes, and thus contribute to public welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.