* 2011362
* Constraining sources of emerging and increasing concern:  Anthropogenic emissions of organic compounds from non-combustion sources and their potential air quality impacts
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Drew Gentner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Air pollution causes major health problems and is responsible for 8 million
deaths annually worldwide. Reactive organic chemicals (ROCs) are the key
precursors that make up smog. In the past, research on the emissions of ROCs has
focused primarily on combustion sources from cars and trucks. However, non-
combustion ROC sources such as roofing and paving materials, building materials,
and consumer products and packaging are now understood to play a larger role in
air quality. In spite of this recognition, reliable data on the magnitude and
chemical makeup of ROC emissions from non-combustion sources is very limited.
Such information is critical to understanding their impact on human health and
the environment. The goal of this project is to address this need by
investigating the emissions of complex mixtures of ROCs from non-combustion
sources. The research will be performed using specially designed reaction
chambers using cutting-edge analytical techniques and tools. Successful
completion of this project will benefit society by increasing our understanding
of pollutant emissions that impact both outdoor and indoor air quality. Further
benefits to society from this project result from education and training
opportunities to graduate students, undergraduate students, and high school
interns. The investigator will promote diversity and enhance the involvement of
under-represented groups in science and engineering through engagement in Yale's
K-12 outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emissions from non-combustion
sources are increasingly understood to play a larger role in air quality. The
goal of this project is to address knowledge gaps on emissions of gas-phase
reactive organic compounds (ROCs) from emerging non-combustion sources and their
subsequent chemical transformations in urban air. To achieve this goal, the PI
and collaborators at Aerodyne Research will focus on the characterization of
ROCs generated by mixtures of known, understudied, and unknown organic
chemicals. The team will carry out experiments in emission and reaction chambers
using a suite of state-of-the-art high-resolution mass spectrometry and
gas/liquid chromatography. The research will include “bottom-up” emissions
experiments to quantify the magnitude and chemical composition of emissions from
paving and roofing asphalt materials, two of the most important non-combustion
sources of ROCs. A major focus of these experiments will be on poorly
constrained emissions pathways and compound classes. In addition, the team will
also conduct experiments in an oxidation flow reactor to 1) determine the
oxidation products and secondary organic aerosol yields from model and relevant
precursor mixtures emitted from non-combustion sources, and 2) identify key
single precursors present in these complex mixtures. The PI will pursue active
collaboration with emissions inventory and modeling experts at the U.S. EPA and
other stakeholders to disseminate information and data resulting from this
study. The successful completion of this project has potential for
transformative impact in air pollution management through the development of new
insight and fundamental knowledge on the emission, fate, and atmospheric
chemistry of ROCs emitted from non-combustion sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.