* 2011764
* Catalyst Project: Infusing Collaborations in Forensics for Conceptualizing Student Innovation at Alabama State University (CSI-ASU)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Robert Green, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 239,999.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Alabama State University (ASU) will enhance the Forensics Research
Infrastructure at the institution and is anticipated to lead to increased
retention of students. The work will develop students' problem-solving skills
and provide STEM research opportunities. An expected outcome is nurturing the
success of underrepresented groups to promote their inclusion in STEM pipelines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students without prior research experience will initially
be trained at ASU. They will learn a variety of laboratory skills such as DNA
extraction from cadaver tissues, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), agarose gel
electrophoresis, and other transferable research skills. Students will then be
eligible to participate in a 5-day training session at a partner institution,
such as Florida International University's International Forensic Research
Institute in Miami. Research mentors with competencies in state-of-the-art
techniques have been selected from partner institutions, these techniques
include chemical, genetic, and physical forensic analyses using human specimens
and evidence collected at crime scene. This project will also enhance
introductory forensic infrastructure by implementing a Freshman Retention
Program (FRP), integrating new cyberlearning modules, and adding new forensic
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.