* 2011039
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Manal Tabbaa, Tabbaa, Manal
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Social behavior can vary greatly between
individuals, with genetic and environmental factors impacting the development of
sociability. The Fellow will apply a novel approach in the field of behavioral
neuroscience—the examination of many genetically diverse mouse strains from the
large Collaborative Cross (CC) mouse genetic reference panel (GRP)—to examine
genetic and environmental regulators of social outcomes. This approach is
important because basic research into the impact of genes and environment on
brain and behavior has historically been conducted in only a very small number
of inbred laboratory rodent strains, limiting genetic variation that is
essential for understanding how genes impact complex behaviors. Thus, research
incorporating increased genetic diversity to investigate genetic and
environmental regulators of behavioral outcomes may lead to new discoveries that
are more applicable to genetically diverse populations, such as humans. This
fellowship will broaden participation in neuroscience by facilitating the
intellectual and professional development of underrepresented students recruited
from the LA-HIP and USC McNair Scholars Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CC
mouse panel was created by a global team of researchers to study the biological
regulation of polygenic traits and consists of ~60 strains of highly genetically
diverse mice. By examining early social interactions across the CC GRP, the
Fellow will identify strains with the lowest and highest mother-pup
interactions. Behavioral testing of adult offspring will allow long-term effects
of strain genetic background and maternal care to be examined. The relationship
between genetic background and actual gene expression patterns in the brain from
the most behaviorally extreme strains will be examined to identify underlying
mechanisms. Computational modeling will establish gene transcription patterns
across neural networks that can be compared between behaviorally extreme strains
with different levels of maternal experience to identify mechanisms of social
behavioral variation. The Fellow will receive training in the best approaches
for integrative analyses of comprehensive datasets across biological levels of
analyses to address complex questions across a population. In addition, the
Fellow will train in scientific communication and mentorship by presenting to
the public at local events and training students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.