* 2011396
* Collaborative Research: Real-Time Hybrid Simulation Enabled Damping System Assessment using Scaled Aeroelastic Models of Tall Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Teng Wu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 275,778.00

This award will develop a new damping system assessment framework based on the
real-time hybrid simulation (RTHS) methodology that will provide the capability
to accurately capture wind-induced response of tall buildings equipped with
complex dampers. One of the most cost-effective means of suppressing undesirable
wind-induced vibrations of tall buildings is to incorporate auxiliary damping
systems. State-of-the-art assessment and design of such damping systems rely on
the use of simplified small-scale damper models in wind tunnel tests. This
approach presents limitations in reproducing the complex behaviors of full-scale
damping systems in a realistic wind environment, as it can introduce errors and
significant uncertainty in tall building response evaluation. This research
project will develop experimentation, modeling, and computational capabilities
for the design and analysis of such damping systems and to understand how tall
buildings perform when integrated with them under realistic wind excitations.
The NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
Wall of Wind facility at Florida International University will be used for the
experimental validation and demonstration studies. The research program will be
complemented with an education and outreach program through curriculum
development, hands-on experiences for high school students, and training
demonstrations on dynamic testing and wind-induced response reduction for tall
buildings. As an integrated part of this project, the participation of students
from underrepresented groups will be promoted through established institutional
programs on high school outreach and undergraduate training activities. Project
data will be archived in the NHERI Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).
This award contributes to NSF's role in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction
Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance fundamental knowledge on the response
of tall buildings equipped with complex dampers under realistic wind
excitations, this project will: (1) capture the aeroelastic behavior of tall
building models integrated with full-scale damping systems by establishing a
novel RTHS platform for the realistic evaluation of wind-induced response
reduction; (2) develop a damper analysis framework to identify damper parameters
for optimal response reduction and quantitatively assess the damperâ€™s
performance under uncertainty; (3) validate and demonstrate the RTHS platform
and damper analysis framework via an experimental program focused on realistic
wind scenarios; (4) disseminate the research outcomes to researchers and
practitioners through publications, shared codes, and benchmark data sets; and
(5) build RTHS capacity in the NHERI Wall of Wind facility. The research
outcomes will help realize high-confidence evaluation and design for auxiliary
damping systems in tall buildings subjected to various wind
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.