* 2011304
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Midlatitude Ionospheric Instability
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Hysell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 08/31/2024
* USD 412,839.00

This research addresses long standing questions about space-weather phenomena in
Earth's ionosphere, which can have drastic effects including on HF and VHF
communications. The characteristics and causes of these phenomena remain poorly
understood. The project has three main components: (i) numerical simulations and
modeling of ionospheric irregularities and instabilities, (ii) experimental
observations made with portable coherent scatter radar deployed by Cornell
University and Clemson University as well as the Millstone Hill Observatory, and
(iii) incoherent scatter radar observations at the Arecibo Observatory
complemented by coherent scatter experiments from the island of Guadeloupe
(using a radar to be installed as part of this project). The broader impacts of
this work are through its applications to understanding space weather and via a
strong educational component that assures extensive involvement of students at
both universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aeronomy investigations focus on
ionospheric phenomena including sporadic E layers (Es), medium-scale traveling
ionospheric disturbances (MSTID), and plasma irregularities associated with mid-
latitude spread-F conditions (MSF). The project examines both neutral/plasma and
E region/F region coupling in a common physical context. The main goals pertain
to 1) the nature of the plasma instabilities in the mid-latitude ionosphere, 2)
the role of neutral atmosphere dynamics in the occurrence of MSF, 3) the nature
of the coupling between the E and F regions, and 4) how these phenomena vary
with latitude. By extending ground-based observations across North America, the
researchers will study how E- and F-region plasma irregularities and
instabilities are causally related. A new regional, coupled neutral/plasma
dynamics model will be developed, which will allow going beyond idealized
theoretical approaches toward a deeper understanding of space weather at middle
latitudes. The broader impacts are through not only the applications to space
weather but also the educational opportunities at Cornell University and Clemson
University for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.