* 2011889
* Broadening Participation Research: Investigating the Effects of a Linked, Interdisciplinary Learning Community Model on Achievement and Persistence of Black Males
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* John Haynes, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 05/31/2023
* USD 349,614.00

This study is investigating the extent to which results from the College Student
Inventory (CSI) cognitive and non-cognitive measures are predictive of
persistence from the first to the third year of college. Researchers demonstrate
the effectiveness of theory-based teaching and learning concepts in STEM by
using a proactive means of identifying STEM students who may be at-risk for
academic difficulty and applying an intervention based upon concepts and
practices for establishing learning communities. The intervention inputs include
linked interdisciplinary regular courses such as biology and oral communication
that integrate content and application coursework; theme-based interdisciplinary
seminars, early immersion into research, and receipt of mentoring. The study
links research and education and advances understanding of factors associated
with improving achievement and retention of Black male undergraduates in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is grounded in Tinto’s Departure Theory and
situated cognition theory. Researchers will investigate (1) to what extent was
participation in the linked courses associated with higher cumulative GPAs,
continuous enrollment, and higher completion rates?, (2) What motivational
factors measured by the College Student Inventory predict academic success and
persistence of STEM students who might be at-risk for academic difficulty? (3)
In what ways has the interdisciplinary learning community experience changed
students’ approaches to understanding STEM course materials? And (4) In what
ways did students, instructors, and the institution benefit from the
interdisciplinary learning community? The study sample will include all incoming
freshmen who will be placed in one of two comparison conditions – those not
enrolled into an interdisciplinary learning community and non-STEM students
whose predicted academic difficulty scores range from 1-9. A comparative
regression discontinuity design will be used to analyze the quantitative and
qualitative measures of the effects of the intervention. The research results
are expected to inform the design of interventions for at-risk undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is supported by the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program, broadening participation
in STEM education research track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.