* 2011972
* Collaborative Research: Access Expansion: Growing a Network of Equity-Focused Programs in the Physical Sciences
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Gina Quan, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2024
* USD 45,047.00

This award supports the Access Network, a project aimed at substantially
improving equity and inclusion in the physical sciences. Research has shown that
many common existing cultural features of physics departments disproportionately
and negatively impact women and underrepresented minority students, ultimately
leading to their attrition. Students and faculty in physics departments have
created programs using research-based strategies that cultivate a culture that
welcomes and values studentsâ€™ different identities. The Access Network, formed
in 2015, combines nine of these single campus programs into a national network
while providing them with resources, expertise, and knowledge related to equity
work, institutional change, and STEM education. Evidence shows that Access sites
have positively transformed the student experience, and that the Network
supports the success of these sites. The lessons learned in developing intensive
mentorship and workshops to new sites and deliberately expanding leadership will
be of value to others attempting to apply best practices in student support to
new populations and scale local efforts to national movements. Documentation
will expand the set of resources for new and existing programs, which can be
used within the Network and beyond. Finally, ongoing evaluation will contribute
to an understanding of the impacts of the Network on the individual sites and of
the sites on their participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Access Network works
towards a more equitable and inclusive physics culture. Driven by a set of
shared principles (e.g., student voice, community building) and a suite of
programmatic offerings (e.g., mentorship, model building courses, community
events, early research opportunities), each site is tailored to the needs of its
unique population, ranging from a large number of Deaf and hard of hearing
students at the Rochester Institute of Technology to Black commuter students at
Chicago State University. The Network supports each site by providing relevant
expertise, community support, mentored leadership opportunities, and shared
resources. By helping students succeed and empowering them as leaders, Access
supports these students in changing the culture of physics to make it more
inclusive, welcoming, and equitable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.