* 2011542
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Origin of distributed modular activity in the neocortex
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Gordon Smith, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 11/30/2023
* USD 575,000.00

In the brain, early developmental events define and constrain its future
capabilities and functions. Large-scale cortical networks are critical to the
processing of information in the brain, yet very little is known about how such
networks arise in early development. This project will address this critical
question by creating an interdisciplinary collaboration that will develop and
then test novel computational models of neural activity in the early cortex.
These models will aim to describe the mechanisms through which functional neural
networks arise in the early cortex, thereby providing critical new insights into
brain development. Furthermore, this project will employ cutting edge optical
approaches to measure and manipulate networks in the developing cortex,
providing a direct test of these models. This project will produce novel
computational tools and unique large-scale imaging datasets of the early brain
that will be valuable to the broad scientific community, while also providing
key training for junior scientists in the tight integration of theory and
experiment. Collectively, this project will yield new insights into fundamental
questions of functional brain development and generate novel tools and datasets
for future research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cortical activity in primates and
carnivores is both modular (columnar) and distributed, linking functional units
that are spread across cortical space. Computational models suggest that these
two properties can arise from local network interactions in the early developing
cortex, however both critical aspects of the proposed mechanisms and
experimental validation are currently lacking. In order to address this key gap
in the understanding of cortical network development, this project will combine
computational modeling with highly sensitive calcium imaging and pharmacological
and optogenetic methods for up-and down-regulating specific circuit components.
This research will derive critical predictions for the effects of experimental
manipulations of local network components on modular and distributed cortical
activity and then perform these manipulations in vivo to test the validity of
the proposed mechanisms. This work will greatly deepen the understanding of the
origin of modular and distributed activity in the early developing cortex, while
addressing long-standing issues in the field by identifying the cortical
mechanism for generating modular activity and testing whether long-range network
correlations can arise from local recurrent connections as a truly emergent
property. By combining state of the art experimental approaches, data analysis,
and theoretical modeling, this project will yield a quantitative understanding
of the mechanisms that give rise in the young brain to two of the most prominent
features of cortical activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is
being funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany
(BMBF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.