* 2011208
* Structure and Function of Heteroanionic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* James Rondinelli, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2024
* USD 460,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty-first century microelectronic
and battery technologies rely on components consisting of transition metal
oxides that can accommodate reversible changes in the distribution of their
electrons. This award supports theoretical and computational research on the
fundamental science of heteroanionic materials, which are compounds consisting
of more than one anion beyond oxygen such as oxynitrides, oxyfluorides, and
oxysulfides. These compounds benefit from the stability of oxide materials, but
have the added advantage of tunable electronic, magnetic, and topological
properties owing to the additional secondary anion, which allows for greater
control over the electron distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals
are to design, discover, and control the properties of heteroanionic materials
displaying ferroelectricity, metal-insulator transitions, and topological band
structures by establishing links between crystal structure and anion chemistry,
profiting from a coupling of theory, simulation, and comprehensive
experimentation. The project utilizes quantum-mechanical based calculations to
establish model frameworks and knowledge that are both descriptive and
predictive. These models and approaches may be expanded to materials beyond
heteroanionic materials, enabling an unprecedented expansion of compounds with
varying electronic functions for future technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
teaching and training of students and the discovery capabilities of the project
are also interwoven and aimed at broadening participation of underrepresented
students in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics disciplines through
public outreach events, through undergraduate and graduate curriculum
development, and by involving students with experiential and interdisciplinary
training. The educational impact extends to high-school students by developing
materials physics/engineering modules that meet Next Generation Science
Standards in concert with high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex transition metal oxides are utilized in a
variety of technologies owing to their properties ranging from ferroelectricity
to high-temperature superconductivity supported by polarizable oxide anions. The
design, discovery, and control of new transition metal compounds, particularly
those with multiple anions (heteroanionic materials) rather than multiple
cations (homoanionic oxides with a single anion), with novel properties and
superior performance are crucial to the continued development of present and
future technologies. This award supports theoretical and computational research
on the fundamental science of heteroanionic materials such as oxynitrides,
oxyfluorides, and oxysulfides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are to
implement and extend a heteroanionic materials design scheme for understanding
the complex interplay among atomic structure, anion order, and band structure on
novel electronic and quantum states and to advance new heteroanionic materials
exhibiting superior functionalities and/or responses not found in homoanionic
materials. The project utilizes a computational strategy, which integrates group
theoretical techniques, derivative-structure tools, and density functional
theory, to understand the electronic and optical properties of oxynitrides,
oxyfluorides, and oxysulfides within three thrusts focused on (i) geometric and
chemical control of noncentrosymmetry for acentric function; (ii) probing metal-
insulator transition mechanisms for materials discovery; and (iii) novel routes
to anion-ordered topological semimetals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
deliver new knowledge to facilitate the selection and design of materials with
tunable electronic states derived from multiple anions. It benefits society by
advancing the repertoire of structure-based design strategies to control
electronic properties, which could lead to discovery of reconfigurable materials
for low-power and brain-inspired microelectronics, transparent optoelectronics,
and quantum information systems. In addition, educational goals of the project
include the teaching and training of students at multiple levels and broadening
STEM participation by underrepresented students. These goals extend to high-
school students by developing materials physics/engineering modules in concert
with high school teachers that meet Next Generation Science Standards. These
efforts will impact the next-generation workforce by endowing students and
teachers problem-solving skills to be success in globally competitive
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.