* 2011434
* Pilot Study: Intentionally Delivered Effective Accommodation (IDEA) at Elizabeth City State University (ECSU) - IDEA@ECSU
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Anthony Emekalam, Elizabeth City State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2023
* USD 143,822.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
at the National Science Foundation supports faculty supports at historically
black colleges and universities (HBCUs) that aspire to build research capacity
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the pilot awards will further the
faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution. and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The
project at Elizabeth City State University will study the impact of extenuating
circumstances on the performance of students who major in STEM fields and/or who
take STEM courses, develop appropriate interventions to support those students
in those targeted courses, and determine how those interventions reduce
attrition rates in the stated circumstances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to understand the feasibility and effectiveness of Intentionally Delivered
Effective Accommodation (IDEA) at Elizabeth City State University (ECSU). IDEA @
ECSU is a novel instructional paradigm intended to promote student persistence
and reduce attrition from STEM programs by addressing individual student-level
extenuating education burdens that are not formally recognized and traditionally
unaccommodated within the conventional academic STEM instruction as a means of
improving educational outcomes. This is a pilot project with a goal of building
upon preliminary findings of a recent small-scale study suggesting that
inadequate accommodations of students bearing extenuating education burdens -
such as student athletes - is a possible contributor to attrition from STEM
programs. The IDEA instructional approach proactively solicits student input
regarding their educational needs and relies on course syllabi intentionally
designed to maximize reasonable accommodation for all students in the course
without compromising learning goals. The project will evaluate the impact of
utilizing IDEA-infused course syllabi in two introductory level STEM courses
notable for high rates of failing grades and withdrawals at the Elizabeth City
State University for two academic years. The project will also explore issues
around HBCU student educational needs, burdens, and accommodations from the
perspectives of both students and HBCU STEM faculty. Information generated from
this study will advance goal-oriented STEM pedagogy by providing a novel guide
and perspective to STEM instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.