* 2011401
* University of Minnesota Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2026
* USD 12,000,000.00

Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;This Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University of Minnesota features two
Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs). The first team aims to access novel
electronic and magnetic properties by direct application of strong local
electric fields to promising new materials. This Quantum Leap aligned research
will realize ready control over an extraordinary range of electronic phases and
functions, thereby enabling new approaches to low-power magnetic data storage
and processing, neuron-like computation, and nanophotonic devices such as solar
cells. The second team is developing novel and systematic approaches to
assembling polymeric materials into bicontinuous network structures with
superior property combinations. These will advance multiple applications,
including membranes for removal of viruses and bacteria, selective ion transport
media for new battery designs, therapeutic delivery vehicles, and materials to
manipulate light more efficiently in photovoltaic devices. The investigators
provide extensive research experiences for promising undergraduates from a
national network of four-year colleges, minority serving institutions, and
especially tribal colleges. Summer camps for high school students, drawn from
the Twin Cities and from Native American communities across the upper Midwest,
involve senior investigators, students, and postdoctoral fellows in hands-on
laboratory activities. Entertaining demonstration shows to illustrate
fundamental scientific principles engage over 50,000 K-12 students each year.
Close interaction with industry involves knowledge transfer in a pre-competitive
collaboration with over 25 companies. Shared experimental facilities provide
access to state-of-the-art materials characterization instrumentation to a
national base of over 500 users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt;IRG-1 aims to transform the understanding of mechanisms,
capabilities, and applications of electrolyte-based gating, thereby realizing
electrical control over an extraordinary range of electronic phases and
function. Both electrostatic and electrochemical control are central to
elucidating the biggest challenges facing ionic gating, and thus the development
of ionic devices. These include understanding: when and why electrostatics vs.
electrochemistry dominate; limits on speed, reversibility, and property
modulation; interfacial structure, chemistry, and ion-carrier interactions; and
universality of the approach. Three target materials classes are envisioned to
tackle these issues – metal oxides, metal chalcogenides, and molecular
conductors – chosen for alignment with key open issues and extraordinary
functionality. The overarching goal of IRG-2 is to identify and translate design
principles that direct small molecule self-assembly to oligomeric and polymeric
shape-filling amphiphiles to form robust and functional mesoscopic network
materials. Self-assembly strategies enable bottom-up design of nanostructured
materials with tailored functionalities, accessing morphologies and properties
exceeding those of their constituent building blocks. The interpenetrating
microdomains of three-dimensional networks enable independent tuning of
orthogonal properties in a single material. Crucially, the narrow composition
windows over which networks typically form currently restricts their translation
to applications. The team’s approach centers on identifying packing motifs that
destabilize lamellar and cylindrical morphologies to broaden the composition
phase windows of negative Gaussian curvature network phases. Control of phase
selection and defect density by advanced processing in films and in bulk is also
an important additional target.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.