* 2011031
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Elan Portner, Portner, Elan
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Effective oceanic resource management requires knowledge of how
resources respond to the environment. However, the basic structures of food webs
supporting oceanic resources remain poorly understood. In the case of large
predators, we often know what they eat but not how they choose what to eat, or
which other predators they compete with for food. To understand how large
predators like tuna and billfish choose their food, this project will examine
prey traits such as body shape and behavior. By doing so, this research will
condense diverse diets into general rules used by predators to select prey.
Comparing these rules among predators will produce insights into the structure
of oceanic food webs. Identifying predators that compete for similar prey types
will help us understand how changes in the distributions of predators and prey
will impact oceanic food web structure. The Fellow will promote diverse
participation in science by (1) working with the Equity, Diversity, and
Inclusion Team at Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) to establish a
journal club that examines bias and discrimination in scientific disciplines,
and (2) creating public curricula on oceanic ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will bridge predator feeding habits data at NOAA Southwest Fisheries
Science Center and physical prey specimens housed at SIO to facilitate a meta-
analysis of oceanic food web structure in the Southern California Current
Ecosystem (SCCE). The Fellow will (1) develop a trait-based analysis framework
to describe the rules used by predators to select prey, and (2) quantify trait-
based resource partitioning among tunas and billfishes in the SCCE. The
robustness of this trait framework will be tested by quantifying variability in
prey selection rules for predator feeding habits studied both in the SCCE
(eutrophic upwelling system) and the central North Pacific (oligotrophic gyre
system). The Fellow will receive advanced analytical training in the application
of trait-based food web models as well as training in the mentorship of
undergraduate and graduate students. To engage diverse communities in STEM
education and research, the Fellow will develop an outreach program in
collaboration with NOAA, SIO, and the San Diego County Office of Education that
uses fish stomach dissections to introduce students to biological oceanography,
data analysis, and human impacts on the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.