* 2011424
* Learning Solutions: Investigating Fundamental Tools, Resources &amp; Strategies to Support Professionals Addressing Persistent Issues in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* John Falk, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 244,407.00

Across the United States, individuals, organizations, and communities are
wrestling with a wide array of challenging and persistent science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM)-related problems. A few examples include
ensuring more equitable access to STEM careers; building capacity for rural
libraries to support STEM learning; and supporting greater cyber literacy among
youth. The good news is that thousands of individuals, organizations, and
communities are coming up with great ideas for how to confront these problems;
many of them supported by the NSF. Unfortunately, most will encounter
significant roadblocks to success along the way, but not because of bad ideas.
Most change agents falter along the lengthy and often convoluted pathway between
idea and successful execution because they bump up against barriers they do not
expect or know how to overcome. This Pilot and Feasibility Study will create
Learning Solutions, a multi-platform program designed to support those people
and entities engaged in work that cultivates the public’s understanding of,
engagement with, and interest in STEM fields and STEM-related information.
First, the project will systematically identify the real, but often unspoken
issues that individuals, organizations, and communities run into as they work to
bring about significant and impactful STEM-related change. Then, the project
will assemble, curate, and make digitally available a collection of tools,
resources and strategies designed to help someone understand and resolve these
kinds of issues if and when they arise. By better understanding the experiences
of change agents, the challenges they face, and the creative learning solutions
they enact, this project will ensure that more change agents successfully access
the learning know-how they need, when they need it, in curated, easy-to-digest
formats. This award is funded by the Advanced Informal STEM Learning program
which contributes to STEM engagement and literacy, workforce development, and
educational success via supporting new approaches to and evidence-based
understanding of STEM learning in informal environments. Learning Solutions will
build capacity and will help more professionals successfully bring more good
ideas to fruition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target audience for this Pilot &amp;
Feasibility phase of Learning Solutions will be STEM professionals working at
the intersection of STEM and society across diverse sectors. It will focus on
change agents -- individuals who want to be or who already are engaged in
community-based, action-oriented STEM-related change projects, whether acting on
their own, within an organization, or as part of a broader community of
organizations. To achieve the goal of making STEM-related change easier to
accomplish, Learning Solutions will implement a multi-step process. With input
from five Critical Advisors, 20 Key Informants, and ultimately hundreds of
change agents, project staff will: 1) Utilize an iterative process of in-depth
interviews and broadly disseminated surveys to identify the major
understandings, skills and processes that current and past STEM-related change
agents have experienced as impediments to their success; 2) Determine how best
to describe and categorize these issues across diverse problem spaces; 3) Select
twelve issues, based on which are the most frequently mentioned and/or perceived
to be the most critical or challenging, and research and curate the best and
most authoritative resources responsive to these dozen issues; and finally, 4)
Use a variety of platforms (e.g., social media, traditional media, digital and
in print publications, podcasts, panels, and group presentations) and
utilization metrics to ensure effective digital delivery of potential solutions
to the selected issues. By the project’s end, we will have identified some of
the key challenges the STEM-related change agents who work in communities across
America regularly encounter, as well as the feasibility of developing a
mechanism for helping those change agents discover preexisting and readily
accessible resources to assist them in resolving those
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.