* 2011876
* Center for Emergent Materials, an NSF MRSEC
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* P. Chris Hammel, Ohio State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2026
* USD 9,000,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Innovations in materials will be central to new
computational and information-processing technologies that will undergird
economies world-wide and enhance human well-being in a changing and globally
interconnected world. Discovery of new materials engendering novel quantum
phenomena lies at the heart of many of these innovations. Continuing improvement
in speed and energy-efficiency will rely on the emergence of new materials and
phenomena whose subtlety and complexity demand the coordinated and focused
synthesis of a range of experimental and theoretical capabilities. The Center
for Emergent Materials, an NSF MRSEC (CEM) at Ohio State University, realizes
innovative science and complex materials discovery by engaging researchers from
diverse backgrounds and disciplines in an enabling and collaborative
environment. Working in two Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs), these
scientists conceive and create materials that grant improved control over
magnetic properties; the first focuses on magnetic interactions at interfaces,
and the second on control of configurations and interrelationships between
magnetic interactions that protect desired magnetic properties even in the
presence of disruptive forces. This MRSEC is devising innovative strategies for
teaching science that ease the entry of diverse groups into the scientific
enterprise, and welcome the contributions of women and underrepresented groups.
CEM’s fundamental research is integrated into sustained ongoing interactions
with young scientists from elementary school through secondary study to inspire
their engagement with science. A concerted focus on improving diversity is
integrated into all facets of the MRSEC’s activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: One IRG is creating novel
materials that enable control of atoms at the interface between metals and
magnets. It determines the structure of the interface using high resolution
microscopy then investigates magnetic configurations and excitations using a
variety of transport, magnetic and fast optical probes. Theoretical studies
guide scientific directions and choice of materials and provide insight into
experimental results. These advances will open the door to innovative means of
controlling static and dynamic behavior of spins. A second IRG seeks to discover
materials harboring topologically protected magnetic excitations. Confirming the
existence of these subtle features and understanding their properties requires
coordinated application of a diverse suite of experiments closely integrated
with theoretical guidance to bring these subtle phenomena to light. The IRG
seeks to establish a new paradigm of topological phases in strongly correlated
magnetic materials thus providing the precise control over the magnetic
properties of solids that will have critical applications for both spintronics
and quantum information. The Center continues to have bi-weekly contact with
high-needs elementary school students. This program is spawning a vibrant
community of OSU undergraduate and graduate students, and aids in the
development of innovative approaches to enhancing diversity through scientific
outreach. Center faculty are vital participants in the externally funded
Masters-to-Ph.D. minority Bridge Program that increases the pool of qualified
faculty candidates from underrepresented backgrounds. CEM’s Diversity Action
Plan, founded on proven strategies employing concrete, measurable steps, is
focused on improving faculty and post-secondary diversity. A Professional
Development course teaches the networking, interviewing and negotiating skills
that students seeking non-academic careers need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.