* 2011571
* Collaborative Research: Stanford-Florida Program in Support of LIGO on Coatings and Core Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Martin Fejer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,350,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
detection of gravitational waves from coalescing black holes in 2015 launched
the field of gravitational wave astronomy. Gravitational-wave detectors with a
two-fold increase in sensitivity over Advanced LIGO would yield an order of
magnitude increase in detection rate for black hole coalescences, and enable
detection of fainter objects like binary neutron stars, greatly increasing their
value for multi-messenger astronomy. All future detector upgrades and concepts
rely on the development of new mirror coating materials to reduce thermal noise,
which is the core research focus this collaborative project between Martin
Fejer's group at Stanford University and Hai-Ping Cheng's group at the
University of Florida. Reducing this noise source requires reducing the
mechanical loss in the mirror coatings on the test masses. The goal of this
project is to develop mirror coatings consistent with the mechanical and optical
requirements for implementation in future generations of LIGO. Meeting this goal
for room temperature detectors requires a solution of a longstanding problem in
the physics of amorphous materials: understanding the nature of and finding
means to reduce the low-energy excitations in amorphous metal oxides. On a
longer time-scale, the proposed 3G detectors' cryogenic operation broadens the
possible choice of low-noise mirror materials to include amorphous or
crystalline semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mid-band sensitivity of the
Advanced LIGO detectors is limited by thermal noise resulting from mechanical
loss in the mirror coatings, and future upgrades including Advanced LIGO Plus
will seek to reduce this source of noise by a factor of two or more. The
Stanford-Florida partnership, alongside collaborators in the LSC Center for
Coatings Research (CCR), has identified different structural motifs associated
with room-temperature vs cryogenic mechanical losses, which led to synthesis of
germania (GeO2) films, giving rise to the lowest-loss amorphous oxide film other
than silica. Going forward, this structural guide, based on electron and x-ray
scattering atomic structure data, will serve as a paradigm informing the
development of high-refractive-index amorphous coatings with lower elastic loss.
Atomic modeling of coating elastic loss combined with simulations of the coating
deposition process will provide guidance for the selection of candidate
materials, assist in interpretation of experimental structure data, and will
ultimately assist in the design of synthesis experiments. Another long-standing
effort at Stanford has been measurements of the absorption of low-optical-loss
materials at the sub-ppm/cm level, dating back to the down select between silica
and sapphire for initial LIGO test masses. The groups will continue to use the
interferometric tool developed for those studies to characterize cryogenic
losses in single-crystal silicon samples to evaluate their suitability for
implementation in the Voyager technology demonstrator and future cryogenic
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.