* 2011854
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2026
* USD 9,990,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The UChicago Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) is a strategic trans-disciplinary research hub that
tackles some of the deepest intellectual challenges of materials research
central to priority industries through highly collaborative efforts united to a
strong commitment to education and outreach. The first research thrust,
beautifully aligned with the NSF Big Idea - Understanding the Rules of Life, is
discovering new materials whose properties are essential to emerging
technologies; exciting outcomes in materials biology will advance the mastery of
synthetic biological systems by identifying training mechanisms at play in the
biological realm including advances in artificial muscles. This research will
lay the scientific foundation for innovative approaches in materials processing.
A second research thrust is exploring materials containing distributed molecular
engines enabling new classes of materials that can spontaneously deform and
flow: the future vision of this research is to design and build shape-morphing
hybrid materials with transport properties that are programmable and
spatiotemporally self-regulating. The resulting materials platform will have
tremendous impact in sensing, actuation, separations, and biodesign, thus adding
innovation to synthetic materials biology. A third effort, aligned with the NSF
Big Idea - Quantum Leap, focuses on new materials needed for the creation of
integrated quantum circuits: powerful new methodologies developed here will
enable the manipulation and transfer of quantum information. This research
vision allows this MRSEC to forge a robust community where students, postdocs
and faculty bring diverse expertise and research interests in the service of
compelling scientific goals designed to increase our national competitiveness in
these areas. The UChicago MRSEC manages state-of-the art materials preparation
and measurement facilities that are accessible to all academic and industrial
researchers. Outreach and education activities are designed to communicate
research results broadly, to foster professional development of students and to
strengthen interest in science in the general public. As a result, the UChicago
MRSEC provides a vibrant resource to the university, to the broader materials
science community, and, via societal impacts, to the local inner-city
neighborhood and to the general public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The UChicago MRSEC establishes new conceptual frameworks to guide
materials discovery and explores synergistic connections. The research
activities are organized into two Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs) and
one SuperSeed. The IRG on Trainable Soft Materials establishes a framework for
building classes of materials whose physical response is engineered by using
external manipulation to train in novel functionality. It takes inspiration from
the fundamental processes that govern the structure and enormous adaptability of
biological networks in order to derive new principles for pluripotent material
fabrication by varying the training protocol. The IRG on Activated Architectured
Materials constructs materials with spatiotemporally programmable and self-
regulating transport properties by bringing together recent advances in active
materials with inorganic colloidal and thin film synthesis. This work enables
dynamic control of transport properties of inorganic materials with potential
applications in sensing, actuation and biodesign. A Super-Seed on Materials for
Electrical-Optical Quantum Transduction focuses on the challenge of creating
integrated quantum circuits with coherent interfaces between different quantum
materials spanning across many energy scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.