* 2011948
* Barium Daughter Tagging for the nEXO Double Beta Decay Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* William Fairbank, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 682,655.00

This project aims to develop a laser-based measurement technique so precise that
it will be able to detect a single atom of barium in a tank of five tons of
liquid xenon. Doing so will enable nuclear physicists to efficiently carry out
an ongoing experiment that would otherwise require a device that is several
times larger. The nuclear physicists are searching for an extremely rare
radioactive decay in nature that has been theorized but has not yet been found.
The discovery of this decay, which changes one xenon atom into one barium atom,
would prove for the first time that one of the smallest and weakly interacting
particles in nature, neutrinos, are the same as their anti-particles, the
antineutrinos. The proof that a component of matter is the same as its
antimatter counterpart could contribute to an understanding of why our universe
is composed of matter only, with negligible amounts of antimatter, whereas Big
Bang theories of the universe predict initial formation of equal parts of matter
and antimatter. In this project a laser of the right color is scanned across a
sample containing a few barium atoms or ions captured in xenon that is frozen
solid, and each time the laser hits an atom or ion, a characteristic flash of
light is recorded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientists doing this research have
recently demonstrated for the first time that individual atoms trapped in a
solid noble element can be imaged and counted with high selectivity against
background. This project extends the imaging and counting of individual barium
atoms in two particular sites, or configuration of neighbors, in a solid xenon
matrix to both barium atoms and ions in all the significant matrix sites. In a
xenon neutrinoless double beta decay detector, it will be necessary to grab and
count individual daughter barium atoms or ions in solid xenon from the liquid
xenon volume. A second focus of the work is to demonstrate and perfect this
barium capture and counting capability in a small liquid xenon test chamber. The
proposed research is fundamentally interdisciplinary and promises advances of
broad scientific interest. It involves applying single atom detection techniques
originally developed within the framework of Atomic, Molecular and Optical
physics to atoms in a condensed noble gas environment, while offering a
transformational advance in nuclear physics. The project has an educational and
outreach component to connect high school teachers to state-of-the-art research.
The project is jointly funded by three NSF Programs (Experimental Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics; Experimental Nuclear Physics, both in the
Physics Division; and Chemical Measurement and Imaging, in the Chemistry
Division).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.