* 2011841
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Investigating Culturally Responsive Mentoring Practices in HBCU Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Derrick Bryan, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,685.00

The project will apply theoretical frameworks within social science to examine
STEM undergraduate research experiences at HBCUs. This mixed methodology
investigation will observe, measure, and describe how students, faculty, and
staff at HBCUs engage in culturally responsive mentoring practices within a STEM
undergraduate research experience. The investigators will enter the research
spaces (research laboratories, campus research programs, etc.) to collect
observations of mentoring practices and document what culturally responsive
mentoring looks like in various HBCU STEM research settings. The investigators
will then explore and measure the influence of mentorship in the participation
and retention of STEM students at HBCUs. The project will generate approaches
and guidelines to facilitate the replication of a culturally relevant mentoring
model for STEM undergraduate research experiences at HBCUs and other contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Culturally relevant pedagogy will be used as a theoretical
framework to investigate (1) What does mentorship look like in STEM
undergraduate research experiences at HBCUs? and (2) What role does mentoring
play in the participation and retention of HBCU STEM students in undergraduate
research experiences? Investigators will collect quantitative and qualitative
data to conduct a mixed methodology investigation. Survey data will be collected
to quantitatively assess mentoring competencies as well as feelings, beliefs,
interests, and attitudes toward mentoring in STEM research experiences. They
will then collect qualitative data to reflect multiple points of view and
understand trends, outliers, and contradictions in other data sources. These
data will be combined with observational data to more accurately represent the
mentoring experience within HBCU STEM research laboratories. Investigators will
apply multiple case approaches to develop an in-depth description of HBCU STEM
research experiences and compare and contrast different STEM research
environments. The research is expected to produce reproducible findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This broadening participation in STEM education research
project is supported by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.