* 2011366
* Mantle controls on magmatic-volcanic cycles at basaltic volcanoes: An isotopic probe of the Pu'u 'O'o, Halema'uma'u, and 2018 Leilani eruptions of Kilauea Volcano
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Andrew Greene, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,977.00

The spectacular 2018 Leilani rift eruption of Kilauea Volcano captivated the
attention of nightly news-watchers and internet-surfers around the U.S. and the
world, and it became a destructive volcanic crisis for residents of the Island
of Hawaii. The volcanic events of 2018 included the end of two sustained lava
eruptions at Kilauea, a large (magnitude 6.9) local earthquake, and a voluminous
(~0.8 km3) explosive collapse of the volcano’s summit region that damaged roads
and infrastructure in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. Over three months in 2018,
a large amount of new lava (&gt;0.8 km3) erupted from fissures on Kilauea’s
Lower East Rift Zone at Leilani Estates and destroyed ~700 homes. The scale of
this eruption (i.e., its high effusion rate and level of destruction) was “truly
unprecedented in the modern record” according to Tina Neal, the Scientist-in-
Charge at the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory of the U.S. Geological Survey. Very
little is yet known about the magmatic processes that controlled the volcanic
events of 2018. In this study, the temporal changes in the composition of lava
samples from three Kilauea eruptions, each separated by ~20 km, will be used to
track the movement of magma batches through the volcano’s plumbing system as a
function of time and space. These results will be used to test the hypothesis
that the 2018 Leilani rift eruption was actively driven by the delivery of at
least one large mantle-derived magma batch to a volcanic edifice that already
held an unusually large amount of stored magma. This research has the potential
to reveal the enigmatic mantle controls on the behavior and hazards of Kilauea
Volcano. An educational module, simulating the volcanic events at Kilauea in
2018 through role playing, will be created and published on the Science
Education Resource Center (SERC) website for Hawaiian Volcanoes and Hazards
Education as an integral part of this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kilauea
experiences long-term cycles of dominantly effusive vs. explosive volcanic
activity on a time scale of decades to centuries, with the latter often
associated with summit collapse and/or caldera formation. The events of 2018
likely mark the culmination of a volcanic cycle at Kilauea. Lavas from this
volcano display systematic chemical (e.g., Nb/Y) and isotopic (e.g.,
206Pb/204Pb) variations on time scales of years to centuries due to its mantle
source heterogeneity and melting processes. These mantle-derived changes in
parental magma composition indicate that Kilauea also experiences distinctive
magmatic cycles, some of which coincide with the long-term volcanic cycles. An
important project goal is to test the idea that the long-term volcanic cycles at
Kilauea are ultimately driven by mantle processes, including (1) the generation
of compositionally distinct magma batches within the heterogeneous mantle and
(2) the transport of these magma batches from the source to the surface.
Kilauea’s magmatic-volcanic cycles may be caused by two mechanisms. One
mechanism—essentially passive—is related to a refractory mantle source-related
decrease in the degree of partial melting, a decline in the magma supply rate,
and a subsequent disruption of the summit magmatic plumbing system. This was
important for the previous magmatic-volcanic cycle that ended with summit
collapse and an explosive eruption in 1924. The other mechanism—actively
driven—is related to high degrees of partial melting of a more fertile mantle
source, a high rate of magma supply, and the vigorous delivery of one or more
large magma batches from the mantle. This hypothesis for the events of 2018 will
be tested using the chemistry and Pb, Sr, and Nd isotope ratios of lava samples
from (1) the 2018 Leilani rift eruption, and (2) the final decade of the long-
lived Pu’u ’O’o rift eruption (1983-2018) and summit lava lake within
Halema’uma’u Crater (2008-2018).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.