* 2011824
* University of Delaware MRSEC - Center for Hybrid, Active, and Responsive Materials (CHARM)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Darrin Pochan, University of Delaware
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2026
* USD 9,000,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The University of Delaware – Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center (UD MRSEC) is a network rich in scientific opportunity,
spanning UD and several strategic external academic and national laboratory
partnerships, including U. of Pennsylvania and the National Institute of
Standards &amp; Technology (NIST). Also known as the UD Center for Hybrid,
Active, and Responsive Materials (UD CHARM), the Center is advancing
foundational understanding of new materials driven by theoretical and
computational predictions paired with cutting-edge experiments to enable the
integration of unconventional, ultra-small, building blocks. One
interdisciplinary research group (IRG) is targeting the creation of new
bioinspired organic materials with the capacity to function as nanoscale
machines. A second IRG aims to create hybrid inorganic quantum materials that
enable new optoelectronic circuits/devices and precise control of
electromagnetic radiation. With this fundamental approach in both IRGs,
transformative advances in materials science are expected, enabling critical
innovations in biomedicine, security, sensing, adaptable materials, and soft
robotics. The close physical proximity of UD to many of the major partner
institutions and industrial stakeholders, facilitates frequent in-person
research, education, and outreach interactions. Furthermore, UD CHARM is
providing an exciting materials science platform for diversity and education
programming to under-resourced youth – targeting students from groups
underrepresented in science via partnerships with two historically black
colleges and universities (HBCUs, Delaware State U. and Claflin U.), a pre-
college effort focused on providing undergraduate pathways for Black and Latinx
youth, and an education initiative geared toward mentoring younger students in
basic science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: UD CHARM
is harnessing the integrated power of computational design, innovative synthetic
and manufacturing processes, and nanoscale characterization to unlock the
substantial promise of complex synthetic materials at multiple length/time-
scales - leveraging strategic control of interfaces, interactions, and synthetic
specificity. This MRSEC is nucleating activities to become a hub of
interdisciplinary integration and infrastructure development to drive cross-
cutting materials innovation. One IRG is pioneering the use of computationally-
directed pathways for non-natural amino acid assembly and functionalization to
achieve emergent properties in peptide active materials, such as concerted and
precise larger-scale, directed molecular motion. The team is exploiting the
programmability of peptide molecular shape and chemical sequence, enabled by
non-natural amino acid incorporation and solution/film processing, to develop
new bioinspired materials with targeted architectures and the capacity to
generate simple machine movement – all guided by computational insights. A
second IRG is creating hybrid quantum materials that control terahertz (THz)
functionality, to enable unprecedented control over THz radiation and THz
integrated circuits/devices. The team is manipulating interfaces and
interactions between constituents to create hybrid materials that seamlessly
convert between THz excitations of each constituent, enable nonlinear
interactions ideal for modulators or gates, and enable controlled formation and
modulation of hybridized quantum states. UD CHARM is creating a materials
pipeline by teaching/training in a cohesive mentoring loop. Major programming
impacts include: (1) under-served K-12 students via creation of a Delaware
Science Program, (2) Black and Latinx high school students by interfacing with
the TeenSHARP-DE college prep program, (3) HBCU undergraduates (UGs) and faculty
through a ‘Pathways to Graduate School’ program, and (4) UGs via an REU program
with industrial/international partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Materials Research Science and Engineering Centers (MRSEC)
Program in the Division of Materials Research (DMR), the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.