* 2011911
* Collaborative Research:  Advancing Chemical Separation Simulations: Computational Algorithms and Optimization with Implicit Adsorption Isotherms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Anastasia Wilson, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 140,000.00

The unprecedented growth of biopharmaceuticals in recent years has led to better
strategies for managing chronic diseases in humans including diabetes,
immunodeficiencies, and cancer. These therapeutics are often produced using
purified proteins extracted from biological sera, which has created a need for
technologies that produce these proteins efficiently, quickly, and in sufficient
quantities to meet the growing demand. The global market for biologics is the
fastest growing market in the pharmaceutical industry with global revenues near
$163 billion; it is expected to grow annually by 10.9%. FDA approval rates for
protein therapeutics increased threefold from 2013 to 2017. There are currently
over 200 approved biotherapeutic drugs on the market with over 1500 in clinical
trials and more in the pipeline. The work in this project seeks to aid bio-
manufacturers in expanding their production capacity in existing facilities by
developing an accurate computational simulation framework for describing new
methods of protein separation strategies. The simulation will be used with
optimization algorithms to help engineers improve the performance of adsorption
membranes which in turn will reduce bottlenecks in
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the need for
efficient new separation and purification processes for protein therapeutics.
The emergence of biologics, i.e., drugs derived from biotechnology, as a leading
way to manage chronic diseases in humans has created a pressing need for lower
cost, faster biomanufacturing operations to make these products available and
more affordable for growing patient populations. This research project aims to
develop numerical approaches to solve the mathematical descriptions needed to
simulate these processes. The mathematical descriptions will incorporate new,
more complex ion-exchange relationships that define the solid phase adsorption
as an implicit function of the liquid phase adsorption, a significant change
from the standard explicit mathematical relationships. The goals of this project
are to develop, validate, analyze, and use computational tools to inform the
design of new, rapid membrane chromatography purification processes for bio-
manufacturing environments. Specifically, the research team will work on four
major research activities: (1) development and testing of a computational
framework; (2) analysis of computational models for nonlinear and implicit
models of chromatographic adsorption processes; (3) validation of the
computational tools using experimental data; and (4) simulation-based
optimization using the developed computational framework to understand the
effects of the design parameters on desired outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.