* 2011766
* Identifying Motivating Factors of Undergraduate Women Pursuing Physics Degrees
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Eric Brewe, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 287,461.00

This award supports the funding to analyze the motivational factors identified
by women pursuing undergraduate physics degrees. This project will develop
qualitative methods and natural language processing (NLP) to identify positive
and negative motivating factors in existing datasets consisting of written
narratives that describe the factors that encouraged or discouraged women from
pursuing physics degrees. This project will also develop an NLP text classifier
and a methodology for disaggregation of gender and ethnicity, making
intersectional analyses feasible. The initial qualitative analysis and
development of the NLP algorithm will utilize data collected as part of the
American Physical Society Conferences for Undergraduate Women in Physics
evaluation survey. The analysis will be extended by using the NLP algorithm to
analyze data collected by the American Institute of Physics Statistical Research
Center's Follow-up Survey of Physics Bachelors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will promote the representation of women in physics by developing an in-
depth understanding of the factors motivating women to pursue physics degrees.
This knowledge allows for the expansion of targeted interventions and outreach
efforts to encourage women into physics careers. Furthermore, disaggregating
data by gender, race, and ethnicity will increase the avenues for engaging women
of color or gender non-binary persons. The resources developed as part of this
project will be shared with the American Institute of Physics Statistical
Research Center, and the American Physical Society's Education and Diversity
department. These two large professional organizations in physics will support
further use and development of these methods, thereby potentially impacting many
future physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.