* 2011789
* I-Corps:  Virtual Reality technology for teacher-driven development of classroom-based  assessment
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Ryan Walker, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
technology to enable a gamified approach to the world of virtual reality (VR).
Current educational VR programs are focused on providing an experience through
360 degree videos or simple interactions allowing students to explore a virtual
world. The advancement of the technology under development is the connection
between student-centered experiential learning and an easy-access, teacher-
driven assessment management system. By lowering the threshold of programming
experience required to create and use VR technology in the classroom, teachers
will be able to fine-tune VR resources to meet the student curricular needs.
This will allow VR to seamlessly integrate into classrooms on a large
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to evaluate the
commercialization potential of technology using a multi-platform (VR, PC, Mac)
gamification tool for student assessment. Teachers will be able to create
assessments via an easy-to-use web interface that are then automatically placed
inside the game portal for students to complete. After completing the assignment
or quiz, a student will be rewarded with a short gameplay session where s/he can
advance based on the performance during the assessment portion of the game.
Teachers will be able to use the web interface to track student progress and
results. The novel assessments created can be shared with other teachers to
create a library of assessments, so that teachers can develop a new course
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.