* 2011107
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Interpretability of Tomographic Images Using Geologically Motivated Parametrizations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Robert Clayton, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2023
* USD 65,000.00

Geophysical imaging is one of the cornerstones of the Earth Sciences.
Tomographic imaging techniques provide spatial descriptions of geologic features
of the interior of the Earth that are otherwise inaccessible, and thus comprises
a primary source of insight into the geometry of structures inside the Earth.
These images are essential to understanding the evolution and dynamics of the
Earth, from the relatively short length and timescales that govern natural
hazards such as seismicity and volcanism, to fundamental questions of the
origins of first order features such as patterns of continental motion and
mountain building. This project investigates ways to fundamentally improve
geophysical imaging by incorporating geological knowledge into imaging tools
rather than relying solely on standard mathematical tools for imaging. Specific
imaging targets include the Los Angeles, San Gabriel and San Bernardino basins,
which are essential to accurately define to improve seismic hazard calculations
at high frequencies and will help characterize earthquake risk in this
societally important region. Another target is imaging the Yellowstone Caldera,
where improved imaging can lead to better understanding of the dynamics of
crustal magma emplacement and volcanic eruption dynamics. The work also brings
together diverse communities of geophysicists and mathematicians and supports
the education of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geophysical imaging problems are fundamentally
ill-posed so careful choices of parametrization and regularization are required
to produce sensible results, especially at regional and global length scales
where data are particularly scarce. Parametrizations in terms of blocks, pixels
or spherical harmonics are typically driven by mathematical utility. These
parametrizations ignore the fact that the end goal of tomographic imaging is
typically to categorize the subsurface into discrete structures. Previous
improvements in geophysical imaging have been driven by advancements in the
solution of forward problems, the development of adjoint methods for large scale
optimization and methods for uncertainty quantification, but comparatively
little progress has been made regarding development of effective parametrization
strategies for the Earth. This work melds together an innovative geometric and
level set parametrization strategy for specifying Earth structure with a best-
in-class derivative-free optimization scheme based on the Ensemble Kalman
Filter. The project focuses on two problems that are impactful and provide
complementary test cases of the team's methodology. The first application
focuses on geometric optimization of geological units in the Los Angeles, San
Gabriel and San Bernardino basins, from which better calculations of earthquake
ground motions within the basin may be calculated. A second application at
Yellowstone Caldera allows better quantification of the tradeoffs between magma
chamber volume and melt fraction estimates, as determined by velocity
perturbations using local and teleseismic body wave
tomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.