* 2011415
* In-Situ Formation of Ternary Sulfide-rich Interphases for Stabilizing Lithium Deposition in Lithium-sulfur Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2024
* USD 447,258.00

Energy storage at an affordable cost has emerged as one of the challenging
issues for the energy sector, being critical for a wide range of applications
ranging from electric vehicles to grid storage of renewable energies. Lithium-
sulfur batteries are one the most promising next-generation battery
technologies, as lithium and sulfur exhibit charge-storage capacity ten times
higher than that of the electrode materials used in current lithium-ion
batteries. Also, sulfur is environmentally benign, inexpensive, and widely
available with secure domestic supply chains. Despite these advantages, the
commercial adoption of lithium-sulfur batteries is hobbled by their poor cycle
life. This project focuses on developing an effective strategy for improving the
cycle life of lithium-sulfur batteries by systematically tuning the surface
composition and properties of the anode. The effect of the modified interface
material anode layer on the cycle life will be investigated with various
computational, electrochemical, and materials characterization techniques. This
will be a crucial step towards realizing practically relevant lithium-sulfur
batteries with high energy density and extended cycle life. This work is also
expected to yield new insights into the unique chemistry of sulfur compounds,
which find applications in diverse areas, including photovoltaics, catalysis,
and organic semiconductors. The project will also provide a broad
interdisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate students as well as
historically underrepresented community college students and teachers in the
globally important area of clean energy, encompassing inorganic chemistry,
solid-state physics, electrochemical systems, and materials science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique chemistry of sulfur and its
tendency to form polysulfide intermediates that are soluble in the liquid
electrolyte profoundly impact the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer
formed on lithium-metal surface in Li-S batteries. This project focuses on
developing a systematic and effective strategy for tailoring the composition of
the SEI layer to improve the reversibility of lithium plating and stripping in
Li-S batteries. Electrolyte and cathode additives will be identified that work
in tandem with the generated polysulfide intermediates to form a stabilizing SEI
layer on lithium-metal surface. Specifically, high Li-ion conductivity LiXS
ternary sulfides will be investigated as in-situ engineered SEI components,
where X is a high-oxidation state cation of an element less electronegative than
sulfur. It is hypothesized that the nature of X-S bond would play a critical
role in determining the properties of the modified SEI layer, and consequently,
the measured lithium cycling efficiency. The impact of the in-situ modified SEI
layers on electrochemical performance will be assessed with practically relevant
anode-free full cells (limited lithium inventory) and pouch cells (limited
electrolyte supply) by determining the lithium inventory loss rates. With the
in-situ engineering of a sulfide-rich lithium SEI and careful application of
computational and materials characterization techniques, the project aims to (i)
identify stabilizing SEI components in Li-S batteries and methods of fabricating
them, (ii) establish a fundamental understanding of the composition-structure-
property relationships that underlie the effect of SEI layer on the
reversibility of lithium plating and stripping, and (iii) demonstrate the impact
of SEI modification on electrochemical performance under realistic cell design
and testing conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.