* 2011040
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Nicholai Hensley, Hensley                 Nicholai       M
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Breaking down patterns of observed diversity
across levels of biology can help us understand the rules that determine how
organisms evolve to fit their preferred habitats and how biodiversity is
maintained. The research aims to understand how brain responses have evolved to
produce behaviors that help different species live together. The Fellow will
collect behavioral, neural, and genome data to understand how different cricket
species perceive one another in their shared environment, impacting how they are
able to coexist yet remain distinct species in nature. The Fellow will also
participate in a number of direct mentorship and community-building outreach
activities at the host institution to promote diverse perspectives in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the complexity of behavioral systems, we
lack a detailed understanding of how adaptation and constraint at lower levels
of biological organization can shift ecological and evolutionary patterns at
higher levels. Theory predicts that overlap in shared ecology, including sensory
abilities used to perceive mating signals in sympatry, should have ecological
consequences on species distributions, and evolutionary implications on rates of
divergence between species. This research aims to connect how neurosensory
systems used in mate choice shape ecological communities and impact speciation
using the behaviorally diverse and rapidly radiating clade of Hawaiian swordtail
crickets. Crickets in the genus Laupala have the fastest known speciation rate
of any invertebrate, and many species are both syntopic and sympatric to one
another during mate calling. By surveying replicated populations of sympatric
species, collecting whole-genome data, and comparing neuronal recordings of
decision-making circuits in different species, this project will test if
overlapping neurocognitive responses during mate choice influences interspecific
interactions, scaling to differences in species overlap in sympatry and to rates
of hybridization across the genome. Ultimately, the Fellow will integrate
diverse data types to test how increased diversity in lower levels of biological
organization like neural responses or behaviors may constrain ecological and
species diversity. Outside this work, the Fellow will mentor students through
recruitment programs aimed at diverse student populations, and gain leadership
and teaching certificates to better prepare for more senior academic
roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.