* 2011514
* CRCNS US-Spain Research Proposal: Serial dependence in working memory
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,10/31/2021
* Christos Constantinidis, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 10/31/2021
* USD 670,680.00

Working memory, the ability to retain and manipulate information over a period
of seconds, represents a core component of higher cognitive functions, including
language, problem solving, reasoning, and abstract thought. Working memory
capacity accounts for a great proportion of individual variability in academic
performance, and it is impaired in clinical conditions including schizophrenia,
stroke, traumatic brain injury, and ADHD. Understanding the neural basis of
working memory has been a question in the forefront of scientific research over
the past few years. This project relies on an “imperfection” of working memory,
serial dependence: the contents of memory in a previous trial often affect what
is being recalled in a following one, even though this is no longer useful.
Serial dependences can provide insight into cellular mechanisms and
neurotransmitter systems. Patients with genetic conditions such as
schizophrenia, autism, and encephalitis exhibit different patterns of serial
dependence. This project forms a collaborative experimental and theoretical
approach to understand the role of different neurotransmitter systems and brain
areas in serial dependence, which will reveal fundamental properties of the
circuits that mediate working memory. Beyond the immediate goals of the
experiments, understanding the neural basis of working memory and developing
mechanistic models that capture its properties is expected to have broader
impacts on a number of scientific fields, including neuroscience, psychology,
cognitive science, computer science, and machine learning. The combined
experimental-modeling approach has also direct relevance to understanding and
treating these clinical conditions. The approach opens new avenues of model-
guided research in neuropsychiatric conditions and enhances the reach of
computational psychiatry.

Working memory has been linked to the prefrontal cortex, an area central to
cognitive processing, with unique anatomical and cellular organization. NMDA
receptors, which are abundant in the prefrontal cortex, are suspected to play a
critical role for the maintenance of information in working memory, by virtue of
their ability to maintain neurons at an excited state for an extended period of
time, and to induce plasticity of synaptic connections. Direct evidence linking
their cellular role to working memory behavior has been scant, however. This
project will address the circuit mechanisms by which NMDA receptors support
working memory function. We will rely on a novel approach, by investigating the
mechanisms of history biases, as a manifestation of long-lasting NMDAR-dependent
mechanisms in working memory. Serial dependencies are systematically affected in
patients with schizophrenia and anti-NMDAR encephalitis, suggesting an
underlying NMDAR-dependent mechanism. Experiments will train non-human primates
to perform spatial working memory tasks; obtain single neuron neurophysiological
recordings and local field potentials from dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior
parietal cortex; administer NMDAR antagonists systemically; and use optogenetic
cortical stimulation to test behavioral and physiological predictions of a
computational model of serial biases. Analysis of neural data and computational
modeling will integrate the results of the experiments in a fronto-parietal
network model. This will shed light on the role of prefrontal NMDA receptors in
shaping history-dependent biases, and the importance of local-circuit
(intrinsic) connections and long-range connections. Specifying subunit-specific
NMDAR mechanisms, and the role of the fronto-parietal network, will inform a new
computational framework with biophysical detail and enhanced predictive power
for subsequent experimentation. The project is expected to advance understanding
of cognitive processes and the neural networks mediating them.

A companion project is being funded by the National Institute of Health Carlos
III, Spain (ISCIII).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.