* 2011981
* Collaborative Research: An Object-Oriented Approach to Assess the Rainfall Evolution of Tropical Cyclones in Varying Moisture Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Stephanie Zick, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 205,455.00

Tropical storms and hurricanes can produce more than five feet of rain as
occurred in 2017 during Hurricane Harvey. Climate models indicate increasing
temperatures and atmospheric moisture in the future, factors which can lead to
stronger storms that produce more rain. To better understand how moisture is
tied to rainfall in tropical systems, it is essential to assess the structures
that produce rain within the storm – the rainbands – and the impact of moisture
on those rainbands. This project will use geographic methods to measure storm
structure and analyze how atmospheric moisture (also referred to as humidity)
affects that structure. Rainbands will be analyzed in dozens of tropical storms
using ground-based radar and polar-orbiting satellite data. Metrics that
quantify the shape, size, and evolution of rainbands are applied to these
observations. By comparing rainband evolution in different moisture
environments, this research will describe how rainband structural changes occur
and the environmental moisture regimes that lead to high rain rates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through collaboration with scientists from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), this project’s results will
enable assessment of how accurately hurricane model forecasts depict rainband
structure, an assessment that will help improve hurricane rainfall predictions.
In addition to funding graduate student research, each investigator will
simultaneously teach a course that provides hands-on training in state-of-the
art methods and includes collaborative learning opportunities for students to
discuss research among the three universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will integrate geographic and meteorological methods to investigate two
fundamental research questions about tropical cyclone (TC) size and structure:
(1) How skillful are satellite and modeling datasets in representing cloud and
precipitation structure and which three-dimensional object-based metrics best
quantify these structures? (2) How does large-scale environmental moisture
impact TC rainband development and rainfall production? Despite research that
details the importance of environmental moisture at the synoptic-scale and
within the TC inner core, few studies have combined radar, satellite, and
modeling data to examine the influence of variable moisture on synoptic and
mesoscale processes that impact TC size and structure (e.g, ventilation and
shear-induced asymmetric circulations). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provides crucial insight into model TC forecasts. By employing a novel shape-
identification algorithm that is scalable across datasets with multiple spatial
resolutions, this project will identify rainbands and tracks changes in rainband
configuration to then identify how rainbands, and TC spatial extent more
generally, are impacted by the TC’s moisture environment. The results from these
analyses will be used to establish a multi-scale conceptual model of TC size and
structure based on large-scale environmental moisture. Finally, object-based
metrics will be applied to evaluate rainfall forecasts from current operational
and experimental models by collaborating with the Hurricane Research Division of
NOAA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.