* 2011346
* Collaborative Research: Network Cluster: Using Big Data approaches to assess ecohydrological resilience across scales
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Gabrielle Boisrame, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2025
* USD 171,030.00

The part of the Earth surface that sustains life (the Critical Zone) consists of
bedrock, soil, water, air, and living things that have been interacting for
billions of years. The Critical Zone can absorb many disturbances while still
supporting life on Earth, but the age of humans or the “Anthropocene” has put
unprecedented pressure on the Critical Zone. When long-term disturbances like
climate change are combined with short-term disturbances like fires or flooding,
ecosystems can be pushed past a breaking point where important ecosystem
services shut down. This project seeks to understand and predict Critical Zone
resilience in the face of multiple natural and human disturbances. The research
will combine river flow and chemistry data from throughout the U.S. to shed
light on how quickly ecosystems recover from local disturbances and to what
degree long-term change is altering the structure of the Critical Zone. The team
of researchers will combine ecological approaches with data science methods to
analyze large quantities of information from thousands of locations. Existing
data from public and private organizations across the U.S. will be compiled into
a publicly available data base to compare ecosystem recovery times and
trajectories. The general patterns observed in the “big data” analysis will be
tested by in-depth field studies at four sites experiencing multiple
disturbances such as wildfire, acidification, and extreme storms. This project
will help Earth science researchers and educators across the U.S. develop a
deeper understanding of how the Earth system maintains itself and how humans can
avoid eroding the ecosystem services that sustain us. To achieve this goal, all
data and approaches will be shared publicly and the research team will lead an
innovative outreach and education program. This comprehensive program will
educate 7-12 grade teachers to bring cutting-edge ecology and data science to
schools across America. To enhance diversity in Earth science and data science,
a field camp will be co-designed and implemented in collaboration with
historically black colleges and universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
observatory-based Critical Zone research produces important findings on
catchment-scale processes, the global scale of disturbance in the Anthropocene
transcends the bounds of a single site or funding cycle, posing a challenge for
traditional investigative approaches. This spatial and temporal mismatch
significantly limits the predictive power of individual site studies in the
context of regional- to continental-scale environmental change. To advance
network-scale syntheses and integrate across scales, this project will apply an
iterative “pattern to process” and “process to pattern” approach to investigate
how Critical Zone structure controls water, carbon, nutrients, and response to
overlapping disturbances in the context of multi-dimensional resilience. In this
context, the overarching hypothesis is that Critical Zone structure (i.e.
configuration of biological, chemical, and physical characteristics) controls
the timing, direction, and intensity of linkages among multiple responses and
that these linkages regulate ecosystem resilience and resistance to climate and
land cover disturbance. To test this overarching hypothesis, (1) existing
ecohydrological data will be compiled from across the continental U.S. into a
multi-dimensional Critical Zone database, (2) advanced statistical analysis will
be performed using complex-systems tools on “big data” to identify state changes
in ecological function and ecosystem services, (3) process-hypotheses will be
refined based on these data-driven approaches, and (4) in-depth process
investigations will be performed at four high-vulnerability focal sites in the
northeast and southwest. The database and complex-systems approaches will be
shared to empower the Critical Zone community to transition into a phase of
data-driven hypothesis generation and cross-site research. To broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in Critical Zone and data science the
project will educate and empower a diverse new generation of STEM thinkers from
middle and high school to the graduate college level. A comprehensive grade 7-12
education program will reach hundreds of students from high-need Vermont schools
(historically marginalized economic, racial or disability groupings) by
“educating the educators” in Critical Zone and data science. Furthermore, in
collaboration with HBCUs, outdoor education on Critical Zone and data science
will be designed and implemented for a diverse group of undergraduate students.
This project is jointly funded by the Critical Zone Collaborative Network
Program, the Hydrologic Sciences Program in the NSF Division of Earth Sciences,
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.