* 2011317
* Surface Free Energy of Nanoparticles Regulates the Formation of Pulmonary Surfactant Biomolecular Corona
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yi Zuo, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 337,230.00

Understanding the complex behavior and interaction between extremely tiny
particles (nanoparticles) and living organisms is of crucial importance in
advancing the science of drug delivery, as well as proactively preventing the
environmental, health and safety ramifications after inhalation of noxious gases
and/or infectious airborne particles. Once inhaled, nanoparticles immediately
adsorb biological molecules normally found in the surface lining of the lung,
enveloping the nanoparticle with a unique biomolecular corona that defines its
subsequent cellular interactions. To date, little is known about the biological
and physicochemical driving forces regulating the formation of the biomolecular
corona. It is also unknown what potential deleterious effects may result from
the interactions of these corona-covered particles on the human lung. Thus, the
goal of this research project is to develop novel experimental methods for
understanding the thermodynamic driving forces responsible for the formation of
the biomolecular corona of inhaled nanoparticles. Understanding the dynamics of
these pulmonary/nanoparticle interactions will provide novel insights into the
mechanism of pulmonary toxicity of inhaled nanoparticles. By collaborating with
local healthcare providers, the overarching goal is to apply the knowledge
gained from this research to elucidate the environmental risks of a library of
nanoparticles, particularly those that are likely to adversely affect the lungs
of infants and children. Through the unique location of the University of
Hawaii, the investigator is dedicated to promoting participation in this
research with Native Hawaiians, Pacific Islanders, and students from
underrepresented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research project is to test a novel hypothesis that the surface free energy of
nanoparticles regulates the structure and chemical composition of the pulmonary
surfactant biomolecular corona, using a combined experimental and computational
approach. Although it is well known that the hydrophobicity of nanoparticles
plays a critical role in defining the structure and chemical configuration of
the biomolecular corona, the biomolecular events have never been elucidated or
systematically studied. This is largely due to the lack of quantitative methods
for characterizing the hydrophobicity of nanoparticles. The PI will fill this
gap by developing a novel optical method for determining the surface free energy
of nanoparticles as a quantitative measure of its hydrophobicity. This method
relies on an innovative measuring principle of manipulating the intermolecular
forces between nanoparticles across liquid media. The methodology is both unique
and innovative, and distinctly different from existing methods. Once developed
and validated, it has the potential to offer a standard, low-cost, and easy-to-
use method for quantitatively characterizing the surface free energy and
hydrophobicity of particulate matter. The PI will experimentally study particle-
size dependent surface free energy, and the energetic effect of the biomolecular
corona utilizing a library of pristine nanoparticles. Knowledge from this study
will provide insight into the thermodynamic driving forces at play in the
formation of the biomolecular corona. This research will also advance the
current understanding of the nano-bio interaction in the lungs and bridge the
gap between the available biophysicochemical data and nanotoxicological data.
Broader implications include a translational research methodology and approach
in designing nanoparticle-based pulmonary drug delivery systems and in
furthering an understanding of the pathophysiology of respiratory injury caused
by noxious air pollutants and other environmental respiratory hazards.
Ultimately, the developed technology offers the potential for widespread usage
in many platforms, both in the laboratory and in studies performed on humans to
improve respiratory health. The PI is actively engaged in the Native Hawaiian
Science &amp; Engineering Mentorship Program (NHSEMP) and the Society of Women
Engineers (SWE) at the University of Hawaii. The PI will support one graduate
student and several undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.