* 2011786
* Stanford Program in Support of LIGO â€“ Seismic Isolation and Controls
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Robert Byer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,650,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
LIGO team at Stanford works to improve the performance and reliability of the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatories (LIGO) by developing
technology and techniques to reduce the impact of ground motion on the
detectors. This grant supports the study of new techniques to reduce the noise
that limits the sensitivity of the LIGO detectors by implementing new sensing
technology in the ground motion isolation systems, and also by increasing the
ability of the detectors to operate in challenging environmental conditions such
as wind storms and earthquakes. Under good conditions, the LIGO observatories
can operate 24 hours a day, but challenging environmental conditions limit the
observatories' stable operation. The improved technology and control schemes
funded by this grant will help maximize the scientific output of these premier
facilities. This grant also supports research to enable the next generation of
detectors which may operate at low temperature, by demonstrating ways to cool
the sensitive optics without compromising the extremely low-vibration conditions
in which they operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports development of
several complementary approaches to improving Advanced LIGO. In the short term,
the implementation of improved earthquake warning schemes will enable the
operators at the sites to better utilize information from the realtime USGS
earthquake early warning systems so that the detectors can change from a low-
noise to a robust configuration before the increased motion from teleseismic
(i.e., distant) earthquakes can affect operations. The grant also supports the
study of the new wind protection fences which were developed in the previous
funding cycling and constructed recently at the LIGO Hanford Observatory. In the
medium term, this grant supports the building and testing of a Seismic Platform
Interferometer (SPI) in the test facility at Stanford. This SPI is designed to
be used to interferometrically connect the various isolation systems at the
Observatories so as to dramatically reduce the relative motion at frequencies
below 1 Hz. This integration should reduce the control noise and also improve
robustness of the LIGO detectors. In the long term, this grant supports the
development of new cryogenic heat transport systems, both dilute nitrogen gas
and nitrogen thermo-siphons for the test facility at Stanford. These systems
will be used to measure how to remove heat quickly from next generation
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.