* 2011049
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Katherine Ennis, Ennis, Katherine
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The research aims to understand the
distribution, dispersal of bacteriophage virus (phage) and its role in microbe
interactions. Despite the ubiquity of microbes, and especially predatory phages,
there remains no clear understanding of phage ecology in nature nor their impact
in more complex microbial communities. Indeed, microbes can influence biological
processes at global scales, so understanding phage effects on microbial
communities is important to elucidate larger scale effects. Using strawberry
floral nectar as a study system, this research will examine phage distribution
with field surveys and the impact of phage on microbial community composition
and nectar traits with laboratory experiments. Educational outreach on the
social value of the research will be accomplished through a public symposium and
workshop; students from underrepresented groups will be mentored in research
settings through the recruitment of students at the host institution and from a
local community college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phages are the most abundant and
diverse microbial entity. Yet, the understanding of phage distribution and
interactions is limited. Due to the lack of a universal genetic marker, phage
research has focused on pairwise interactions between phage and bacterial
species. And, studies of microbial community assembly focus on competitive
interactions among microbes, but do not generally consider predation by phages.
Using strawberries as a study system, this research will study phage
distribution in the field and of phage impacts to microbial communities that
extend beyond pairwise interactions. To address these gaps in understanding,
this research will first characterize the distribution of phages in strawberry
field systems through the collection of strawberry nectar, leaves and insect
visitors. Second, to determine how phage presence influences floral microbial
communities and nectar traits, this research will use full-factorial experiments
of inoculated lab-grown strawberry plants. The NSF Fellowship will provide two
years of postdoctoral training to gain the required expertise in microbial
community ecology and continued training as a mentor for students
underrepresented in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.