* 2011016
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Hannah Prather, Prather, Hannah
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Trees are largely composed of an intricate
system of water conducting cells (i.e., wood) that create a continuous pathway
for water movement through the plant. With increasing temperature and drought,
these plant vascular systems will bear the brunt of increasing stress. As a
result, failure of the water transport system (hydraulic failure) will be a
dominant mechanism of tree mortality under these circumstances. This is
especially true for large trees which make up roughly half of mature forest
biomass and contribute significantly to global ecosystem processes. This
research examines the ability of large trees to change their hydraulic systems
to cope with warming conditions by using trees exposed to the elevated
temperatures in urban environments (known as the Urban Heat Island Effect) as a
"natural experiment". This work will reveal the risk of future climate-induced
tree mortality and identify potential opportunities for mitigating that risk.
The fellowship training objectives build on the Fellow’s experience to create a
research and teaching program at a primarily undergraduate institution that will
further research opportunities for diverse undergraduate
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physiological processes underlying
drought-induced tree mortality are far from being fully understood. The key
research objective of this fellowship is to bring a unique approach to examine
hydraulic trait plasticity of large trees to climate warming. The research will
address two interrelated questions: 1) How do hydraulic traits of mature, large
trees shift in response to warming? 2) Are these shifts capable of mitigating
tree mortality risk under future warming? This research will characterize key
xylem hydraulic traits in western US tree species, across an urban heat island
gradient in Portland, Oregon. Xylem vulnerability curves will be used to
estimate drought resistance traits. This approach will provide more accurate
estimates of plant hydraulic traits that represent the “missing link” between
environmental cues and plant responses to drought conditions. The training
objectives will also focus on 1) enhancing scientific communication to diverse,
non-academic audiences, and 2) creating unique research opportunities for
underrepresented minority undergraduate and pre-college students through
establishing a near-peer, relational mentorship model to advance the
postdoctoral training experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.