* 2011411
* CAREER: Realizing Ultra-Broadband Terahertz Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/21/2019,03/31/2024
* Josep Jornet, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 03/31/2024
* USD 602,006.00

Over the last few years, there has been a tremendous growth in the number of
wirelessly connected mobile devices as well as in the data rate at which they
communicate. In this context, Terahertz (THz) band (0.1 - 10 THz) communication
is envisioned as a key wireless technology for the next decade. For many
decades, the lack of compact and efficient THz transceivers able to work at room
temperature has hampered the use of the THz band for practical applications.
However, many recent device technology advancements are finally closing the so-
called THz gap. From the communication perspective, there are mainly two sets of
challenges to overcome: (i) due to the higher carrier frequency (at least
hundreds of GHz), the propagation of THz signals in realistic scenarios is
extremely challenging and (ii) due to the much larger bandwidth (at least tens
of GHz), synchronization and communication with ultra-broadband signals in the
presence of phase noise and other hardware limitations, are unsolved problems.
Together, these introduce further challenges across the protocol stack, which
need to be overcome in order to enable the networks of
tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to demonstrate
the truths and debunk the myths about THz communication networks. The targeted
breakthrough is to prove the feasibility of ultra-broadband communication
networks at THz frequencies, by following a bottom-up approach and through a
closed-loop combination of mathematical modeling, numerical simulation and
experimental evaluation. For the latter, the project will leverage the Ultra-
Broadband Networking Systems Test-bed, a newly established first-of-its-kind
communication and networking test-bed at the University at Buffalo (UB), able to
support ultra-broadband links (up to 32 GHz bandwidth) at 60 GHz, 240 GHz and 1
THz. The proposed work has been divided into four intertwined thrusts: (i)
development of stochastic multi-path channel models for directional THz
communications in indoor and outdoor scenarios; (ii) design, implementation and
testing of physical layer techniques able to maximally utilize the available
bandwidth at THz frequencies, including phase noise estimation and
synchronization algorithms, ultra-broadband modulations and ultra-massive MIMO
communication schemes; (iii) development of link layer solutions for ultra-
broadband networks, including expedited neighbor discovery algorithms and multi-
hop relaying strategies; and (iv) an integrated research and education plan
aimed at creating an exciting environment at UB for the development of THz
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.