* 2011728
* Catalyst Project: Enhancing Undergraduate Research, Innovation and Education in Engineering and Computer Science – Integration of Smart Sensors Design to Citizens Science
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Marwan Rasamny, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,714.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Delaware State University satisfies the requirements of a catalyst project in
that it promises to implement a novel approach to STEM education and research at
the institution. Moreover, the project provides the PI with the opportunity to
obtain preliminary results for the development of a research project that
studies the impact of his interdisciplinary and inter-institutional/community
approach for developing next-generation, undergraduate student researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI proposes an undergraduate
research, innovation and education, infusion program, connected with citizen’s
science. The project promised to empower and prepare students at Delaware State
University for the next-generation STEM workforce. This infusion program will
bring together next-generation smart sensing technologies for environmental and
human health, and advance manufacturing. These novel technologies are generally
low-power, lightweight, portable and able to be deployed on ubiquitous
platforms, including residential, urban or agricultural, and industrial
locations. Several such technologies may include sensing and continuous
monitoring of required physical, chemical or biological environments. These
sensing systems when coupled with advanced manufacturing technologies, e.g.
high-precision 3-D printing for human skin-electronic interface, or bio-
compatible wearable sensors, can shift the paradigm of our interaction, and
understanding of the outside world. The broader impacts of this project includes
undergraduate research, education and DEL-AWARE Citizens Science program that
will involve various stakeholders, including diverse participants from academia,
local environmental agencies/organizations, community group of participants from
academia, local environmental agencies/organizations, communities, schools,
hospitals and health services in the State of
Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.