* 2011020
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Laura Bogar, Bogar, Laura
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Many living things benefit each other, and
these relationships often involve multiple species. Why are these interactions
not specialized on a single “best” partner? This research proposes a new Rule of
Life to explain this paradox: Portfolio effects, predicting that diverse
partners exist because no single partner is the “best” under all conditions.
Like investors, organisms may need a broad portfolio of relationships, in case
the environment changes. This project examines portfolio effects in the
ectomycorrhizal mutualism, required by roughly 60% of trees. Ectomycorrhizal
plants feed sugars to dozens of fungi on their roots in exchange for nutrients
and water. Since trees live for decades, they must withstand environmental
variation, from winter storms to droughts. Their fungi may offer different
symbiotic benefits in these environments. Thus, trees may need to maintain
fungal diversity over time. This research tests for portfolio effects in
seedling recruitment, to improve predictions for how forests will respond to
environmental variation. This research will also train undergraduate researchers
underrepresented in ecology, and will support public lectures and a science
workshop for middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines
greenhouse experiments, gene expression analysis, and mathematical modeling to
investigate portfolio effects. The Fellow will use Douglas fir and fungal
cultures to understand how symbiotic fungal function varies under stress. The
stressors tested – drought and nitrogen pollution – represent likely future
environmental conditions in many forests. The Fellow will measure how well tree
seedlings tolerate stress when associated with each fungus, and will measure
fungal gene expression across environments, connecting genomes to phenotypes.
Then, a statistical model will simulate how well a population of seedlings
associated with the tested fungi would withstand a stressful growing season.
Portfolio effects predict that populations of seedlings with more diverse
symbionts will grow and survive more consistently. Finally, an eco-evolutionary
model will examine how specialized a plant lineage will become, depending upon
how frequently the environment shifts. Portfolio effects predict that variable
environments should select for diverse (not specialized) associations. The
Fellow will learn mathematical modeling with her mentor, and will collaborate
with experts in France to enhance her metatranscriptomic analysis
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.