* 2011378
* Theoretical Biophysics: Searching for Principles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Ilya Nemenman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2023
* USD 42,000.00

This project will provide partial support for the conference "Theoretical
Biophysics: Searching for principles" (the Conference), to be held at the CUNY
Graduate Center in New York City on Sep. 14 -16, 2022. The Conference will bring
together world leaders in theoretical biophysics, and it will provide the
opportunity for them to interact with education experts in the field, as well as
with notable theorists in other fields of physics. The Conference is aimed at
surveying achievements at the interface of theoretical physics and biology, to
understand whether we expect theory at this interface to be different compared
to the rest of theoretical physics, and if it will contribute differently, then
how and why. Finally, the Conference will aim to understand challenges and
opportunities involved in teaching the next generation of scientists at this
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of theoretical biophysics has grown in
the recent decades from a boutique corner of physics to a substantial part of
the international physics community. For example, over the course of the past
ten years, the footprint of biophysics at the Annual March Meeting of the
American Physical Society has more than doubled. Together with related fields of
statistical physics (soft matter, polymer physics, statistical physics)
biophysics now accounts for about a quarter of the talks at the meeting.
Collectively, these groups are responsible for essentially all of the growth of
the meeting in the last decade. Following such a rapid growth, it is now the
time to take stock of the field and to understand where we are, and where we go
from there. Are we still a single field, or have we fragmented into a collection
of sub-disciplines roughly paralleling major divisions of life sciences? What
have we contributed to understanding life that biologists would not be able to
do on their own? Have we changed the discourse and the type of questions that
are being asked? How do we educate the next generation of scientists to ensure
that future progress remains equally dramatic? This Conference is needed
precisely to answer these questions. The conference will be timely since
conferences in this area have been mostly virtual during the pandemic and the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine has just completed the
first Decadal Review of Biological Physics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This event will
provide an unparalleled opportunity to survey and summarize the current state of
the field of theoretical biophysics. The perspectives presented at the
Conference should help frame big questions for the next decade in the field. The
presentations at the meeting will be recorded and made publicly available,
increasing broader impact. Finally, by means of attracting a diverse group of
participants, presenters, and discussants, including junior scientists, the
meeting will contribute to the growth of diversity in physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.