* 2011890
* WoU-MMA: Nuclear Physics at the Notre Dame Nuclear Science Laboratory Providing a Window on the Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michael Wiescher, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 8,285,314.00

This award continues the research program of nine faculty members and their
students in Nuclear Structure Physics and Nuclear Astrophysics at the University
of Notre Dame. The program focuses on direct measurements of nuclear reaction
and decay processes that determine the life of stars, the origin of the
elements, and production of multi messengers that provide a Window on the
Universe. This program addresses key nuclear processes that define the
timescales of stellar evolution and explosion processes. Another component is
the study of low energy fusion reactions during the last days of a stellar life
prior to supernova explosion. The program also explores the nuclear structure
effects that are guiding large scale nucleosynthesis processes. The research is
performed primarily by using the accelerators of the Nuclear Science Laboratory
(NSL) at the University of Notre Dame, which are uniquely designed to probe
stellar reactions through experimental techniques. The experimental results
expand our knowledge of the fundamental structure of the nucleus as a multi-body
quantum system; they also provide new insight for the astrophysics community on
the origin of the elements and the chemical evolution of the cosmos from the Big
Bang to the present. The NSL is uniquely equipped for performing this kind of
research in a university environment. The award will support the training of a
large number of graduate (approximately 25) and undergraduate students
(approximately 20) in experimental and theoretical techniques to be ready to
join the nuclear workforce of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental
program is based on the use of two accelerators at the NSL. Intense stable ion
beams from the single ended 5U Pelletron are used for the direct study of low-
energy capture and fusion reactions. Heavy ion beams are used to investigate
reactions in the inverse kinematic technique using the St. GEORGE recoil
separator. This separator is unique and serves as a blueprint for the design of
the SECAR separator at FRIB. The FN tandem accelerator is used as a multi-
purpose instrument. It is operated as a driver for the production of radioactive
beams at the newly-expanded TriSol facility. These beams allow direct reaction
measurements with the trapping of light radioactive particles at levels not
possible at large national facilities. The FN also serves the accelerator mass
spectrometry (AMS) program at the NSL, testing geological and cosmological
samples for long-lived radioactivities. A large number of nuclear structure
experiments are based on the operation of this machine using a variety of
particle and gamma spectroscopy techniques. A smaller fraction of the program
relies on the use of other national and international facilities to take
advantage of higher energy and more exotic beams not available at the
NSL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award addresses and advances the goals of the
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.