* 2012964
* An Improved Search for Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay with KamLAND-Zen
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Christopher Grant, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

A neutrino is a subatomic particle that has no electrical charge and a very
small mass. Neutrinos are one of the most abundant particles in the universe,
but because they have very little interaction with matter, they are difficult to
detect. In the last 20 years, remarkable progress has been made in understanding
the fundamental nature of the neutrino, including measurements which have
indicated that neutrinos must have a non-zero mass. This leads to some very
important questions. What is the absolute mass of the neutrino? Why are neutrino
masses so small compared to other elementary particles? How did the neutrino
obtain a mass? The answers to these questions could be intimately related to the
neutrino being its own antiparticle, also known as a Majorana particle, and may
explain the prevalence of matter over anti-matter in the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A rare nuclear process, called neutrinoless
double beta decay, is a powerful tool that can be used to investigate the
Majorana nature of neutrinos. This process, whereby two neutrons simultaneously
transform into two protons with the emission of two electrons and no neutrinos,
is extremely rare and is difficult to observe due to the vast number of similar
processes that could occur inside an experimental detector. A competitive
experimental search requires a large quantity of the double beta decay isotope
and exquisite suppression of backgrounds. This award will support the Boston
University group’s activities in an improved search for neutrinoless double beta
decay in the KamLAND-Zen experiment located deep underground in Japan. This
award will engage undergraduates from diverse backgrounds through the Research
Experience for Undergraduates program at Boston University. At the same time, it
will establish a pipeline of students and postdocs who are trained in advanced
technical skills that are highly sought-after in academia, industry, and
national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KamLAND-Zen is a kiloton scale
liquid scintillator based detector. Recently, the experiment started a new phase
of data-taking using roughly 750 kg of 136-Xe instrumented inside the detector.
This award will support the following enhancements to KamLAND-Zen: improved
background suppression with state-of-the-art deep learning classification
algorithms, an independent Bayesian analysis, and the implementation of online
event tagging software for the trigger system. The substantial reduction of
backgrounds offered by these enhancements will push the neutrinoless double beta
decay half-life sensitivity of KamLAND-Zen all the way to 5×10^26 years. This is
almost a five-fold improvement over previous KamLAND-Zen measurements. The
enhancements developed under this award will set the stage for a major detector
upgrade, called KamLAND2-Zen, that will aim for a half-life sensitivity greater
than 2×10^27 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.