* 2012157
* STTR Phase I:  High Performance Microalgae Building Enclosures for Energy Efficient Retrofitting Application
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Chengde Wu, ECOCLOSURE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is in the sustainable and economic retrofitting
of low-performing older buildings toward improved economic, social and
ecological impacts of built environments. More than half of all commercial
buildings were constructed before the 1980s with lower energy standards. The
owners and occupants of these buildings now often seek better energy management
and air quality technologies. The microalgae window developed in this Phase I
project is an energy-efficient, easy-to-install, adaptable modular unit for
different retrofitting applications, able to compete with conventional windows
due to its good air quality and renewable energy potentials. Gains in worker
productivity from microalgae window retrofit are estimated to be substantial and
building values at sale or rental are expected to increase significantly due to
building envelope improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop an innovative, cost-
effective microalgae window for retrofitting low-performing commercial windows.
Microalgae are an effective biological system for carbon capture and biomass
production from photosynthesis. The microalgae window incorporates a network of
screens filled with microalgae within a window assembly to replace or add to
older windows for energy-efficient retrofitting. The microalgae screen within a
window assembly is able to balance multiple functions of thermal insulation,
daylight transmission, solar shading efficacy, and views to outside. Research
objectives are to: 1) characterize the optimal microalgae window system for
pre-1980 office retrofitting applications; 2) verify environmental performance
using computer simulations and lab experimentation in accordance with industry
standards; and 3) conduct field testing to evaluate building energy savings,
indoor air quality improvement and renewable energy production potentials. The
new microalgae window mitigates energy transfer between indoor and outdoor
environments, subsequently reducing heating, cooling, lighting, and ventilation
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.