* 2012738
* Parity-Violating Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* David Armstrong, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 478,324.00

A central goal of subatomic physics is to gain a comprehensive understanding of
the basic "building blocks" of matter, and how they interact with each other.
Since its formulation nearly five decades ago, the “Standard Model” of nuclear
and particle physics has been remarkably successful and allows us to describe a
vast range of physical phenomena. It is known, however, to be incomplete, and
there are compelling reasons to expect that the Standard Model will eventually
break down and fail to describe some properties of
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precision measurements using electron accelerators
present an opportunity to test the Standard Model of particle physics and to
search for new physics. The Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(Jefferson Lab) in Newport News, Virginia is currently the world's leading
laboratory enabling precision tests of the Standard Model through electron
scattering experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support an effort
to precisely determine the weak charge of the electron in a large collaborative
experiment, known as MOLLER, at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
Facility (Jefferson Lab). The electroweak mixing angle, a fundamental parameter
of the electroweak sector of the standard model of particle physics 'runs' with
energy scale in the standard model, and comparison of the measured value with
the predicted running allows a sensitive search for physics beyond the standard
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will take a leading role in the development
of the track reconstruction detectors and software for the MOLLER experiment,
and is also responsible for a detection system to measure the background from
electro- and photo-produced pions. The group will also contribute to
measurements of the radius of the neutron distribution in two nuclides, 208Pb
and 48Ca, through the use of parity-violating electron scattering in the PREx-II
and CREx experiments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will serve to train
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students in the techniques of precision
nuclear physics and in the analysis of large and complex data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.