* 2012051
* The Effect of Perivascular Adipose Tissue Inflammation and Sympathetic Activity on Arterial Stiffening
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Alisa Morss Clyne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2024
* USD 521,275.00

Stiffening of arteries is a significant contributor to vascular disease, which
leads to high blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, stroke and other
significant medical conditions. Arterial stiffness is largely determined by the
function of vascular smooth muscle cells. When vascular smooth cells become
dysfunctional, they begin to proliferate and remodel the blood vessel to make it
stiffer by degrading elastin and depositing collagen. While this transition is
well established, the mechanisms that trigger smooth muscle cells to change and
stiffen arteries is not understood. This research hypothesizes that this
vascular smooth muscle cell dysfunction is mediated by the adipose (fat) tissue
that is present surrounding the arteries. This fat, known as perivascular
adipose tissue, directly surrounds large blood vessels, where it produces and
releases factors that have recently been shown to impact the blood vessel wall.
The goal of this project is to investigate how perivascular adipose tissue
inflammation and sympathetic nervous system activity impact aortic stiffening.
The research team will determine how perivascular adipose tissue impacts
vascular smooth muscle cell function (phenotype) in both an artery-on-a-chip and
in spinal cord injured mice. Spinal cord injury is an interesting model for
arterial stiffening, since patients with chronic spinal cord injury have stiffer
arteries despite normal blood pressure. Knowledge gained through this project
could lead to improved diagnostic and treatment strategies for arterial
stiffening and cardiovascular disease. In addition, this project will expand the
opportunities available for undergraduate students to participate in research
experiences. Specifically, the research team will incorporate this research
project into a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE), in which
the entire class addresses a research question of interest to the scientific
community. This course will then be translated into educational cardiovascular
biomechanics modules for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two research
objectives have been established to support this project. First, the work will
determine how perivascular adipose tissue inflammation contributes to arterial
stiffening. Using a mouse model of spinal cord injury, the research will
quantify changes in arterial stiffness, perivascular adipose tissue
inflammation, expression and activity of MMP-12 (an enzyme that degrades
elastin), as well as elastin content and fragmentation. Second, the researchers
will determine how sympathetic nervous system activity associated with
perivascular adipose tissue contributes to arterial stiffening. A similar mouse
model with spinal cord injury will be used to quantify changes in arterial
stiffness, perivascular adipose tissue sympathetic nervous system activity,
vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, arterial thickness, and collagen
content. An artery-on-a-chip model will be used to support both objectives by
determining how adipokines secreted by perivascular adipose tissue, when it is
either inflamed or stimulated by norepinephrine, affects vascular smooth muscle
cells as well as how endothelial cells may mediate this effect. In addition, two
educational objectives will introduce cardiovascular engineering to
undergraduate and high school students through course-based research activities
as well as outreach modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.