* 2012821
* Collaborative Research: Network Cluster: Quantifying controls and feedbacks of dynamic storage on critical zone processes in western montane watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Christina Tague, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 564,759.00

The critical zone is a thin layer at the Earth’s surface where rock, soil,
water, air, and living organisms interact. The critical zone supports life on
Earth. In the western United States, the critical zone is sensitive to changes
in the environment, such as fires or droughts. This project studies how
processes in the critical zone respond to changes in the environment. Data are
collected from five watersheds in Colorado and California. The project links the
fields of water science, forest ecology, rock chemistry and soil chemistry. The
project connects the way water moves and is stored in the ground to how trees
grow and to how soil and rocks change. Studying these interactions is important
to understanding how Earth will respond to future changes in climate.
Researchers from six universities work together. Students are trained in several
areas of Earth science. Educational materials are developed for all grade levels
including K-12 and college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth’s critical zone is
defined as the upper layer of the Earth’s surface, from bedrock to the tree
canopy, and is dependent upon the co-evolution of Earth system processes
including interactions among climate, hydrology, biogeochemistry, and geology.
Despite the fundamental importance of water in critical zone processes, there is
not widespread understanding of the relations between how water is stored in the
critical zone and how it affects key processes, or how global change drivers,
such as climate shifts and disturbance, will modify these interactions. The
goals of this critical zone network cluster are to 1) advance understanding of
the interactions among water storage, critical zone processes, and water
provisioning in the complex physiography of western United States montane
ecosystems; 2) explore how water storage and critical zone processes will be
altered under global change drivers; and 3) create educational opportunities and
resources about the critical zone that are accessible to a diverse student
population, including K-12 to postgraduates. The network cluster consists of
five research catchments with differing critical zone structure and water
storage capacity where the research team collects a common suite of field
measurements and conducts coordinated modeling activities. Field measurements
include monitoring of hydrologic and biogeochemical fluxes, as well as, surveys
of near-surface geophysical properties and forest structure and dynamics. The
modeling platforms for this project include: 1) integrated hydrologic models
that can fully resolve overland, unsaturated, and saturated flow to full
quantify the roles of climate, vegetation, subsurface structure, and topography
on hydrologic partitioning, 2) reactive transport models that fully resolve
biogeochemical reaction networks with flexible implementation of reaction
kinetics and thermodynamics to estimate weathering and biogeochemical reaction
rates and fluxes at the catchment scale, and 3) an ecohydrology model that
couples hydrologic processes with dynamics of vegetation and ecosystem carbon
and nutrient cycles and ecosystem disturbance including vegetation mortality and
fire. The broader impacts of this project include 1) research experiences and
training of students at multiple education levels, including students in middle
school, undergraduate institutions, and graduate school; and 2) improving public
science literacy of critical zone processes through the creation of interactive
virtual reality video installations. In addition, this network cluster maintains
and expands research infrastructure to provide a facility for the Earth science
community. This project is jointly funded by the Critical Zone Collaborative
Network, the Hydrologic Sciences, and the Education and Human Resources programs
in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.