* 2012415
* Numerical Algorithms and Simulations for Multiphase Flows of Multiple Immiscible Incompressible Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Suchuan Dong, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 205,349.00

This research project aims to develop mathematical and computational tools,
methods, and algorithms for simulating and understanding a class of multiphase
multicomponent flow problems that are of practical engineering significance and
fundamental physical importance. The systems under study in this project have
relevance to the environment, energy, and materials science. For example, such
multiphase systems occur in modeling for remediation of oil spills. Another
example is the novel class of functional surfaces called liquid infused surfaces
discovered in the past decade, which exhibit a variety of attractive properties
such as self-cleaning, anti-icing and anti-fouling. These multiphase
multicomponent problems underlie numerous technological advances, from printed
electronic circuits and sensors, to opto-fluidic microscopes and waveguides, to
water-resistant fabrics, to oil recovery and carbon sequestration. The project
aims to develop improved efficient and effective computational methods to tackle
the challenges in simulations for such systems. This project provides research
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims at devising efficient and effective
methods for simulating and understanding the dynamics of a system of three or
more immiscible incompressible fluids with different physical properties such as
densities, viscosities, and pairwise surface tensions. These systems pose
enormous computational and algorithmic challenges to numerical simulations,
because of the multitude of fluid interfaces, three-phase lines, and contact
lines and contact angles involved. The project builds upon the reduction-
consistent and thermodynamically-consistent formulations developed in recent
years and will provide computational prediction capability and effective
techniques for illuminating and understanding the interactions among multiple
fluid components, multiple types of fluid interfaces, and multiple types of
contact lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.