* 2012817
* SBIR Phase I:  Intraoperative monitoring device to detect bowel injuries during laparoscopic surgical procedures
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Devin Fell, SENTIRE MEDICAL SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

This broader impacts/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
enhance patient safety by addressing the most devastating and costly risk
associated with robotic-assisted and standard laparoscopic surgical procedures –
undetected bowel perforation. More than 15 million such procedures, including
hysterectomy, cholecystectomy, hernia repair, prostatectomy, oophorectomy and
others, are performed annually. While the incidence of undetected bowel
perforation is relatively low at 0.3 – 1.0%, the consequences for more than
40,000 patients annually are severe, and the incremental costs of caring for
those patients substantial. Detection of inadvertent bowel perforation during
the initial surgery would enable surgeons to effect repair at that time,
avoiding unnecessary patient suffering, billions in associated costs and a 5%
mortality rate. Those patients who do not die are subjected to multiple
corrective surgeries, extensive antibiotic treatment and potentially lengthy
intensive care convalescence. Patient safety concerns and the significant cost
of corrective care, which can easily exceed $100,000 per patient, dictate the
need for a low-cost solution. The proposed project will advance the development
of intraoperative detection of bowel perforation, allowing for immediate repair
and avoidance of negative outcomes. This can be accomplished by the detection of
gases released from the bowel when it is perforated and alerting the surgeon to
the presence of the perforation. This innovation would be applicable to more
than 49,000 operating suites in the U.S. and represent a potential addressable
market of $750 million annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SBIR Phase I
project will be to advance the development of an intraoperative detection of
bowel perforation, including: 1) experimentation relative to gas species
selection and detection methodology / modality; 2) identification and
optimization of detection ranges; 3) development of controls to ensure against
false positive and negative results. Benchtop and in-vivo testing is proposed to
determine repeatability and reliability regarding device efficacy. A Potential
Failure Modes Effects Analysis (PFMEA) will be utilized to highlight technical
risks. The project will also explore the cost-performance trade space to create
a new patient safety measure in laparoscopic and robotic
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.