* 2012339
* Building a National Model for an Undergraduate Women In Science and Engineering Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Monica Fernandez-Bugallo, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 570,698.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by preparing leaders and
improving career readiness among women in science and engineering majors. There
is a critical need to identify and implement innovative interventions to help
retain students from underrepresented groups in STEM majors and to prepare them
for careers in STEM fields. In addition, novel educational approaches are needed
to better prepare STEM workforce leaders. The two needs may be interrelated
since an emphasis on leadership development may help motivate students as well
as prepare them for transition into professional careers or graduate school in
STEM fields. Despite the increasing awareness of gender inequity, women are
still underrepresented in many STEM careers and academic institutions and STEM
programs must be called to action to alleviate this inequity. This project hopes
to contribute to these efforts by implementing a career readiness course
sequence and mentoring pathway for undergraduate women in science and
engineering. In addition, the project intends to study the mechanisms that
affect students’ academic and career engagement, as well as their social
integration into STEM majors and STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project’s interventions respond to identified challenges of STEM undergraduate
education with the goal of increasing the success of women undergraduates in
completing STEM degree programs and pursuing careers in STEM fields. New career-
ready courses with associated practica will be created to connect knowledge
acquired through STEM majors to experiential learning and research. In addition,
a mentoring pathway will be enhanced with training for mentors and mentees; this
pathway will include opportunities for professional development. These
programmatic activities are intended to foster development of the skills,
knowledge, and competencies needed for success in STEM careers. An empirical
psychological study using measures at multiple timepoints is planned to
investigate the factors that contribute to the development of academic and
career motivation and skill development, and that advance the development of
academic social networks, social support, and belonging. The project intends to
create a replicable program for female undergraduate students who will integrate
their technical expertise with formal training and practice of skills required
for joining and leading the STEM workforce, and for succeeding in graduate
study. The project will also contribute to institutional transformation by
creating an exceptionally strong collaboration between different campus offices
and building an energetic link between Stony Brook University and local
industries that will contribute to the diversification of the workforce. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.