* 2012972
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: EA3 - Expanding Access to Alabama Agriscience
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Neil Lamb, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,255.00

Expanding Access to Alabama Agriscience (EA3)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to form a partnership of stakeholders to identify barriers and opportunities
to broadening participation in agriscience-related careers across Alabama. The
great challenge of modern agriculture is how we continue to feed Earth’s growing
population in the face of shrinking farmable land and increasing climate change.
One solution is to use genomic tools to identify and incorporate genetic changes
that increase yields in the face of decreased inputs and uncertain environments.
The demand for the workforce to use these tools is projected to grow faster than
the national average, but as in other STEM fields, women and ethnic minorities
are currently underrepresented in these agriscience-related careers. Alabama has
historically lacked a common vision to expand and weave individual initiatives,
resources and expertise into a coordinated network that provides learners with a
pathway towards agriscience-related careers. We are program-rich but
“coordination-poor”. This proposal seeks to generate a shared awareness of the
current landscape, deepen cross-sector relationships and build a common vision
for how to broaden agriscience participation from elementary school through the
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning proposal has four key objectives:
(1) Engage Alabama’s agriscience and educational stakeholders in a collaborative
partnership to build cross-sector relationships and identify a common vision to
broaden participation across the agriscience workforce (2) Identify the
agriscience-related opportunities for student engagement, career exploration and
workforce development that are currently available to Alabama learners, (3)
Recognize the geographic, academic, financial and cultural barriers that limit
student access to these opportunities, (4) Cultivate approaches to overcome
these barriers, through modifying/scaling existing initiatives as well as
developing new ones. The planning process will utilize collective impact
concepts as well as the NSF INCLUDES collaborative infrastructure elements of
Shared Vision, Partnership and Goals and Metrics. EA3 partners includes K-12
STEM and Career and Technical Education programs, as well as out-of-school
organizations like Future Farmers of America, Alabama 4-H, the Boys and Girls
Club and the Educational Outreach team at the HudsonAlpha Institute for
Biotechnology. Research and teaching faculty from Alabama A&amp;M, Auburn and
Tuskegee universities, together with the plant genomics team from HudsonAlpha,
link scientific discovery and workforce development. Lastly, the Alabama Farmers
Federation and Alabama Extension offices provide a direct connection to the
state’s agriscience industry. Over a 14-month timeframe, this team will assemble
for eight videoconferences and five in-person meetings, held across Alabama. The
outcomes of these meetings will be woven into a statement of shared vision and
an integrated strategic plan for increasing participation in Alabama’s
agriscience-related careers. This will have a lasting impact as stakeholders use
the knowledge gained through the planning process to develop experiences that
effectively boost the participation and retention of underrepresented
populations in agriscience-related fields across
Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.