* 2012221
* SBIR Phase I:  Rechargeable Zn Metal Battery with Long Life and Low Cost
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Heng Jiang, GROTTHUSS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to explore translation of a rechargeable zinc-metal
battery for large-scale energy storage. Renewable but intermittent energy
sources require cost-effective storage. The proposed battery essentially
converts a primary alkaline battery to a rechargeable form with novel chemical
components. This project will demonstrate the long cycle life of zinc-metal
batteries under conditions amenable for applications such as backup power for
data centers, grid-level needs, and household energy storage use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop Zn-metal
batteries in use-inspired battery configurations and cell dimensions. This
project is to translate the fundamental understanding of Zinc-salt-based water-
in-salt electrolytes that strengthen the inertness of both water molecules of
the electrolytes and Zn metal anode. The proposed technology offers stable cycle
life with excellent power output in an appropriate footprint. The project will
advance the development of new electrolytes that greatly mitigate the hydrogen
evolution reaction and eliminate dendrite formation on the Zn metal anode. The
new electrolytes address the challenges of both anode and cathode, where the
cathode capacity fading issues will be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.