* 2012017
* Aluminum Gallium Arsenide Coatings to Improve LIGO Sensitivity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Gregory Harry, American University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,955.00

The direct detection of gravitational waves from astronomical sources by the
LIGO and Virgo detectors has opened the universe to a new type of investigation:
gravitational astronomy. Gravitational astronomy relies on precise measurement
of the position of mirrors using a laser, and any source of noise in the mirrors
represents a limitation to our ability to observe gravitational phenomenon such
as black holes, neutron starts, supernova, and the Big Bang. The thermal motions
of atoms in the optical coatings that cover the surface of the mirrors is large
enough to be a significant limitation on LIGO sensitivity. Aluminum gallium
arsenide (AlGaAs) mirrors have been used as low noise coatings in other
applications that require precision measurement of mirror positions, including
the most accurate clocks and very precise lasers. This project explores using
AlGaAs mirrors on the much larger LIGO optics to make sure the low noise
benefits can be realized in gravitational astronomy as have been in other
precision measurement applications. This project does this using undergraduate
students as the laboratory researchers, and exposure of undergraduate students
to high end research both enhances their careers and equips them with the skills
to compete in the technical workplace of the 21st century. Development of large
AlGaAs mirrors can also have benefits in other applications such as computer
chip manufacturing and direct energy applications to national defense. This
project will also continue the annual Optics Olympiad that brings over a hundred
Washington DC middle school students to the university campus. The middle school
students participate in optics demonstrations, discussions with university
students as well as professional scientists and engineers, and compete in a game
show style tournament.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary challenge in using
AlGaAs mirrors in LIGO is to scale up the size of these coatings. The group will
work with vendors to increase the diameters of the coatings that can be grown
and bonded onto silica substrates. They will also further study the material
properties of AlGaAS, and especially the internal friction that is the source of
thermal noise, to make sure AlGaAs will still be an attractive coating material
at larger sizes. They will research AlGaAs internal friction using the
established technique of normal mode quality factor measurements and finite
element modeling. They will also share the AlGaAs samples with other members of
the LIGO Optics Working Group for measurements of optical and other
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.