* 2012482
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Temperature reconstructions for the United States Intermountain West
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Grant Harley, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2022
* USD 17,700.00

This study will reconstruct summer air temperatures over the past 1000 years
using tree-ring data in an area where these data do not currently exit. Using a
novel “blue-light” proxy for tree-ring analysis, this project will provide solid
contributions to the field of dendrochronology. Understanding the broader
temporal and spatial patterns, timing, and amplitude of current and past cool
and warm periods provides a framework to better understand future environmental
disruptions in the study region. These data and the environmental
reconstructions produced by this research will be hosted at the International
Tree-Ring Data Bank and NOAA World Data Center for Paleoclimatology so that they
are readily accessible to the public, as well as other researchers. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide
support to enable a graduate student to establish an independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current and future changes in temperatures may have
negative impacts on natural and human systems and high-resolution temperature
reconstructions are needed to understand current and longer-term environmental
change. The spatial variability of historic temperature trends is not fully
understood, and this lack of knowledge limits model forecasts. This research
will improve understandings of the historic spatial and temporal variability of
summer temperatures across the western United States. It uses novel methods
applied to tree rings to develop temperature records that provide information on
(1) past and current spatiotemporal characteristics of temperature variability,
(2) the full range and amplitude of historic temperatures, and (3) the timing
and direction of temperature rate changes. Results from this work will
contribute to increasing the global density of robust, longer-term, annually-
resolved environmental records and increase the understanding of regional
variability of past and present environmental trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.