* 2012191
* Investigating Quantum Coherence using Structured Electron Interferometry
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Benjamin McMorran, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 572,321.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable and
expand quantum-inspired measurements with electrons. The vast majority of modern
developments in quantum measurement and quantum information technologies use
photons, the smallest unit of light, as a central component. Yet the wavelike
nature of photons still places fundamental limits on the smallest length scale
at which this can be applied. Many of these quantum measurement protocols can be
implemented with matter waves as well, but the technologies used to generate,
manipulate, apply, and detect matter waves are not as well-developed as those
for photons. This project develops new quantum techniques in the electron
microscope, such as interaction-free measurements using electrons, and applies
them to explore various phenomenon at the nanoscale. This will provide new
quantum electron microscopy tools that can be used to reduce the size of quantum
devices, similar to how conventional electron microscopes enabled the reduction
in size of classical electronic computing components. In addition to providing
training to graduate and undergraduate students in advanced microscopy and
nanoscience, this project will engage first-year STEM majors as well, providing
a “bridge” over the summer into their second year by introducing them to
programming, data analysis, electron microscopy, nanofabrication, and optical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop and use tools to
both prepare and measure the coherence and the phase of free electron
wavefunctions inside electron microscopes. Nanoscale diffraction holograms
provide a way to coherently manipulate the phase profile of individual electrons
as well as measure them. For example, diffraction holograms produce free
electron wavefunctions with helical phase profiles that provide a new way to
probe the chirality and spatial coherence of nanoscale plasmonics. Electron-
transparent phase gratings serve as optimized beamsplitters for electrons, which
are used in this project to create electron interferometers with large path
separation, useful for measuring electric and magnetic fields at the nanoscale.
Interaction-free measurement protocols will also be explored, which could enable
high resolution electron microscopy of easily damaged materials. The project
connects with a broad spectrum of sciences and applications, enabling unique
opportunities for project participants in a range of disciplines and
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.