* 2012944
* WoU-MMA: The Southern Wide-Field Gamma-Ray Observatory (SWGO): R&amp;D for a Next-Generation Ground-Based Survey Instrument for Very High Energy Gamma-Ray Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Smith, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2024
* USD 860,003.00

With the successful development of facilities for the detection of neutrinos and
gravitational waves, as well as the deployment of next-generation gamma-ray
detectors, the next decade will provide a wealth of opportunities for multi-
messenger astronomy. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) gamma-ray
observatory is an extremely successful survey instrument, and has inspired an
ambitious Chinese effort, but that will also be sited in the northern
hemisphere. This project will be carrying out the essential research and
development needed for a next-generation ground-based survey instrument in the
southern hemisphere: the Southern Wide-Field Gamma-Ray Observatory (SWGO). The
work also contributes to maintaining US leadership in ground-based gamma-ray
instruments. The team is committed to increasing the diversity and excellence of
the STEM workforce, and will continue efforts to provide a path for
predominantly African-American students to continue to graduate school in
physics and astronomy. SWGO will be built in a Spanish speaking country, which
will enhance outreach to Hispanic communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A survey
instrument provides daily unbiased monitoring for variable sources, as well as
near-real-time alerts to other instruments, and the wide field makes it
sensitive to particle accelerators in the local Galactic neighborhood. The
detection of very extended TeV gamma-ray emission around nearby pulsars is
interpreted as halos of gamma rays that are produced by electrons and positrons
interacting with the ambient interstellar radiation field outside the classical
pulsar wind nebulae. SWGO will be ideally suited to study the acceleration and
propagation of particles within them in unprecedented detail. It will also
enable studies of the galactic center region and uniquely contribute to the
search for and study of sources of cosmic rays with energies in excess of 1 PeV.
All gamma-ray data will be made publicly available. Supported by this initial
SWGO award the team will focus on detector simulation, air shower data
reconstruction algorithm development, and electronics
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.