* 2012584
* Studies in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Morris Swartz, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,135,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all the elementary particles known at the time into a hierarchy
of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this model to date
was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC). However, the Standard Model as it currently exists leaves open many
questions about the universe, including such fundamental questions as to why the
Higgs mass has the value it has. One of the primary functions of the Compact
Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the LHC, which remains the premier Energy
Frontier particle accelerator, operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva
Switzerland, is to discover new physics beyond the Standard Model. This project
will analyze the latest data from the CMS experiment looking for signals of
beyond the Standard Model. The work that will be accomplished with this award
will impact three broad areas: 1) furthering the analysis techniques that might
well discover new physics at the LHC 2) Alignment of the new tracking detector
upgrade of the CMS detector (HL-LHC) and 3) workforce development and outreach
to the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This group led the work on the
4-lepton decay channel in the discovery of the Higgs. This award will expand on
analysis techniques developed in that discovery, applying it to the new data
that has now been delivered by the LHC and use it in new searches for physics
beyond the Standard Model. To discover this new physics, this group will probe
the large data sample of Higgs bosons, measuring details such as precision
measurements of the Higgs boson mass, width, quantum numbers, Charge Parity
properties, and more generally, the tensor structure of Higgs interactions with
vector bosons and fermions. The larger dataset now available could yield new
sources of symmetry violation (called Charged Parity or CP violation) that might
be associated with the Higgs boson. This project will also support technical
contributions to the operation of the CMS detector and to the study of new
detector technology for high luminosity upgrades of the LHC, the HL-LHC which
has now just started. The contributions to the study of detector upgrades are
based on tools that were developed to support the present operation. The PI's
group is the host of a QuarkNet center that has a current membership of 25
Baltimore area high school teachers. The QuarkNet center has initiated and
helped to organize a very successful series of regional Physics Fairs that have
brought science to thousands of area residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.