* 2012609
* Quantum Computational Signal Classification
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* George Siopsis, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Developments in artificial intelligence are opening up new avenues for human-
machine teaming. For example, the brain-computer interface (BCI) technology
extracts and interprets information generated by brain activity without
depending on any external device or muscle intervention. Improving human-machine
interactions requires the analysis and interpretation of physiological signals
to effectively assess individual states. These signals are typically
nonstationary, noisy, and nonlinear, and current signal processing methods may
fail. Embedding a signal into a point cloud, this project, Quantum Computational
Signal Classifications (QuATOMIC) abides by the stringent nature of signals, and
considers the detection of shape patterns of the signals’ point clouds. These
shape patterns are characterized by their pertinent topological properties,
which are summarized in a persistence diagram. A persistence diagram consists of
two dimensional points whose positioning highlights signals’ features and
deconvolves them from any underlying noise. On the other hand, point clouds
consist of many discrete points, and the computation of these diagrams is a
rather formidable task. Indeed, subsampling typically takes place leading to
loss of vital information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will adopt a quantum
topological framework which considers all points in a point cloud, and relies on
principles of quantum machine learning algorithms. Moreover, when it comes to
actual analysis of signals and their associated diagrams, one may need (i) to
compute a distance between them so that they are differentiated, or (ii) to
quantify their uncertainty and estimate a probability density function on the
space of persistence diagrams. Computing a distance between two persistence
diagrams requires the solution of an optimal matching problem. The PIs will
develop a novel distance that is formulated and computed in a quantum way.
Propagating a distribution of a persistence diagram to quantify uncertainty
requires to compute a distribution of a random point process. This is a non-
trivial, highly combinatorial problem, which QuATOMIC will bypass by considering
a quantum computing approach based on either quantum circuits (gate model), or
the principles of quantum annealing. Having at hand a measure of quantifying the
difference among persistence diagrams and their uncertainty, QuATOMIC will
further generate a novel quantum supervised machine learning scheme for
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.