* 2012255
* Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Variational Multiscale Reduced Order Models for Biomedical and Engineering Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Omer San, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 149,996.00

Mathematical models are a fundamental tool for improving our knowledge of
natural and industrial processes. Their use in practice depends on their
reliability and efficiency. Reliability requires a fine-tuning of the model
parameters and an accurate assessment of the sensitivity to noisy inputs.
Efficiency is particularly critical in optimization problems, where the
computational procedure identifies the best working conditions of a complex
system. These requirements lead to solving many times models with millions or
even billions of unknowns. This process may require days or weeks of
computations on high-performance computing facilities. To mitigate these costs,
we need new modeling strategies that allow model-runs in minutes to hours on
local computing facilities (such as a laptop). Reduced order models (ROMs) are
extremely low-dimensional approximations that can decrease the computational
cost of current computational models by orders of magnitude. Having in mind
biomedical and wind-engineering applications, this project proposes novel
methods of model reduction. Data and numerical results from the expensive (or
high-fidelity) models are combined with machine learning approaches, to obtain
ROMs that attain both efficiency and accuracy at an unprecedented level. The new
data-driven ROM framework will finally make possible the numerical simulation of
aortic dissections, pediatric surgery, or wind farm optimization on a laptop in
minutes, and aims at becoming a critical and trustworthy tool in decision-making
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data assimilation (DA), uncertainty
quantification (UQ), and shape optimization (SO) are central to the development
of computational models for significant biomedical and engineering applications.
Since these applications require a large number of model simulations, running an
expensive full order model (FOM) is generally prohibitively expensive. For
systems that display dominant structures, reduced order models (ROMs) can
decrease the FOM computational cost by orders of magnitude. Thus, for the
clinical and engineering applications above, ROMs appear as a natural and
practical alternative to the prohibitively expensive FOMs running on high-
performance computing facilities. Unfortunately, to capture all the geometric
scales in the hemodynamics of aortic dissections or to cope with the large
Reynolds number in the wind farm optimization, hundreds and thousands of ROM
modes are necessary. These relatively high-dimensional ROMs are still not viable
to effectively perform DA, UQ, or SO for these applications. What is needed is
ROMs that are not only low-dimensional and efficient, but also accurate. To
develop ROMs that are accurate in realistic, under-resolved regimes, the ROM
closure problem needs to be solved, i.e., the effect of the discarded ROM modes
on the ROM dynamics needs to be modeled. The proposed research puts forth a new
data-driven ROM paradigm that centers around the hierarchical structure of
variational multiscale (VMS) methodology and utilizes modern machine learning
(ML) and numerical and observational data to develop structural ROM closures
that can dramatically increase the ROM accuracy at a modest computational cost.
The novel data-driven VMS-ROM paradigm maintains the low computational cost of
current ROMs but dramatically increases the ROM accuracy. Biomedical
applications in thoracic and pediatric surgery (aortic dissections and Fontan
procedure â€“ where the fate of the patient depends significantly on the shape of
the vessels) as well as wind-engineering applications are specifically targeted.
The data-driven VMS-ROM framework will finally make possible the efficient DA,
UQ, and SO in these and, possibly, other fields relying on mathematical and
computational modeling. This project will support one graduate student each year
at each of the three institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.