* 2012350
* Torsion-Balance Searches for Ultra-Light Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Eric Adelberger, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2024
* USD 424,536.00

Astrophysical observations and cosmological data give strong evidence that
nearly a quarter of the Universe consists of dark matter. There are strong
reasons to believe that it cannot consist of known particles. It is likely that
the dark matter consists of new particles that have not yet revealed themselves
in any other context. There are two well-motivated possibilities for the dark-
matter particles: heavy fermionic particles called WIMPs and bosonic ultra-light
dark matter (ULDM), of which axions are a subset. Searches at large-scale
facilities for WIMPs have not yet found dark matter. Recent theoretical
suggestions have inspired searches for ULDM particles with masses as low as
10^(-23) eV/c2. These particles are not detected individually, but rather by the
coherent fields they produce, which are most-readily detected in small-scale
precision experiments. The torsion balance technology developed by the Eöt-Wash
Gravity Group is ideally suited to search for the effects expected from these
bosonic fields. The group has a long tradition of teaching research to
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdocs. With formal and
informal instruction this project will provide broad STEM education at all
levels. This project offers unique training opportunities in fundamental
physics, realization of precision mechanical instruments, and the execution of
precision measurements. The technology developed is finding application in
gravitational wave detection as well as in applied areas such as
seismology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Torsion balances have become sensitive enough
to be significant tools in the search for ULDM. Recently, such measurements have
set some of the most stringent limits on axion-like and equivalence-principle-
violating ULDM. Enabled by technological advances, this torsion balance search
will encompass upgrades to existing instruments that make these dark matter
searches substantially more sensitive. In addition, data analysis will be
performed to look for the signature of equivalence-principle-violating bosonic
ULDM in the data stream of concurrent torsion-balance tests of gravity. This
award will fund searches for this bosonic ULDM using rotating and stationary
torsion balances, using beryllium and polyethylene test materials to increase
ULDM sensitivity; searches for spin-coupled axion-like ULDM using an existing
unique spin-polarized torsion pendulum in an upgraded stationary torsion
balance; and increase experimental sensitivity to ULDM signals by refining
fused-silica fibers, adding auxiliary sensors, upgrading readout, and improving
instrumental shielding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.