* 2012014
* Collaborative Research: Diversifying and Humanizing Scientist Role Models to Increase the Impact of Data Literacy Instruction on Student Interest and Retention in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Melissa Kjelvik, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 480,255.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping to improve
undergraduate biology education and broaden participation in the U.S. STEM
workforce. Undergraduate educational resources typically do not represent the
full breadth of the people in the scientific workforce. They also fail to
represent the diversity of students in STEM classrooms. These mismatches can
have negative effects on students, such as contributing to stereotype threat and
imposter syndrome, reducing student course performance, and increasing the
likelihood that students will drop out of STEM majors. Thus, increasing the
diversity of scientist role models in classrooms is likely to have positive
impacts on students. However, more work is needed to understand the specific
impacts of different educational approaches and their role in increasing the
performance, recruitment, and retention of students in STEM. To address this
research need, the project team will study the impact of a diverse set of
scientist role models on student performance and retention in undergraduate
biology courses. Results of this research will increase understanding about how
inclusion of diverse scientist role models in instructional materials affects
student attitudes towards STEM courses and careers. The project will also
produce a new set of freely available, research tested, educational resources
for public use in biology classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This discipline-
based education research study will evaluate the impact of introducing a diverse
set of scientist role models to undergraduate students in conjunction with
quantitative data literacy instruction. Project personnel will design new
teaching materials that address appropriate scientific content and data literacy
objectives for introductory undergraduate biology courses and simultaneously
highlight scientist role models from diverse genders, abilities, and
race/ethnicities. These resources will be based on a combination of two
previously established science education approaches, Data Nuggets and Project
Biodiversify. The research study design will vary the depth to which students in
introductory biology classrooms engage with humanizing elements of scientist
role models from diverse backgrounds to determine which aspects drive the
efficacy of the combined instructional materials. Through a network of
introductory biology classrooms across the country, students will experience one
of three treatments, all of which apply the same core content and data literacy
instruction but vary in the inclusion of information on scientist identity and
background. Using online student survey data, the project will assess the impact
of treatments on student interest, course engagement, and indicators of
recruitment/retention in STEM careers. This research will also result in the
development and testing of publicly available curricular resources for
introductory undergraduate biology courses that highlight scientists’ stories,
while simultaneously linking to core content in biology and data literacy. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.