* 2012224
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an Injectable Shear Thinning Biomaterial for the Treatment of Aneurysms
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Ehsan Jabbarzadeh, OBSIDIO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2021
* USD 224,962.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project lies in the development of an innovative universal embolization
biomaterial for the treatment of aneurysms with the goal of stopping undesired
blood flow through vessels anywhere in the body. Recent reports estimate
aneurysm incidence of 6 million in the US alone. The mortality rate for aneurysm
rupture alone are over 50%; 66% of those who survive a rupture suffer from major
disabilities. Current benchmark treatments for aneurysms include coil
embolization, in which trained radiologists push long metal wires with a coiled
shape into the vessel until they are packed densely to slow and clot blood flow.
While treatment options exist, most suffer from difficulty in administration,
high treatment failure rate, and high cost. The proposed novel shear-thinning
biomaterial (STB) technology offers an easy-to-use, cheaper and safer
alternative to treat aneurysms. This approach has the potential to reduce
procedure time, decrease radiation exposure, reduce world-wide morbidity and
mortality, and provide access to a broad range of hospitals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will generate the required data for a
development of a robust, minimally invasive, and biocompatible STB product for
treatment of aneurysms. In Objective 1, we will demonstrate STB off-the-shelf
readiness, including stability over an adequate shelf life in a premixed, ready-
to-use formulation, and biocompatibility through the ISO-10993 framework. These
studies will demonstrate STB safety. In Objective 2, we will conduct preclinical
toxicological and performance testing to demonstrate the durability, safety and
efficacy of the STB embolic agent using a canine saccular aneurysm (SA) animal
model to demonstrate biocompatibility of optimized STBs and successful delivery.
Benchmarks include stoppage of blood flow and absence of recanalization within
the aneurysm sac in a 60-day follow up time period. Other parameters to be
studied include inflammation rates, proper adhesion, and immobility of the
material upon exposure to the blood stream, with the goal of successful
(&gt;95%) exclusion from the circulation up to 60-day post embolization with
epithelization along the lumen interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.