* 2012443
* EAGER: Improving the Aeroacoustic Properties of Hybrid Anechoic Wind Tunnels
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Stewart Glegg, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 195,525.00

Wind tunnels are a fundamental part of the engineering and scientific process
used to develop quieter and more efficient aircraft, wind turbines, and other
systems. The hybrid anechoic wind tunnel, introduced some 13 years ago, provides
a way to substantially increase the accuracy and scope of wind tunnel tests
concerned with flow generated noise. This configuration, which has already been
adopted by a number of research facilities across the world relies on “acoustic
windows” – large panels of tensioned fabric that are transparent to sound but
largely impervious to flow. Such windows have been made from commercially
available Kevlar fabric which has many desirable characteristics for this
purpose, but the fabric was designed for composites manufacture. A Kevlar fabric
explicitly designed for wind tunnel applications promises additional benefits –
an even quieter test environment and embedded instrumentation that can monitor
the flow. Under this project, an interdisciplinary team of textiles, acoustics,
and aerodynamics researchers will conduct a short-term research program to
develop these materials. This innovative, potentially high payoff effort,
promises to bring the advantages of hybrid anechoic testing to national scale
facilities and greatly enhance the development quieter and more efficient
vehicles and systems. This project will also be dedicated to research education
at the postdoc, graduate and undergraduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is based upon the observation that Kevlar fabric used as acoustic
windows generates noise at high frequencies (&gt;10kHz) that potentially limits
the application of this technology in the context of national scale wind tunnel
facilities that perform applied model scale testing for vehicle development by
industry and government. The hypothesis is that the noise is made by pores in
the fabric that serve no useful aeroacoustic function. Adjusting the weave to
eliminate the pores requires the multi-disciplinary collaboration needed to
perform a systematic study of the optimum fabric design for aeroacoustic
applications. The work is being performed by a team of researchers from Virginia
Tech, Florida Atlantic University, and NC State. The NC State group will use a
research loom fabricate the needed modified fabrics and also investigate the
feasibility of embedding sensors. Wind tunnel experiments directed at
documenting and understanding the aeroacoustic performance of the fabrics will
be performed at Virginia Tech, which will also provide input on sensor choices
and requirements. Theoretical modeling and understanding of the nature of the
acoustic source will be performed at Florida Atlantic University. Together this
effort is expected to generate robust recommendations for optimal acoustic
window design and embedded sensors that can be adopted by current and planned
hybrid anechoic wind tunnels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.