* 2012154
* RUI: Commissioning, Operations, and Data Analysis of the ALICE Fast Interaction Trigger Detector for LHC Run 3
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Klay, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 255,000.00

The ALICE experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is dedicated to the
study of the strongly interacting nuclear matter known as the Quark Gluon Plasma
(QGP), which is produced in high energy collisions of heavy ions. As part of a
decades-long international collaboration, ALICE has helped reveal the nature of
the Universe as it was just a millionth of a second after the Big Bang. Over the
past several years, the PI and her team of undergraduate students have
contributed to the design, testing, and construction of an essential upgrade to
ALICE, the Fast Interaction Trigger (FIT) detector. FIT will enable ALICE to
efficiently select the most interesting collisions for further analysis during
LHC Run 3. This award allows the PI to continue her work by helping with the
installation, commissioning, and operation of the detector during its initial
deployment. Together with their collaborators, the PI and her students will help
commission, monitor, and analyze the detector’s performance to help ALICE
explore fundamental principles of the theory of strong nuclear interactions.
These results will help build a deeper understanding of the primordial
composition of matter. This award will allow students to contribute to the
development and deployment of cutting-edge instrumentation for high-energy
nuclear physics experiments and build experience and technical skills while
collaborating with renowned international scientists and engineers on one of the
largest accelerator experiments ever conducted. Recruiting, retaining, and
educating science, technology, engineering and mathematics students and teachers
are critical to advancing scientific literacy, maintaining economic growth, and
continuing scientific discoveries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Less than a millionth
of a second after the Big Bang, the universe was filled with a hot, dense medium
of quarks and gluons termed a Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP). The fundamental theory
governing the interactions within this medium is known as Quantum Chromo-
Dynamics (QCD). There remain important open questions about several of QCD’s
most important aspects, such as the parton-hadron transition, the nature of
confinement, and the behavior of QCD matter at high temperature. The focus of
the Heavy Ion program at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is to understand
the behavior of this QGP matter at very high temperature and density. ALICE is
the experiment dedicated to this study and has published nearly 300 articles
detailing its findings. During the second long shutdown of the LHC for critical
maintenance and luminosity upgrades, ALICE has upgraded many aspects of its
instrumentation to take advantage of these improvements. In particular, the
ALICE Fast Interaction Trigger detector (FIT) upgrade will provide ALICE
unprecedented trigger discrimination for selecting rare events when the LHC
commences its third physics run. Specifically, FIT will improve the detection of
heavy-flavor hadrons, of thermal photons and low-mass di-electrons, and the
characterization of jets created in the early stages of heavy ion collisions.
These hard probes of the QGP will enable experimental verification of elusive
QCD principles, such as asymptotic freedom, chiral symmetry restoration, and
confinement. Not only will we gain a deeper understanding of the primordial
composition of matter but we will develop a more complete picture of the
cosmological evolution of the early universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.