* 2012127
* RUI: Adding Spin to a Gravitational Wave Detector Simulator
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Thomas Moore, Pomona College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 145,223.00

The recent detection of the tiny ripples in space and time known as
gravitational waves has prompted astronomers to consider new ways to build more
sensitive gravitational-wave detectors. This project will develop, test, and
share a flexible computer app that simulates how future detectors might react to
binary star systems, the most important source of gravitational waves. This
model will explore how well different designs perform, and it will cross-check
the detector models of other groups in this exciting new area of astronomical
research. This project will give valuable research experience to college
students at a crucial time in their education. It will also give high school,
college, and graduate-level educators new teaching resources on gravitational-
wave astronomy, detector physics, and the strange phenomenon of
gravitomagnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dawning of gravitational wave
astronomy and the prospect of new gravitational wave detectors have made
determining how to best use such detectors a critical task for the gravity
research community. This project supports completion of a computer application
that models the gravitational waves generated by inspiraling binary star systems
with spin, simulates their detection, and estimates the uncertainties that
detector noise introduces into determinations of system characteristics. This
work will involve (1) perfecting the addition of precessing stellar spin to the
model, (2) thoroughly testing the model against simulations from various
research groups, (3) using the tested model to generate results valuable to the
field, and (4) creating a web portal granting public access to the model
software, documentation, and educational materials. This model is distinctive in
providing a time-domain-based analysis that includes higher-order harmonics in
the waveform as well as a natural way to perform controlled comparisons of
different detector designs, and so will be a valuable and accessible tool for
the research community to compare with other models and to use for further
research. This project will also support research experiences for a number of
undergraduates and delivers new online teaching resources for educators at a
variety of levels for teaching students about related physics
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.