* 2012951
* Collaborative Research:  WoU-MMA: Askaryan Radio Array:  The World's Forefront Neutrino Astrophysics Program from 100 PeV
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dave Besson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2024
* USD 214,847.00

This award will push the frontier of ultra-high-energy (UHE) neutrino
astrophysics above 100 peta-electron-volts (PeV) with the Askaryan Radio Array
(ARA) testbed at the South Pole Station, whose dataset is now large enough to
enable either a discovery of the highest energy neutrinos ever detected or
setting the worldâ€™s best constraints in this crucial energy regime. The study
will continue operation of this testbed experiment, doubling the size of the
dataset in the next three years, streamline neutrino searches in the growing ARA
dataset, calibrate simulations of neutrino detectors using newly-detected cosmic
ray air showers, and test next-generation data acquisition electronics in the
South Pole environment. ARA serves as a platform for recruitment of young
scientists into STEM fields, and the development of junior scientists to work on
the next generation of UHE neutrino detectors. This group engages secondary-
school, undergraduate and graduate students in innovative neutrino research, and
will develop a new module for the Masterclass for high school students on big
data strategies to search for rare events in large datasets, using data from ARA
and from the IceCube Neutrino Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The radio
technique used by ARA allows astrophysics to extend to these UHE neutrinos. ARA
is laying the groundwork for the radio component of the next generation of
neutrino observatories. A neutrino observation from ARA will constrain the
properties of any global population of sources of the highest energy cosmic
rays, complementing cosmic ray experiments that sample only local sources at the
highest energies. Any event detected would be the highest energy neutrino ever
observed, cosmic or terrestrial, and be the first-ever detection of a neutrino
via radio frequency emission. This would be a major event in the pursuit of UHE
neutrinos, and would provide crucial information for the technical design of
future facilities. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.