* 2012330
* Simulating Large-Scale Morphogenesis in Planar Tissues
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Min Wu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Cutting-edge developments in biotechnology and medicine involve reconstructing
large-scale tissues and organs. This work can be limited by lack of knowledge in
tissue morphogenesis, the process by which living tissues develop their size-
and-shape characteristics. Though live-imaging techniques have enabled the
observation of morphogenetic processes, progress in fundamental understanding
has been slow. This project aims to improve tools for modeling a wide range of
living tissues that are relatively planar and have been extensively studied
experimentally. The project will develop methods for numerical simulation of
morphogenesis processes and attempt to reproduce the observed large-scale
morphogenesis structures in planar tissues. The project provides graduate
student training through involvement in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project concerns numerical simulation of large-scale continuum models for tissue
morphogenesis that involve free boundaries, bulk-interface coupling, and highly
nonlinear interactions. The work centers on a new mathematical model in which
the field variables are nonlinearly coupled via reaction-convection equations
and non-standard spatial partial differential equations. The project will
develop semi-implicit and fully implicit time-stepping methods to avoid a
potential time-step restriction for explicit time-stepping methods. Due to the
high nonlinearity of the system, the boundary configuration must be updated
together with the velocity field as well as other field variables. For this
purpose, a novel interface-tracking method based on reference-map techniques
will be investigated. Linear analysis close to trivial solutions will be
conducted to assist the design of fast-converging iterative methods for solving
the nonlinear system derived from the implicit time-stepping discretization of
the original model. Simulations to understand in vitro micro-tissue and in vivo
epithelial-tissue morphogenesis from live-imaging data will be carried
out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.