* 2012242
* Interaction of multiphase fluids and solids at the microscale
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Hector Gomez, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,994.00

Multiphase flows are important in a wide variety of processes in science,
engineering and medicine. In most cases of practical interest, multiphase flows
interact mechanically with deformable solids. Fluid-solid interactions have been
widely studied for macroscale problems, where the effect of surface tension is
negligible. However, due to the continuous miniaturization of manufactured
objects and the importance of surface tension in natural phenomena, there is a
critical need to better understand fluid-solid interactions where surface
tension plays a predominant role. Using a unique and enabling computational
method, this project will unravel the fundamental mechanisms of fluid-solid
interactions that couple flow, nonlinear elasticity and surface tension. The
proposed research will shed light on the process of spontaneous droplet motion
on soft substrates, interfacial instabilities in soft capillary tubes, and pool
boiling on deformable solid surfaces. The understanding of these phenomena may
bring major advances in bioinspired droplet motion, microfluidics and multiphase
heat transfer. The research will be integrated in the curriculum through an
initiative to introduce simple concepts of fluid-structure interaction in
undergraduate mechanical engineering courses. The project will also offer
undergraduate summer research experiences and mentoring activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand fluid-solid
interactions where surface tension interacts with flow, fluid-fluid phase
transformations and elastic forces. These phenomena, ubiquitous in
microfluidics, medicine, and natural phenomena, have not been previously studied
partially due to our lack of theoretical and computational tools. This knowledge
gap is limiting our progress on multiphase heat transfer, microfluidics,
biofluids and microfabrication, among other science and engineering
applications. The current project will leverage a unique computational approach
to unveil the fundamental mechanisms controlling this fascinating coupled
problem. The project will focus on fundamental scientific problems involving (i)
the displacement of a fluid by another fluid in a soft capillary tube, (ii) the
spontaneous motion of droplets on soft substrates, and (iii) the effect of
deformable substrates on temperature-driven liquid-vapor phase
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.