* 2012793
* Experimental Study of Heavy Flavor and CP Violation with the LHCb Experiment at the CERN LHC Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 06/30/2020,06/29/2023
* Abolhassan Jawahery, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 06/29/2023
* USD 1,400,723.00

A major focus of experimental particle physics research is on the search for
physics beyond the Standard Model. Flavor physics plays a key role in this
endeavor via precision measurements of ﬂavor processes sensitive to quantum loop
effects, which complement direct searches at the highest energy accelerators.
The physics reach of the LHCb experiment at the CERN LHC collider includes
precision measurements of rare decays and matter-antimatter asymmetry in the
charm quark and the bottom quark systems. At the current level of precision,
these measurements impose severe constraints on the energy scale and the
structure of new physics models. However, areas of deviations from the Standard
Model are emerging, including signs of lepton non-universality in radiative and
semi-leptonic B decays, which are highly sensitive to the presence of new scalar
particles. The precision of future measurements in some key areas is expected to
reach the required sensitivity to clarify these anomalies or further strengthen
the deviations from the Standard Model predictions. These results could, in
conjunction with studies at high energies, point the way to the structure of the
physics beyond the Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a
Maryland experimental particle physics group study of heavy flavor and CP
violation with the LHCb experiment. It includes the development and construction
of off-detector electronics for the upstream tracker for the LHCb detector
upgrade and the installation and commissioning of the tracker, as well as major
participation in the physics analysis of recorded and future LHCb data. The
physics analysis effort is focused on measurements related to two current
anomalies in the decays of B mesons: hints of departure from Lepton Flavor
Universality in semileptonic B decays and the longstanding “Kaon pion” puzzle,
where the measured CP asymmetries in the family of B to Kaon plus pion decays
deviate from expectations. These anomalies, if confirmed, could be due to the
imprints of new physics on flavor processes. Several data analysis techniques
will be developed and used, including the use of machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ﬁndings of new sources of CP violation beyond the SM
will have a profound impact on the understanding of the origin of baryon-
antibaryon asymmetry and the ﬁeld of cosmology. The studies of ﬂavor processes
will also yield precision information on the decay properties of the bottom and
charmed hadrons, serving as a powerful testing ground for the predictions of
lattice QCD calculations. The group’s detector upgrade eﬀort provides excellent
opportunities for training undergraduate students in experimental and
engineering techniques. The group works closely with an outreach program run by
the physics and astronomy departments at the University of Maryland, the GRAD-
MAP, which is aimed at providing research and training opportunities for
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in the Maryland and Washington area
community colleges. The group plans to expand this eﬀort to data analysis with
the LHCb data by introducing students to advanced data handling and analysis
techniques, such as machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.