* 2012554
* When Can We Cluster Data? Improved Conditions for Perfect Recovery and Numerical Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Brendan Ames, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 12/31/2023
* USD 129,374.00

The clustering procedure is ubiquitous in science and engineering, especially in
analysis of massive data sets and complex networks. The purpose of clustering is
to divide a given data set into groups of similar items, called clusters.
Although many heuristics for clustering exist (and are widely used), the
theoretical properties of this learning task are less well-understood.
Relatively few theoretical analyses have been performed establishing conditions
under which we may expect to successfully cluster data. The goal of this project
is to establish realistic theoretical guarantees for clustering, both in terms
of data amenable to clustering as well as in the development of effective,
computationally efficient algorithms. The project will facilitate
interdisciplinary research via applications in image processing, astronomy and
physics, mathematical biology, social network analysis, and high-dimensional
statistics. The project will also provide educational opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students through the development of new courses focusing on
the interaction of machine learning and large-scale optimization,
interdisciplinary undergraduate research programs, and K-12 outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on two main research thrusts.
The first concerns the generalization of average case analyses and theoretical
guarantees for perfect recovery for convex relaxations of model problems for
clustering, such as the densest submatrix localization and graph partition
problems. The goal of these analyses is to extend the existing state of the art
to probabilistic models for data that are more representative of data observed
in practical applications. Extensive average planted case analyses will be
performed to establish computational and information-theoretic bounds for
perfect recovery under generalizations of the stochastic block model. The second
thrust will focus on the design, analysis, and implementation of numerical
methods for large-scale semidefinite and nonlinear optimization, with specific
focus on the algorithms for model problems for clustering and classification.
Theoretical convergence analysis and numerical simulation will be performed to
illustrate the efficacy of the methods. This project is jointly funded by the
Computational Mathematics program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.