* 2012268
* Collaborative Research: Euler-Based Time-Stepping with Optimal Stability and Accuracy for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* David Shirokoff, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 196,874.00

Principled simulations of many real-world problems (such as fluid flow,
geophysical phenomena, and quantum mechanics) require an evolution in time with
high accuracy, yet in a structurally simple and robust fashion. This project
develops novel time integration methods for complex multi-physics problems,
while not incurring fundamental problems that reduce the accuracy or stability
of many existing methods. The developed methods are founded in new mathematical
theories, and are used to devise more accurate and robust simulations of shallow
water flows with dispersive effects, which are important in the understanding of
tsunamis, storm surge, and coastal flooding. This project will support one
graduate student for two years at NJIT and one graduate student per year at the
second institution, Temple.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops methods
for the time integration of differential equations that are implemented as
sequences of generalized Euler steps, including: multistage diagonally implicit
Runge-Kutta (DIRK) and multistep implicit-explicit (IMEX) methods. Such methods
are significant as they reduce the implementation burden on a practitioner to
the solution of a fully- or semi-implicit Euler step for their initial-boundary-
value problem. The key research contributions are: (A) a full algebraic theory
of weak stage order, and its use to design optimized high-order DIRK methods
devoid of order reduction; (B) a stability theory for IMEX methods applied to
differential algebraic equations, and the co-design of IMEX splittings and
scheme coefficients to overcome stability limitations prevalent in existing
methods. Applications include new efficient time-stepping for the dispersive
shallow water equations and related differential algebraic equations. The
collaborative mentoring of graduate students at two campuses is an important
component of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.