* 2012145
* Expansion Dynamics and Prethermalization in Ultracold Quantum Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marcos Rigol, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Progress in science in general, and physics in particular, comes in many
flavors. Often experimental observations of an unexpected phenomenon, such as
high-temperature superconductivity, trigger the development of new theories. It
also happens sometimes that "thought experiments" result in new theories, such
as general relativity, that are later tested in actual experiments. In the field
of ultracold quantum gases, gases at temperatures that are in the nano-Kelvin
regime trapped by means of magnetic fields in ultrahigh vacuum (the ultracold
counterpart of plasmas), experimental and theoretical developments often go hand
in hand. Experiments with ultracold quantum gases have motivated many recent
developments in statistical physics. They have also tested theoretical
predictions with an exceptional accuracy. This project involves a close
collaboration between the theoretical group of the PI and experimental groups in
the US and Europe. The goal is to develop and test increasingly sophisticated
theoretical descriptions of nonequilibrium quantum systems while contributing to
the development and testing of progressively more accurate and controllable
experimental platforms. Under this award, graduate students will be trained in
quantum physics and computational physics (e.g., they will write and run codes
for supercomputers). The PI will deliver lectures about the experimental and
theoretical developments at the local high school to motivate students to pursue
careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will study the quantum dynamics of
ultracold one-dimensional (1D) gases locally far from equilibrium, as well as
their expansion dynamics in 1D. After long expansion times in 1D, the latter
dynamics enables the experimental measurement of rapidity distributions, long-
thought "theoretical constructs" that were recently measured in a collaboration
between the PI and groups at Penn State. A central goal of the new studies will
be to test the recently developed theory of generalized hydrodynamics (GHD), and
to identify corrections beyond GHD that need to be accounted for theoretically.
A second topic to be explored is the dynamics of systems with weakly broken
integrability (and, more generally, weakly broken conservation laws) to
experimentally test a recently developed theory of prethermalization, and to
search for its limits of applicability. A central goal here will be to develop
theoretical/experimental tools to predict/measure thermalization rates in a
broad range of systems. In addition, the PI's group will develop generalizations
of a recently introduced theoretical approach to study equilibrium and far-from-
equilibrium dynamics of impenetrable SU(N) fermions, and will study the off-
diagonal matrix elements of observables in the eigenstates of integrable
interacting Hamiltonians to understand what they can teach us about quantum
dynamics and transport close to integrability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.