* 2012068
* NSF-BSF: High-Precision Atomic Methodologies and New Physics Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Marianna Safronova, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,464.00

This project addresses a set of open fundamental problems at the intersection of
atomic, particle physics, and cosmology. The PI plans to set up a program to
search for new light particles and forces. The research will provide theoretical
results that are necessary to take full advantage of the rapid progress in
tabletop precision atomic physics experiments that can then act as a new
frontier in searches for new physics. Any such discovery of new physics will
revolutionize the field of particle physics and, if the new particle is the dark
matter, potentially also our understanding of the Universe. The goals of this
project are to spearhead a new generation of atomic precision measurements aimed
at searches for physics beyond the standard model of elementary particles and
interactions, with a particular focus on novel atomic clocks with high
sensitivity to new physics effects and dark matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the PI will (1) develop atomic theory needed
for new generation of new physics searches with precision atomic measurements;
(2) develop theoretical tools for the interpretation of experimental results,
dearly needed to be able to take full advantage of the innovative concepts for
new physics searches via ultra-accurate measurements; and (3) investigate
specific dark matter scenarios that can be probed with atomic clocks. Atomic
theory development in this project focuses on methods to treat two types of very
different problems: (1) cases where none of the precision methods work at all,
and theory cannot provide reliable estimates (2) cases where exceptional sub-
percent precision is required, and even most accurate present methods are
inadequate. For the first problem, the team will build upon the fast parallel
configuration interaction (CI) code that was recently developed and develop
algorithms for efficient selection of the configuration functions that need to
be included for reliable predictions at the 10% level. For the second problem,
the team will expand the inclusion of the electronic correlations in the hybrid
method that combines CI and coupled-cluster
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.