* 2012910
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Project ACCESS: Accessible Cyber Content Expanded through State Synergies
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Charles Gardner, Cyber Innovation Center
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 04/30/2022
* USD 99,638.00

NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Project ACCESS: Accessible Cyber Content Expanded
through State Synergies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growth of the United States
STEM workforce is important to economic and global competitiveness. Developing
STEM talent among all sectors of society is needed in order to reach these
goals. This planning grant project will advance the use of accessible cyber
education activities and build capacity for a national network of content
creators, event leaders, state agencies, non-profits, educators, STEM
professionals with disabilities, workforce development programs, manufacturers
of accessible STEM equipment, and others to collaborate and broaden the
participation of learners with disabilities in the STEM workforce. Partnering
organizations will share accessible cyber education resources, promote
professional development opportunities, and host virtual peer learning
communities. The overall goal of the project to strengthen and expand
collaborations that promote accessible cyber education resources and activities
to enhance the preparation of individuals with disabilities for STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a communities of practice
approach, which brings people together to learn with and from each other.
Planning grant activities include collaboratively developing plans for
implementing the infrastructure needed to support a large-scale network;
engaging additional, strategic partners; and exploring opportunities to scale
and sustain the use of accessible cyber education activities to prepare
individuals with disabilities to participate in the STEM workforce. The project
will also include continuing efforts to disseminate accessible content for use
in informal learning environments and workforce development programs. Expected
project outcomes are increased knowledge of accessible cyber education content
and enhanced capacity for broadening the participation of individuals with
disabilities in the U.S. STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES
planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF
INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in
discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening
participation in STEM at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.