* 2012264
* Collaborative Research: Network Cluster: Bedrock controls on the deep critical zone, landscapes, and ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Harihar Rajaram, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2026
* USD 311,556.00

The Critical Zone comprises the terrestrial environment from the tree canopy
through the soil horizon and down to the base of weathered bedrock. This
Critical Zone provides crucial services to humans and ecosystems, including the
storage and filtering of groundwater, maintenance of streamflow, and long-term
regulation of Earth’s climate. This project, part of the Critical Zone
Collaborative Network, will establish the Bedrock Critical Zone Network that
spans a wide range of climatic conditions across the continental US, ranging
from a subtropical site in the South Carolina Piedmont to warm and dry sites in
southern California. The principal goal is to improve knowledge of how
subsurface processes in the deep Critical Zone influence water storage
potential. In addition, the project will explore how water storage affects
ecosystem resilience to disturbances such as prolonged drought. The research
will involve direct sampling of subsurface materials via drilling and borehole
logging together with non-invasive, indirect imaging techniques. The project
will engage teachers, students, and the broader public in information sessions
that emphasize the crucial importance of the Critical Zone, including
development of a set of interactive 3D visualizations for use by
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Critical Zone extends from treetop to
bedrock and thus includes both the substrate for life and the organisms that
live at Earth’s land surface. In hilly and mountainous landscapes, where erosion
at the surface exhumes underlying bedrock, the deepest reaches of the Critical
Zone are where bedrock begins the weathering process, where fluids and gases
first penetrate and react, where biota begin to colonize and interact with
minerals, and where pore space begins to open. This project establishes the
Bedrock Critical Zone Network to provide the scientific community with new
knowledge of the deep Critical Zone and its feedbacks with surface processes and
ecosystems. Observations and modeling at seven sites spanning a wide range of
climatic and bedrock conditions in the continental US will test the hypothesis
that Critical Zone structure, evolution, and processes are strongly influenced
by bedrock conditions at the base of the Critical Zone. Mineralogy, ambient
stress, and inherited fractures are influential factors, and these, in turn, are
influenced by surface processes like erosion, subsurface flow, and ecosystem
productivity. The project will address questions about fundamental deep Critical
Zone properties and processes, including: controls on regolith thickness and its
variation across landscapes; the relative importance and spatial variability of
physical and chemical weathering; how subsurface weathering influences landscape
evolution; and how deep Critical Zone water storage affects ecosystem
resilience.The project will engage teachers, students, and the broader public on
the crucial importance of the Critical Zone ; train scientists at diverse career
stages on how to communicate; and promote diversity, inclusion, and equity in
Critical-Zone science through targeted programs. The project will undertake an
outreach and engagement program that includes a new set of interactive 3D
visualizations, called the "Virtual Critical Zone," based on extensive imaging
and measurements of roadcuts and quarries. This project will also include hands-
on programs for high school teachers and students. All activities will support
diversity and inclusion in Critical-Zone science through intentional recruiting
and outreach. This project is jointly funded by the Critical Zone Collaborative
Network, the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics programs in the Division of
Earth Sciences, as well as the Education Program in the Geosciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.