* 2012438
* Collaborative: Connecting Undergraduate Biology Through Systems and Systems Thinking
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sara Wyse, Bethel University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 104,468.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying core thinking
skills required for reasoning about complex biological systems. Specifically,
this project will develop strategies and tools to integrate systems and systems
thinking as organizing principles in undergraduate biology. Systems are
‘complex’ when their parts interact to produce outcomes that cannot be
predicted. Reasoning about biological systems requires thinking skills that
extend far beyond knowing the facts about the system’s parts. It requires
thinking in terms of systems of parts. Such thinking is a foundational practice
across STEM but is rarely taught as an explicit educational objective. Despite
the emphasis on systems in national reports informing life sciences education,
little guidance exists about specific objectives for systems learning,
strategies for assessing evidence of systems thinking, or instructional
approaches that foster systems thinking competencies. This project aims to
conduct research that will identify and provide evidence for a framework of
systems thinking skills that will serve undergraduate biology teaching and
learning. This work will involve postdoctoral researchers, graduate students,
and undergraduates in qualitative and quantitative research methods, training
them to conduct novel research and development in STEM education. The project
will engage college faculty and K-12 teachers in professional development and
collaborative relationships that promote their abilities to develop systems
thinking curricula and assessments. The project has the potential to encourage
integration of systems thinking skill development in undergraduate biology
teaching and learning nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In biological systems,
organisms interact with each other and their environments in variable and
dynamic ways that can be amplified or dampened in response to myriad factors
(e.g., signals from the environment; feedback from other interactions). This
project aims to translate research findings into practical tools and curricular
materials that will support instructors’ abilities to bring systems thinking
into their biology classrooms. The project will seek evidence to identify a set
of skills that are fundamental for representing and reasoning about systems in
undergraduate biology. It is hypothesized that a Biology Systems Thinking (BST)
framework will emerge from this work, providing an integrated perspective about
the concepts and competencies identified in nationally recognized curricular
frameworks, as well as offering practical scaffolds to support design of
assessments to measure these higher-level thinking skills. Iterative cycles of
materials development, validity research, field-testing, and revision will
produce: (a) an evidence-based systems thinking framework (the BST) for
undergraduate biology education; (b) instructional materials and assessment
templates that enable instructors to customize BST principles to serve a range
of classroom contexts; and (c) a dissemination plan that integrates materials
development with instructor professional development. In this model, instructor-
collaborators become owners in the process of designing and authoring curricular
materials as well as sources of feedback that further inform BST research,
design, and development. This project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.