* 2012475
* Network Cluster: Patterns and controls of ecohydrology, CO2 fluxes, and nutrient availability in pedogenic carbonate-dominated dryland critical zones
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Lixin Jin, University of Texas at El Paso
* Cooperative Agreement
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,324,493.00

The Critical Zone is the layer of Earth’s surface from the top of the trees to
the bottom of the groundwater. Rocks, soil, water, air, and living organisms
interact in the Critical Zone to provide life-sustaining resources such as food
and water. Drylands, with arid to semi-arid climates, cover 45% of the Earth and
provide homes to more than 2 billion people. The drylands of the American West
are facing significant challenges caused by global change, such as drought and
changing plant communities. Increases in human population and food demand have
also converted many natural drylands in this region to irrigated farms. These
changes in land use and climate have greatly affected the movement of water,
carbon, nutrients and salt through different parts of the drylands. All of these
changes impact the sustainability of natural and agricultural ecosystems. This
project will investigate these important Critical Zone processes and improve our
ability to predict future change. Specifically, this thematic cluster will
investigate how carbonate minerals in dryland soils control and impact water,
nutrients, salts, and carbon moving in and out of the Critical Zone. This
project will help to educate and train middle to high school students, and
college undergraduate and graduate students. These students will be provided
with the motivation, skills and tools to become future professionals in science,
technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics (STEAM). Our research and
education efforts will also help to grow public awareness of the importance of
the Critical Zone function and service in drylands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Critical Zone in dryland ecosystems is an understudied but crucial part of the
Earth system. It contrasts with mesic areas by having sparse vegetation, limited
but dynamic soil moisture, deep water table, low soil organic matter, alkaline
pH, and buildup of salt precipitates, especially as pedogenic carbonates that
can develop into a thick caliche layer and dominate the soil structure. However,
these systems are underrepresented in Critical Zone research and current
conceptual models do not fully address phenomena unique to drylands such as
development of pedogenic carbonate, dust storms, episodic precipitation, and
high spatiotemporal variability in hydrological and biogeochemical processes. To
fill these knowledge gaps, the overarching goal of the project is to increase
our capacity to quantify and predict dryland carbon budgets across land-use and
climatic gradients by examining the role of water and nutrient availability in
regulating the movement of organic and inorganic carbon in the dryland Critical
Zone. Specifically, this project centers around the multifaceted roles of
pedogenic carbonates in dictating vadose zone water dynamics, the potential
recharge to deep water table, and nutrient cycling in typical dryland
landscapes, piedmont, playa and irrigated agricultural fields. These in turn
drive trends in evolution of Critical Zone architectures and land-atmosphere C
exchange. We will tackle these problems by using a comprehensive set of tools
including eddy covariance towers, deep Critical Zone drilling, hydrogeophysical
surveys, soil and hydrologic sensors, isotopic analysis, synchrotron,
geochemical proxies, and genetic sequencing. This project builds on the rich
historical data, knowledge, and models at the Jornada LTER, the Reynolds Creek
CZO, USDA-ARS Kimberly site in Idaho and irrigated agricultural sites along the
Rio Grande Valley in Texas. This thematic cluster will develop an
interdisciplinary framework to understand material and energy flow through
dryland Critical Zones and lay the foundation for managing Critical Zone
function, evolution, and services, as well as forecasting carbon budget changes
with future shifts in climate and land use in
drylands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Critical
Zone Collaborative Network and the Hydrologic Sciences programs in the Division
of Earth Sciences and the Hispanic Serving Institutions program in the Education
and Human Resources Directorate's Division of Human Resource
Development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.