* 2012926
* Studying Quantum Chromodynamics at LHCb
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Christine Aidala, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2023
* USD 697,969.00

The protons and neutrons in the atomic nuclei of everyday matter are made of
subnuclear particles called quarks and gluons. The project supported by this
award will study how quarks and gluons scattered out of a proton or produced in
high-energy particle collisions subsequently form new bound states. Additional
measurements will investigate how strong nuclear charge, called color, flows
through proton-proton scattering processes, searching for a theoretically
predicted novel state of quarks and gluons that exhibit quantum correlations
across colliding protons. Data from the Large Hadron Collider at the European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) will be used to perform the research,
as part of the Large Hadron Collider Beauty (LHCb) experiment. The research
performed will advance our understanding of how strong force bound states such
as protons can be created, and the dynamics of their possible interactions. The
project supported by this award will furthermore train early career scientists
from diverse backgrounds in nuclear physics. Training the next generation of
nuclear physicists is critical to maintain expertise relevant to the nation's
energy and defense needs and to continue advancing both applied and non-applied
research in nuclear physics and technology. Specifically, this award will enable
mentored research in nuclear physics on the LHCb experiment by a woman
postdoctoral scholar and four Ph.D. students, two women and two men, of which
one is Latina American and another African American. In the third year of the
award, a student from Mount Holyoke College, an undergraduate institution for
women, will have the opportunity to perform summer research in nuclear physics
at the University of Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIâ€™s group will study
how high-energy color-charged quarks hadronize into sprays of observable color-
neutral bound states by performing a suite of complementary measurements at
LHCb. Specifically, the measurements will compare charged hadron distributions
in jets initiated predominantly by light versus heavy quarks; examine evidence
for contributions from string breaking versus quark recombination models of
hadronization via measurements of baryon versus meson production as a function
of event multiplicity; and study spin-momentum correlations in hadronization by
measurement of spontaneous polarization of produced hyperons. The proposed
hadronization program will contribute toward the ultimate, long-term goal of
being able to predict statistically the fully correlated distributions of
particles from different flavor high-energy fragmenting quarks. Separate
measurements will explore the role of color flow in hadronic scattering
processes by searching for experimental evidence of transverse-momentum-
dependent factorization breaking and color entanglement. The specific
observables include correlated production of nearly back-to-back Z boson-hadron,
hadron-hadron, and Z boson-jet pairs. The activities furthermore include
contributions to the installation, commissioning, and maintenance of the
U.S.-led Upstream Tracker silicon detector upgrade for
LHCb.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.