* 2012139
* Quantum Gravity, Atom Condensate Analogs, and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Theodore Jacobson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 474,587.00

The grant will support research projects on several aspects of gravitational
physics, ranging from astrophysical to laboratory analogs to quantum gravity.
These projects are aimed at: 1) learning more about the magnetic physics
involved in the powerful processes accelerating particles around black holes and
neutron stars, which could assist in the interpretation of observations of such
sources made with various sorts of telescopes; 2) exploring a mechanism by which
neutron stars might source a hypothetical "axion" field, which is a candidate
for solving a theoretical puzzle of nuclear physics and is a candidate for the
"missing mass" (a.k.a. "dark matter") in the Universe; 3) working with
experimentalists to study close analogies between the physics of ultra cold
atomic condensates and the behavior of quantum fields in the expanding universe
and the Hawking radiation from black holes. This work can stimulate new insights
into the properties of atom condensates, and provide laboratory confirmation and
perspectives on otherwise purely theoretical fundamental theory; 4) approach the
unsolved problem of reconciling Einstein's curved spacetime theory of gravity
with the principles of quantum physics. The first three of these project
categories include significant interdisciplinary connections to astrophysics,
plasma physics, and atomic physics, which may enhance synergy between different
research communities and methods, and therefore stimulate progress in scientific
understanding. The results of the proposed research will be disseminated through
written articles, as well as seminars, conference talks, and colloquia. The PI
will provide instruction and mentoring to graduate and undergraduate students,
regarding scientific research, writing, and verbal communication. The PI will
design and implement instruction in a University of Maryland summer programs for
rising 9th graders and for high school girls interested in physics. All of these
activities will contribute to technical training and scientific literacy, as
well as understanding and appreciation of the insights of
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research topics in category 1) above
include a sharp formulation of magnetic helicity of twisted magnetic field lines
in a general relativistic setting, and in the presence of boundaries such as the
surface of a neutron star or the horizon of a black hole, and the impact of
cyclotron motion on the stagnation surface, which defines the boundary between
the charges that are gravitationally pulled to the black hole or neutron star
and the charges that are flung outward along magnetic field lines by centrifugal
force. Research under 2) aims to discover new ways of observing or constraining
an axion field by studying the consequences of copious axion production sourced
outside neutron stars, first analytically, and potentially later in numerical
simulations with a computational collaborator. The hypothesis that such axion
fields are implicated in fast radio bursts will also be explored. In category
3), one project will quantify the effect of variations in the number of
condensate atoms on laboratory measurements of the correlation function
associated with Hawking radiation. This is necessary in order to interpret those
observations. Another project will analyze the theory and upcoming observations
of mode modulation (analog Hubble friction) in expanding Bose-Einstein
condensates. A third project in this area will explore approaches to
experimental measurement of phonon or magnon creation in analog expanding
universes. Observations might be possible within the time frame of the award.
Finally, one goal of the research under 4) is to develop understanding of quasi-
localized quantum gravity, using exact quantization of the 2+1 dimensional
theory with a negative cosmological constant, within a spacetime region that is
the causal domain of dependence of a disk with a fixed boundary metric. Another
is to learn how to apply perturbative renormalized quantum gravity near
horizons, to determine whether, as has long been suspected, gravitational
interactions quench two point correlation functions when one of the points
approaches a horizon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.