* 2012342
* Exploratory Learning Activities: Evidence, Mechanisms, and Professional Development in Undergraduate STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Linda Fuselier, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,987.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and testing the
effectiveness of exploratory learning in undergraduate STEM courses. Exploratory
learning reverses the typical order of instruction by having students explore a
novel problem prior to formal instruction. This approach allows students to
identify gaps in their knowledge that they may then actively work to fill.
Exploring new problems and concepts oneself, before being taught by an
instructor, has been shown to improve students’ conceptual understanding.
Exploratory learning helps students accurately recognize the important features
of a problem and their own knowledge gaps, preparing students to learn from
formal lessons. Exploratory learning is similar to problem-based learning and
similar approaches. However, it is simpler to implement than related strategies,
requiring less faculty training and effort to integrate into existing courses.
It has been widely used in K-12 education but is in its infancy in undergraduate
education. Thus, the main goal of this Engaged Student Learning project is to
develop and test the effectiveness of exploratory learning techniques in
undergraduate STEM courses. As an active learning method that more fully engages
all students, exploratory learning may have additional advantages for increasing
equitable success in STEM classes and in the STEM workforce. This project will
also examine how instructors who use exploratory learning in their classes
engage in learning new scientifically informed teaching strategies. Results from
this project may help to develop best practices for professional development,
adoption, and implementation of exploratory learning
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the causal effectiveness
of exploratory learning by comparing the use of a novel activity prior to
instruction to traditional lecture-then-practice methods. Controlled classroom
experiments will be used to test exploratory learning in undergraduate courses
across four STEM disciplines (biology, chemistry, physics, and engineering-
mathematics), with over 3000 STEM majors and non-majors. STEM faculty,
discipline-based education researchers, and cognitive scientists will work
together in an interdisciplinary community of practice to develop exploration
activities and assessments for each course. The learning mechanisms that support
exploratory learning will be examined using surveys and iterative refinements
across experiments. An integrative framework will be developed to identify how
to design exploratory learning activities to best support conceptual
understanding. Factors known to be associated with student achievement in active
learning settings will be examined, such as social-belonging and science self-
efficacy. This project will also use qualitative methods to study how
instructors’ perspectives and identities as educators evolve as they use
exploratory learning in their classrooms. Use of evidence-based teaching
practices such as exploratory learning could become widely adopted at
institutions when learning scientists and STEM instructors work together. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.