* 2012896
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Creating the Networks That Can Build and Sustain Inclusive, Workforce-relevant STEM Courses for Underrepresented Students
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Talia Milgrom-Elcott, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 05/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Disparities in access to and availability of workforce-relevant STEM courses
continue to persist. The inequities are particularly profound for high school
students of color and students from rural and low-income backgrounds. As a
consequence, these students are less likely to succeed in STEM courses and
pursue STEM majors and careers. When workforce-relevant STEM courses are
available, underrepresented and underserved students are also more likely to be
taught by teachers who are ill-prepared to teach such courses. This further
exacerbates the problems and failures of inequity in the education system. This
planning grant will begin to address these challenges through a large-scale
social-change-driven coordinated effort. The American Institutes for Research
(AIR), in collaboration with 100Kin10, will create this large-scale change by
preparing for, launching, and supporting three place-based networks to improve
the quality of and equitable access to workforce-relevant STEM courses. These
networks will develop plans that, when implemented, will enable more
underrepresented students to access and succeed in workforce-relevant STEM
courses, as well as determine the extent to which the collaborative
infrastructure and its use contribute to those systemic improvements. Each of
the place-based networks, made up of districts, teacher preparation programs,
business communities, and other relevant organizations in a geographic region,
will test, adapt, and refine strategies for driving STEM improvements at the
local level. If successful, this foundational work will not only inform the
approach for expanding and scaling the model, but it will also contribute to
NSF’s commitment to improving quality and inclusion within the K–12 education
system by focusing on broadening participation challenges at the high school
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the 12-month project duration, the guiding
framework for the work will be centered on two of the five NSF INCLUDES design
elements of collaborative infrastructure; (a) leadership and communication and
(b) expansion, sustainability and scale. Using this framework, the work will
begin with a literature scan conducted by AIR to identify evidence-based
practices and measures aligned to leadership, communication, expansion,
sustainability, and scale in PK–12 education systems. AIR and 100Kin10 will then
work collaboratively with the place-based networks to co-design plans that use
evidence-based practices for collaboration among members and promote evidence-
based strategies for reducing systemic STEM inequities to support the design and
delivery of workforce-relevant high school STEM courses, especially in low-
income, rural, and majority-minority high schools. Specifically, the co-designed
plans will work to: (1) improve educators’ capacity to develop and teach
workforce-relevant STEM courses; (2) increase the number of high school students
enrolling in and completing workforce-relevant STEM courses; and (3) expand,
sustain, and scale evidence-based practices for supporting underrepresented
student populations in STEM. The place-based network plans will include goals
and metrics for tracking the progress in overcoming the inequities and
determining the extent to which specific collaborative mechanisms spur progress
toward the place-based networks’ aim. After identifying and selecting the goals
and metrics, the project team will work with the place-based networks to
understand the local, root causes of inequity in student access to workforce-
relevant STEM; support the creation of strong local place-based networks; and
draft plans with goals and metrics for progress in overcoming the inequities and
collaborative mechanisms that may spur that progress. The support of these
efforts will be led by the backbone organization, 100Kin10. The role of the
backbone organization will be to support the launch the three place-based
networks, support their partnerships through workshops and convenings, and
connect them to its extensive national networks of representatives from more
than 30 organizations nationwide with expertise in the central levers of
systemic STEM change and focused on improving access to workforce-relevant STEM
courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion
across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in
Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to
enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity,
inclusion, and broadening participation in STEM at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.