* 2012289
* Resonant Few-Body Systems from the Lattice
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michael Doering, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

Strong forces are responsible for the formation of matter as we know it, but the
precise mechanism of how this occurs remain a mystery. Strong forces bind
nucleons together in atomic nuclei, but they also lead to the emergence of
resonant phenomena at higher energies that are studied, e.g., at the Thomas
Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab). The experimental and theoretical
quest for resonances to understand the strong force focuses on few-body systems
and their dynamics. This project aims at closing the gap between theoretical
calculations on few-body systems, called lattice QCD, and phenomenology. The
main technical challenge addressed in this proposal concerns the problem that
these calculations are performed in a small cubic volume instead of infinite
space, and how to remove the corresponding artifacts so that lattice QCD can be
compared to Nature. Deviations of these predictions from measurements are hints
for new physics. The project also aims to conceptually improve the analysis of
three-body data from experiment. The PI will in parallel develop simulations of
simple quantum mechanical systems to illustrate the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum along the lines of standard textbooks to help develop a diverse,
globally competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory underlying
the strong force, Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), can be calculated using Lattice
QCD. However, finite-volume effects for the case of three particles are poorly
understood. This project aims to further develop three-body methods to enable
the extrapolation of Lattice QCD results to the physical world and to help
answer fundamental questions regarding QCD predictions for the properties of
excited mesons and baryons. For this, the principle of unitarity, related to the
conservation of probability in nuclear reactions, can be efficiently used as the
guiding principle, and can be extended to the three- or more particle sector. In
this project, methods will be conceptually upgraded to be applied to emblematic
resonances. To highlight one, the Roper resonance has been under investigation
for decades due to its unusually light mass and its debated nature as radial
excitation of the nucleon or hadronic molecule. Furthermore, there is no clear
signal for it in ab-initio lattice QCD calculations. The focus of this project
is to quantify the finite-volume effects to solve this puzzle. Other lines of
investigation address axial resonances that, in their three-body dynamics,
resemble the supposed exotic mesons â€“ a new type of particle sought for at JLab
and other experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.