* 2012031
* Divergence-Free Hybridizable Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for the Incompressible Navier-Stokes Equations on Moving Domains and Their Application to Fluid-Structure Interaction
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Guosheng Fu, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 263,507.00

Fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems can occur in many fields of
engineering, and are a crucial consideration in the design of many systems, such
as stability and response of aircraft wings in the aerospace industry, flow of
blood through arteries in biomedical applications, and response of bridges and
tall buildings to winds in civil engineering. These problems are often too
complex to solve analytically and so they have to be analyzed by means of
numerical simulations. Efficient, accurate, and robust numerical methods to
solve FSI problems are of fundamental importance to these applications. In this
project, the PI will concentrate his efforts on the development, analysis, and
implementation of high-order strongly mass-conserving finite element methods for
incompressible flow problems on moving domains and their application to FSI
problems. This project provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will (1) develop a novel divergence-free
hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin (div-free-HDG) scheme for the incompressible
Navier-Stokes (INS) equations on moving domains using the Arbitrary Lagrangian-
Eulerian (ALE) framework, (2) extend the ALE-div-free-HDG fluid solver to
moving-domain FSI problems that model the interaction of incompressible fluids
with compressible or incompressible hyperelastic structures. The div-free-HDG
scheme for INS on fixed meshes enjoys features such as higher-order accuracy,
global and local conservation properties, energy-stability, pressure robustness,
minimal amount of numerical dissipation and computational efficiency. The
extension of the div-free-HDG scheme to moving domain problems within the ALE
framework poses further theoretical and numerical challenges due to the
divergence-conforming velocity finite element space used therein. The PI will
use a novel alternative formulation of the div-free-HDG scheme, which does not
require the divergence conformity of the velocity finite element space, that can
be efficiently adapted to the ALE framework for moving domain INS and FSI
problems. This work will be the first systematic study of ALE strongly mass-
conserving finite element methods for moving domain INS and FSI problems.
Rigorous stability analysis will be derived for the methods and their
convergence properties will be investigated. Various strategies to further
improve the efficiency of these schemes will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.