* 2012195
* Neutrino Astrophysics in the Multi-Messenger Astrophysics Era
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Cecilia Lunardini, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 367,079.00

This project concerns aspects of theoretical nuclear and particle astrophysics.
It is centered on the physics of neutrinos, elementary particles that are
produced abundantly in stars and galaxies. These astrophysical neutrinos have
been observed at Earth, and many more observations are expected for the near
future. Theoretical research pursued in this project will help interpret the
data. It will answer current open questions and pose new ones on the fundamental
processes that take place in stars and on how the properties of neutrinos
influence them. In addition, the PI will mentor students, thus enriching the
community, and prepare junior researchers for future careers in industry and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major area of investigation in this project
concerns the physics of 1-10 MeV neutrinos from core collapse supernovae, which
is a strategic opportunity for upcoming neutrino detectors. It will be studied
how, for a nearby star, a neutrino signal could be seen several hours before the
collapse, and be used as an alert of the upcoming supernova for the astronomy
and gravitational wave communities. The interplay of neutrinos and gravitational
waves from a supernova will also be investigated, with emphasis on how joint
analyses of these two messengers can improve our ability to learn about the
dynamics of the core collapse and explosion of the star. A second thrust of the
project is on interpreting the observed flux of TeV-PeV neutrinos from outside
our galaxy, which is still of uncertain origin. Different possibilities will be
examined, including a scenario where the neutrinos are produced by star-
shredding black holes. The theme of neutrinos and black holes will also be
explored in the context of the early universe, where primordial black holes
could have produced an excess of neutrinos that could be measured in experiments
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of "Windows on
the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas
for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.