* 2012668
* CSBR:Continued Support of the Duke Lemur Center for the Study of Primate Biology and History
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Anne Yoder, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 908,813.00

This award will provide support to the Duke Lemur Center (DLC), a unique living
stock collection of the world's most endangered and biologically diverse
primates - the lemurs of Madagascar. Lemurs are exclusive to the biodiversity
hotspot of Madagascar, and due to their critically-endangered status, are not a
renewable resource. Serving as a living laboratory for advancing
interdisciplinary research, scholarship, and conservation, the DLC is the only
place in the world where lemurs are readily available for comparative study
together with associated biological samples, decades of medical records, life
history data, and fossil relatives of living taxa. The diversity of the colony
enables an expansive scope of science to be conducted and communicated, covering
disciplines ranging from behavioral ecology, cognition, sensory communication,
biomechanics, anatomy, life-history strategy, metagenomics, phylogenomics,
population genetics, metabolomics, and more. In addition, the DLC is an
exceptional training ground for students across academic levels. Over its
54-year history, thousands of students ranging from K-12 through postgraduate
levels have been engaged in and inspired by their experiences at the DLC. The
veterinary department supports educational activities via work-study
opportunities and veterinary student training, including an internship for
Malagasy veterinarians. Critically, the DLC is committed to conservation
activities via both ex situ captive management and extensive community-based
Madagascar programs. Hundreds of thousands of visitors from the general public
have been exposed to the concepts of biodiversity discovery and conservation, as
well as the power of biological research via their exposure to the DLC's staff,
students, and collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching aim of this
award is to strategically enhance the value of the DLC’s living collection
through eight short-term goals that will provide significant opportunities to
generate additional research and build multi-disciplinary collaborations,
increase the digital availability of data from living stocks, biological
tissues, and natural history collections, and increase education outreach and
veterinary training activities. The first five goals directly facilitate and
enhance ongoing and planned research to identify species (in particular genomic
and paleontological data), understand organismal systems (in particular
biomechanics, endocrinology, physiology, microbial ecology, behavior, and
metabolics – including torpor), and more broadly, to understand evolutionary
patterns and the links across biological scales between genotypes and
phenotypes. The remaining goals facilitate outreach and education activities so
that the significance of the research will be communicated to a broad audience.
Colony support is central to meeting these goals for advancing key programs in
biological research, education, and conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.