* 2012924
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Cultivating Research and Equity in Sign-related Technology
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Lorna Quandt, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2022
* USD 102,599.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to initiate a collaborative network focused on increasing the inclusion of
deaf and hard-of-hearing (D/HH) individuals in the development of sign-related
technologies. Many research projects use cutting-edge technologies applied to
sign language translation, sign language teaching, or sign recognition. These
projects include signing avatars, virtual/augmented reality sign language
learning, gesture recognition for sign language, machine learning for sign
recognition, wearable sensors for sign translation, and more. While the
potential for these technologies is great, more inclusion and resource-sharing
is needed. This project addresses these goals through building and supporting a
network of researchers and industry professionals who have interest in sign-
related technologies and share a vision for how the network can help build
fruitful collaborations. This work increases the inclusion of D/HH individuals
in the field and fosters the development of young D/HH students who wish to work
in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a network called Cultivating
Research and Equity in Sign-Related Technologies (CREST) is established, a
workshop is hosted to launch the network, and resources are provided for
collaboration and communication among network members. The workshop will develop
the shared vision among stakeholders and initiate and strengthen partnerships.
Activities of the network will have a two-way benefit: 1) D/HH researchers and
students who are working on sign-related technologies are able to gain
experience with new technologies and develop STEM skills they may not already
possess; 2) Researchers with the technological capacity to develop cutting-edge
sign-related technology benefit from expanding their networks to include those
who are already experts in sign languages and the unique challenges they
present: sign language users and D/HH researchers. The CREST network increases
the chances that sign-related technologies will be developed with D/HH input at
all stages, meaning these technologies will be more likely to benefit people who
use sign languages as a primary form of communication. It allows for the growth
of a community around a rapidly changing field which has the potential to reap
great benefits for deaf individuals and communities of people who use sign
language. Two activities, contribution of videos and of blogs and posts, will
deepen the connection between the CREST network and the NSF INCLUDES National
Network that exists already, and the CREST network will bring new people to the
National Network. This work will benefit D/HH students, staff, and researchers
who are part of the network, as well as the broader communities which may be
affected by the technologies in development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.