* 2012001
* SaTC: CORE: Small: A Deep Learning Framework for Intelligent Active and Passive Measurements in the Age of Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Armin Sarabi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The rapid proliferation of Internet-connected devices, specially Internet-of-
Things (IoT) devices, has led to mounting concerns regarding their security and
the security of the Internet. This project seeks to harness the power of big
data analytics and machine/deep learning to enhance Internet measurement
techniques and associated information processing, to make them more scalable,
efficient, and produce more actionable information. It aims to develop
techniques for automated monitoring and data analysis to gain insight into the
range of Internet-connected devices, their security vulnerabilities, and the
ever-changing activities of malicious entities on the public Internet. The
ensuing information will help software/hardware vendors and Internet-connected
entities identify vulnerabilities and protect themselves against cyber-attacks,
and move toward a more secure and transparent
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to significantly advance the
state of the art in using active and passive measurements to (1) effectively
monitor and track Internet devices, (2) accelerate scanning and improve their
efficacy, and design and develop an intelligent honeypot that can learn
responses mimicking a wide range of vulnerable devices, in order to fool
attackers into engaging and revealing their attack vector. The project seeks to
develop software, as well as deep learning and other machine learning models to
build new Internet measurement capabilities and process datasets captured from
passive/active measurements to distill data consumable by machine learning
algorithms and instrumental in security analysis and network monitoring. The
resulting automated tools can monitor the Internet in a continuous manner, to
maintain an up-to-date view of the devices/machines that comprise the Internet,
susceptible and infected devices, and vulnerabilities that are being actively
exploited in-the-wild. The final result of this project is a generalized
framework of interconnected components that applies deep learning to
active/passive network measurements to gain actionable insights with respect to
the Internet and its security, a set of scalable tools that model and enable
real-time decision making regarding Internet addresses and network traffic, and
a large number of raw and curated datasets shared with the research community
while protecting the privacy and security of all parties involved. Automatically
detecting software/hardware vulnerabilities as exploits are observed by these
techniques allows vendors and network administrators to address critical
vulnerabilities while enhancing intrusion detection and DDoS mitigation
techniques. The data can also transform risk assessment techniques for gauging
the security of networks by exposing host-level risk factors, for self-
assessment as well as assisting third-party assessment, e.g., by security
vendors and cyber insurance underwriters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.