* 2012970
* Developing a Practice-based Interdisciplinary Teacher Preparation Program at the Intersection of Science, Second Language, and Literacy Acquisition
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Haiyan Bai, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM education.
To this end, it plans to improve curricula in a secondary science teacher
education program. In addition to the consistently low performance of U.S.
secondary students on international tests, a significant and consistent national
gap exists in the science achievement of English learners versus native English-
speaking students. One-third of all English learners in the U.S. are in
secondary school settings. However, most secondary preservice teacher education
programs do not include an explicit English learner focus in science methods
courses. As a result, many teachers lack experience and coursework in the
language and literacy demands of teaching science to English learners. This
project proposes to focus on scientific inquiry, second language learning, and
science-specific literacy to better prepare secondary (Grades 6-12) and
preservice teachers to teach science to all students, including English
learners. A successful new curriculum created through this project could be
adapted by other science teacher preparation programs. Expected outcomes of the
project include an increase in new teachers’ lesson planning and teaching skills
using approaches that: 1) Engage students in science and engineering practices;
2) Implement skills and strategies for scaffolding the learning of English
learners; 3) Integrate science-specific literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teacher
educators at the University of Central Florida aim to create a practice-based,
interdisciplinary program that targets preservice teacher preparation over four
undergraduate courses during two semesters. These courses will include two
courses at the University and two internship courses in the local school
district, the Seminole County Public Schools. Pre-service teachers will be
engaged in a series of practices including focused inquiry, directed
observations, and guided practice to learn how to teach science to all students.
Mixed methods research will be used to explore research questions that include
the impact on teacher’s lesson planning and teaching skills and learning
outcomes of students who are taught by these new teachers. The pre-service
teachers’ performance will be compared with those who graduated from the
University’s secondary science education programs before implementing this
programmatic transformation. The teaching effectiveness of pre-service teachers
will also be measured by comparing the learning outcomes of their students in
the internship classrooms with those in the control group. Specific practices
and conditions of the project that lead to improvements in the pre-service
teachers’ skills will also be explored. An ongoing project evaluation will be
conducted throughout the three project years. The evaluation will engage all
stakeholders in the assessment cycle to provide feedback and inform the research
team about progress toward the objectives and potential improvements to the
project design. Dissemination activities will include a project website, peer-
reviewed publications, and national and international conference presentations.
The resulting curriculum will be shared with practitioner audiences, including
science teachers in secondary science classrooms and science methods course
instructors in diverse undergraduate teacher education programs across the
nation. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.