* 2012093
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Network Cluster: Dust in the Critical Zone from the Great Basin to the Rocky Mountains
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Gregory Carling, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2025
* USD 809,328.00

Natural and human disturbances that alter sparsely vegetated landscapes in arid
climates greatly increase the abundance of fine-grained sediment available for
wind erosion. This material is transported widely through the atmosphere as
dust. Deposition of this dust in downwind mountain ecosystems alters the
chemistry of surface water, contributes to soil formation, delivers significant
nutrients for plants, and changes the timing of snowpack melting. This project
will investigate the entire dust system in the southwestern US from source to
sink at an array of study sites from the deserts of southern Nevada into the
Rocky Mountains. Results will allow the interconnectedness of desert and
mountain environments to be evaluated, and will be of use to land management
agencies and policymakers. Undergraduate students from populations historically
underrepresented in the sciences will be supported through collaborations with
established programs. A science outreach program for middle school girls will be
organized out of Salt Lake Community College with community partners including
the Salt Lake City School District and Girl Scouts of Utah. This program for
will include field experiences, with scientists, graduate students, and
undergraduate students serving as content experts and role models. The project
will also identify atmospheric conditions responsible for delivering dust to the
Salt Lake City urban area, providing the information necessary for modeling dust
exposure frequency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a Critical
Zone Thematic Cluster to investigate how dust derived from arid landscapes
impacts the Critical Zone (CZ) in downwind mountain ecosystems. At study sites
from the deserts of southern Nevada to the mountains of northern Utah, six
researchers will lead complementary projects designed to illuminate 1) the
factors that control dust emission; 2) the atmospheric processes responsible for
dust transport; 3) the geochemical properties of dust and surficial materials in
dust source areas; 4) the effects of dust deposition on winter snowpack; 5) the
variability of mountain dust deposition through time and across the landscape;
6) the impacts of long-term dust deposition on mountain soil development; and 7)
the bioavailability, fate, and role of dust-derived nutrients in mountain
ecosystems. Selection of these study sites is grounded on a solid foundation of
previous work, established monitoring networks, and unique multi-year datasets.
Installation of monitoring equipment at dust emission sites, continued operation
of sites for snow research, and expansion and maintenance of an existing dust
collector network will enhance the physical infrastructure for the collection of
key environmental variables to better illuminate CZ processes. The project is
designed to offer numerous avenues for student involvement at all levels.
Undergraduate students from populations historically underrepresented in the
sciences will be supported through collaborations with established programs. A
science outreach program for middle school girls will be organized out of Salt
Lake Community College. The observation and modeling work to identify
atmospheric conditions responsible for delivering dust to the Salt Lake City
urban area will provide the information necessary for modeling dust exposure
frequency. Results will be transferred back to the appropriate land management
agencies and policymakers in a format intended to be of use in their planning.
This award is co-funded by the Critical Zone Collaborative Network Program, the
Physical and Dynamic Meteorology Program, and the Geomorphology and Land-use
Dynamics Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.