* 2012213
* Examining the Impact of the Partnership for Life Sciences Education Recognition Program as a Mechanism to Foster Departmental Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Judy Awong-Taylor, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,322.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
biological sciences education. To this end, it will study the impact of the
Partnership for Undergraduate Life Sciences Education (PULSE) Recognition
Program in promoting systemic improvements in biological sciences teaching and
learning. Life science departments are granted PULSE recognition based on
adoption of pedagogical and institutional best practices that are aligned with
the recommendations of the influential 2011 report, Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action. This project will support
expansion of the PULSE Recognition Program to 18 additional life science
departments from under-resourced institutions. The project will use previous
data, together with data from the new institutions, to study the role of PULSE
recognition in departmental transformation. The project has the potential to
transform life sciences departments' implementation of student-centered,
evidence-based teaching approaches. It may also influence STEM education more
broadly by providing a model for large-scale institutional reform
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PULSE Recognition Program is a novel, tiered
recognition model inspired by the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) system for rating buildings. The recognition process requires departments
to complete rubrics that evaluate utilization of evidence-based teaching
practices and other institutional practices known to correlate with innovative
pedagogy, improved student outcomes, and increased student retention in STEM as
recommended by the 2011 Vision and Change report. Additional documents and
departmental data are then submitted and reviewed, followed by a site visit that
includes meetings with faculty, administrators, staff, and students. After
review of the evidence, life science departments are awarded a “Progression
Level” (Baseline, Bronze, Silver, Gold, Platinum) based on the degree of
implementation of pedagogical and institutional best practices. This project
focuses on studying the impact of PULSE Recognition through three specific
objectives. The first is to conduct a rigorous and comprehensive longitudinal
research study on the efficacy of the PULSE Recognition Program as a model to
incentivize departmental change and continuous improvement in undergraduate STEM
education. The second objective is to assess how departmental behavior and
attitudes change in response to receiving PULSE Recognition. To measure these
changes, a Faculty Attitudes and Readiness Survey has been developed, and
individual faculty from participating life science departments will complete
this short survey in years 1, 3, and 5 of the project. The third objective is to
assess how the activities associated with earning PULSE recognition promote
departmental change in ways that improve life sciences undergraduate education
at distinct types of institutions. This work is organized in the context of the
PULSE Theory of Change, a model for how PULSE activities ultimately produce
departmental transformation. The project will create an infrastructure to
evaluate data submitted during the recognition process and compile a nationally
representative sample. The project findings will contribute to understanding
factors that drive successful institutional transformation, as well as help
dissemination of reform efforts in undergraduate STEM education. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.