* 2012979
* Collaborative Research: Broadening Participation in Computing through Authentic, Collaborative Engagement with Computing for the Greater Good
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Lori Postner, Nassau Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 190,972.00

Increasing the number of computer science graduates is a national priority for
continued economic growth in the United States. Accomplishing this goal is
challenging, as millions of available computer science jobs go unfilled each
year due to the lack of skilled applicants. A critical step in increasing the
computing workforce is to increase and broaden participation in undergraduate
computer science. One proven approach to do so is connecting computing to
societal benefits, and such connection is also known to attract students from
groups that are traditionally underrepresented in computing. Through a
collaboration between Drexel University, Nassau Community College, Western New
England University, Worcester State College, and Dickinson College, this project
will make the connection between society and computing through the NSF-supported
Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software (HFOSS) approach. HFOSS is like the
Habitat for Humanity project, but instead of helping communities build houses,
HFOSS supports the development of free software that benefits communities.
Examples of HFOSS projects include free, open software for disaster management,
education, economic development, and public health. This project will enable
students at the five partnering institutions to engage with a complex, authentic
software development environment that supports collaborative, active learning
with genuine tasks that make a difference in communities. Students will learn
contemporary software engineering and develop professional skills while gaining
first-hand experience with the positive impact that computing can have on
society. This project has the potential to transform computing education by
using computing for the greater good as the framework to improve student
engagement, learning, and diversity in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to instructor-led HFOSS development projects, this project will provide
students with an extended range of HFOSS educational opportunities, including
authentic but controlled practice environments within computing classrooms
(HFOSS kits) as well as community-based Client Oriented-FOSS projects that pair
an instructor with students and a local non-profit organization on a small
software product to benefit the non-profit. The computing courses implementing
HFOSS will use Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning to scaffold students'
computer science learning and early professional skill development. Research
conducted by the project team is designed to advance knowledge about
constructivist approaches to computing education including guided inquiry
learning and communities of practice. This research includes innovative studies
of the changes in role and identity of instructor and student that accompany a
shift to active learning, together with studies of student engagement,
retention, and diversity. The evidence-based learning approaches and engagement
with authentic contexts implemented and researched by this project have
potential applications across STEM education. This project is supported by the
NSF IUSE: EHR Program, which supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools. It is also supported by the
IUSE:CUE program, which seeks to re-envision the role of computing in
undergraduate education while continuing to emphasize the need for more diverse
student populations for careers in both computing and non-computing
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.