* 2012202
* Ground-based Magnetoseismic Observations with Surface Magnetic Assessment in Real Time (SMART) Network
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christopher Russell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 876,514.00

This project reorganizes and enhances the UCLA ground-based magnetometers in the
United States, forming a network of fourteen Surface Magnetic Assessment in Real
Time (SMART) stations. The SMART network will be used to answer unsolved
questions about the plasmasphere. Students will be trained in the hardware and
software implementations and in plasmasphere research. The SMART data will be
made available to the scientific community and provide an important enhancement
in the locations where magnetometer observations are collected to monitor space
weather hazards such as geomagnetically induced
currents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is better
determination of seasonal and local time variations in plasmaspheric density
using a remote sensing technique based on field-line resonances, obtaining
statistics of events analyzed by magnetoseismology, and providing mid-latitude
magnetometer data to the wider community. The methodology is deployment of
updated magnetometers in an array of 14 sites in the USA in three meridional
chains that connect with meridional chains operated by other groups in
Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.