* 2012185
* Quantum Many-Body Physics in Spin-Orbit Coupled Bose Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yong Chen, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 357,736.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many technologically important
material properties, such as the conductivity of metals, can be understood by
studying the behavior of a single particle (e.g. an electron) in the material.
However, some novel material properties, such as superconductivity and
magnetism, depend on how particles interact with one another. When such
interparticle interactions are strong, intriguing properties that cannot be
explained by the single-particle picture may emerge. In addition, spin-orbit
coupling (SOC) - the interaction between a particleâ€™s spin and its motion -
plays a crucial role in a wide range of phenomena. The interplay between
interparticle interactions and SOC may lead to new quantum materials which hold
promise for advanced technologies such as topological quantum computers and
dissipationless electronics. Directly studying such materials can be challenging
because of imperfections and the lack of experimental controllability. This
project aims to build a highly controllable quantum simulator based on atomic
Bose gases to explore novel strongly correlated quantum phenomena induced by the
interplay between interactions and SOC/gauge fields in low-dimensional quantum
fluids. The aim is to provide useful insights for designing new materials and
inventing new quantum devices. This project will enhance collaborations between
the experimental group doing this work and theorists in the field. Further, the
project will integrate research with the education of graduate and undergraduate
students from both physics and engineering. These students will learn in an
interdisciplinary environment and acquire knowledge and skills in such areas as
atomic/molecular/optical physics, condensed matter physics, quantum physics,
photonics and electronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental team will engineer an atomic
(Rb-87) Bose gas subjected to synthetic gauge fields and effective spin orbit
coupling (SOC) (optically generated using Raman coupling) in novel geometries
based on optical lattices (periodic potentials created by lasers) and synthetic
spaces (constructed using internal states of atoms). The presence of the
lattices can confine atoms in low dimensional geometries with controllable
inter-particle interactions and correlations, allowing for studying novel
quantum many-body physics induced by the interplay between interactions and
synthetic gauge fields. One main direction of the project is to study atoms
subjected to gauge fields in spaces with nontrivial geometries, and to explore
novel physics inherent to such spaces. For example, engineering a synthetic
magnetic field threading a synthetic cylindrical surface realizes a synthetic
Hall cylinder where a lattice with a symmetry-protected topological band
structure emerges. The program will study the effects of interactions on such
topological bands and associated quantum transport, dynamics and phase
transitions. Such a Bose gas can be further prepared in real-space 1D tubes
which allow for enhanced and tunable inter-particle interactions. As another
example, the team aims to prepare a Bose gas with 1D SOC along the 1D tubes,
where the exact match of the dimension of both the real space and SOC would
notably increase the effects of 1D SOC and also enhance the quantum fluctuations
in 1D, leading to new many-body phenomena. The interplay between SOC and tunable
inter-particle interactions is theoretically predicted to modify the well-known
Tonks-Luttinger physics, giving rise to e.g. non-Luttinger quantum liquids. This
program is not only interesting for cold atom research, but is also relevant for
condensed matter physics, such as insights to interacting topological
physics/superfluids and novel strongly correlated quantum matter in low
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.