* 2012549
* RUI: Providing Strong Field Quantum Electrodynamics Experiments to Cal Poly
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Robert Holtzapple, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2024
* USD 470,529.00

Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) is the relativistic quantum field theory of
electrodynamics that describes how matter and light interact. In the regime of
weak electromagnetic fields, the predictions of QED are calculated via
perturbation theory that has been tested and validated in depth with remarkable
agreement by experiments such as the Lamb shift of the energy levels of
hydrogen. This award will allow the measurement of QED in the presence of strong
fields at or above a critical field, called the Schwinger Field, where
perturbative techniques are no longer applicable. Quantum electrodynamics
predicts that in the presence of very strong electric fields the vacuum becomes
strongly polarized, spontaneous electron-positron pair creation occurs, and
photons are subject to vacuum birefringence. Using advances in laser technology,
it is now possible to measure strong field QED (SFQED) phenomena deep into the
non-perturbative regime. In this award, particle physics, plasma physics, and
optical physics are used in colliding a high energy electron beam (13 GeV) with
an intense laser pulse (I &gt;1020 W cm-2) at the Facility for Advanced
Accelerator Experimental Tests-II (FACET-II) at the SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory as part of the Strong Field Quantum Electrodynamics (SFQED) E-320
collaboration. The aim of this research is to advance the study of light-matter
interaction in the nonperturbative regime of QED, improving some parameters by
orders of magnitude. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will use the FACET-II
facilities at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory to enhance the
experimental physics research, teaching, and outreach in particle physics at the
California Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly). The
proposed work intends to: i) collaborate on SFQED physics between Cal Poly and
the E-320 international collaboration at SLAC; ii) take part in the assembly and
operation of the fundamental SFQED experiments at SLAC; iii) simulate SFQED
nonlinear Compton scattering and vacuum pair production in the perturbative
regime given the FACET-II and laser operating conditions; iv) develop a fast,
high resolution charge particle detector using commercially available Silicon
strip detectors that will be employed in a future upgrade of the experiment; v)
write real time data analysis software for particle, laser and beam detectors
that will be displayed during data taking in the SLAC main control room; vi)
provide support and training of students, including students from
underrepresented backgrounds, at a predominately undergraduate institution in
the field of experimental particle physics at a world class research facility.
This research will provide the PI and Cal Poly undergraduate students research
experiences in SFQED during the summer at SLAC and during the academic year at
Cal Poly. The research allows the principle investigator and Cal Poly
undergraduate students the opportunity to push the intensity frontier in
particle physics that can potentially provide information on the fundamental
nature of matter and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.