* 2012128
* A novel approach for conducting transformative science through a professional meeting: the 5th Symposium on Urbanization and Stream Ecology; February 12-15, 2020; Austin, Texas
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Robert Smith, Lycoming College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2023
* USD 25,550.00

Streams and rivers provide many services to people, including clean drinking
water and commercial and recreational fisheries. In urban areas, aquatic
ecosystems have been severely degraded, putting ecosystem services at risk.
Maintaining these services in cities requires researchers, managers, and local
stakeholders to share knowledge. The 5th Symposium on Urbanization and Stream
Ecology (SUSE5) will bring together a diverse group of scientists, engineers,
practitioners, landscape architects, and planners. They will share fundamental
knowledge about stream ecosystems. Together, they will develop effective
approaches for rehabilitating streams and rivers in urban landscapes. SUSE5
applies a new format for a professional meeting that uses case studies in
Austin, Texas to generate actions with tangible benefits to people. The goal is
to advance understanding and management of urban streams and to generate
outcomes that benefit human wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of SUSE5 is for participants to generate a cross-disciplinary, holistic
understanding of urban stream management and rehabilitation while producing
actionable draft management plans for the City of Austin. Meeting organizers
will advertise broadly to groups not typically associated with aquatic ecology
conferences (e.g., civil engineers, social scientists, etc.) and provide
financial support to individuals from diverse disciplines and with diverse
personal experiences. While plenary speakers will introduce important concepts
and two poster sessions will provide opportunities to share contemporary
research and management frameworks, four case studies will serve as the
foundation for exchanging ideas among attendees. Participants will progress
through single-discipline, interdisciplinary, and transdisciplinary groups to
generate management plans through a structured process that includes site visits
to ground-truth plan concepts. Ancillary activities including a social science
experiment examining the benefits of multidisciplinary collaborations for
addressing complex environmental problems will increase the intellectual merit
of the meeting. Meeting organizers will produce a series of manuscripts and
white papers detailing the outcomes of the case-studies and the effectiveness of
the novel approach used by SUSE5.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.