* 2012152
* Equations of State of Superdense Nuclear Matter for Use in Neutron Star Merger Simulations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Fridolin Weber, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

The observation of the first binary neutron star merger named GW170817 using
LIGO and VIRGO led the scientific community into the era of multi-messenger
astronomy with gravitational waves. Numerical relativity simulations have shown
that the pressure-density relationship (known as equation of state) of hot and
dense matter plays a fundamental role in simulating the collisions of neutron
stars. Neutron stars are up to twice as massive as our Sun but are typically
only around 20 kilometers across. At such extraordinary densities, atomic nuclei
collapse, and neutrons and protons are squeezed so tightly together that they
may disintegrate into a plasma made of up and down quarks, which are the most
fundamental building blocks of matter. The goal of this project is to determine
a comprehensive set of state-of-the art models for the equation of state of
superdense nuclear matter for use by researchers working on neutron-star merger
simulations. In particular, the group will investigate the role of quarks for
neutron-star mergers and identify possible signals by means of which quarks may
register themselves in the gravitational-wave signals produced by merging
neutron stars. The models for the equation of state will be made available to
the community at online services (CompOSE, StellarCollapse). Graduate and
undergraduate students at San Diego State University will be trained in areas of
physics which are richly interdisciplinary and enrich their educational
experience beyond what they learn in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to determine a comprehensive set of state-
of-the art models for the equation of state of hot and dense nuclear matter for
use by researchers working on neutron-star merger simulations. Contemporary
effective field theoretical models, i.e., the relativistic density-dependent
Hartree (DDRMF) model and the (local and the non-local) 3-flavor Polyakov-Nambu-
Jona-Lasinio (3PNJL) model, will be used to accomplish this goal. The DDRMF is a
versatile and numerically tractable nuclear many-body theory well suited for
studies of dense and dense hadronic matter. The 3PNJL model is an effective
model of quantum chromodynamics which allows for a contemporary modeling of
quark matter. It provides a functional and numerically tractable approach to
quantum chromodynamics. The model accounts for the dynamical breaking of chiral
symmetry and mimics quark confinement via the Polyakov-loop potential. Quark
deconfinement at zero and finite temperature will be studied using both the
Gibbs and Maxwell condition for phase equilibrium. The strongest, currently
possible constraints from nuclear theory, nuclear experiment, and astrophysics
will be used to fix the parameters of the effective field theories and test the
validity of the equations of state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances
the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.