* 2012172
* RUI: Robust Exceptional Points and their Application in Harmonic Generation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hamidreza Ramezani, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Every year many electronics and optical devices are sent back to the factories
for possible repair or replacement due to the malfunctioning behavior
originating from unavoidable fabrication errors or possible damages that
occurred later. This would create additional costs, a large waste of materials
and energy, and thus it would be extremely important to find a solution to this
problem. This project will provide new scientific insight and a novel approach
for designing optical devices that are immune to the possible fabrication errors
or small damages in the devices that can occur under severe conditions. The main
focus of this project will be on developing new designs for robust higher
frequency generation which has applications in lasers. Students from a minority-
serving institution will be involved directly in this project. They will learn
about the mathematical modeling of optical structures and designing different
geometries for photonics applications. Therefore they become prepared to enter
the future workforce in industrial or academic communities in these or related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exceptional points are a class of spectral
singularities with a known application in sensing. However, their sensitivity to
parameter space makes them difficult to fabricate. The focus of this project is
on developing a new class of exceptional points in non-Hermitian photonic
systems that have topological robustness. The group will design and implement
robust exceptional points in two distinct systems: i) stationary optical systems
and ii) spatiotemporally modulated lattices. In stationary optical systems, they
will design one-dimensional optical lattices with robust exceptional points with
application in robust sensing while in spatiotemporally modulated lattices they
propose a new application of exceptional points in robust optical devices
capable of generating higher harmonics in the presence of disorder. The ultimate
goal of this project will be the understanding of the fundamental physics behind
non-reciprocity, non-Hermiticity, and topology in one
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.