* 2012083
* Testing General Relativity with Gravitational Wave Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kathleen Hill, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
past two decades have witnessed compounding problems in observational cosmology
that simply don’t go away: the accelerated expansion of the Universe, tension
between the local and early Universe epoch measurements of the Hubble constant,
and non-detection of dark matter are prime examples of crises in physics. A
multitude of effort is being made to better understand these problems as one
does not know where the problem might be. Modified gravity theories are seen as
one possible solution. Likewise, conceptual problems in general relativity need
to be examined observationally from a variety of different approaches to be
successful. This award will test general relativity in ways complementary to
other tests (e.g. the black hole no-hair test) and probe the strong-field regime
of gravity, making the full use of the signal. These tests will either detect
violation of general relativity or constrain certain modified theories of
gravity that have been invoked to explain the aforementioned cosmological
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General Relativity has been a tremendously
successful theory in explaining current astronomical observations and laboratory
experiments. Nevertheless, there is a general consensus that the theory is at
best incomplete, representing an approximation to a more complete theory that
cures some or all of its problems. The work supported by this grant is takes a
two-pronged approach to explore general relativistic violations: 1. Measure the
multipolar structure of the observed radiation to test for self-consistency of
general relativity. 2. An incoherent, time-frequency test that checks for
consistency of the observed signal-power in different multipoles with the
predictions of general relativity. The tests will improve upon the current
approach in two significant ways. Firstly, for binaries with large mass
asymmetry (m1/m2&gt;2) and orbital inclinations more than 30 degrees one can
expect appreciable signal power in higher order multipoles. Secondly, by making
use of the full inspiral-merger-ringdown signal in the analysis increases the
signal-to-noise ratio in higher modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.