* 2012511
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Study of Exotic Nuclei and Neutron Detector Response
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Warren Rogers, Indiana Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2024
* USD 175,637.00

The main goal of this experimental program is to advance understanding of the
nature of exotic atomic nuclei, with undergraduate student participation as an
integral component. Experiments will be conducted at the National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State University (MSU)
using the Modular Neutron Array (MoNA) and the Large-area multi-Institutional
Scintillator Array (LISA), both constructed and tested by undergraduate students
from several institutions in the MoNA collaboration. The PIs of this award and
their team of undergraduate students will investigate the structure of light
neutron-rich nuclei near the limits of stability, which will provide data to
test current theoretical models of nuclear structure. As the nuclear mass-to-
charge ratio for isotopes of an element increases, the isotopes become weakly-
bound or unbound, and they exhibit significantly different structure compared
with their stable counterparts. These unstable nuclei are produced by collisions
of an accelerated nuclear beam with a stable target, and accurate computer
simulations of neutron scattering in the MoNA-LISA plastic scintillator
detectors are critical for extracting physics results from the breakup of these
short-lived nuclei. Analysis of recent neutron-scattering experiments conducted
at Los Alamos National Laboratory will improve accuracy of these simulations in
preparation for higher energy experiments soon to be conducted at the Facility
for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) at MSU. Broader impacts of the proposed work
include formative research opportunities for undergraduate students and
investing in the MoNA Collaboration in terms of equipment development and
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research supported by this award will consist
of conducting two new experiments, analyzing recent and future data, and
contributing to the development of the next generation fast neutron detector for
use with the High-Rigidity Spectrometer at FRIB. Two final MoNA experiments at
the NSCL will be performed in 2020 to study neutron-unbound states in neutron-
rich nuclei. The nuclei of interest are 13Be and 28F. These experiments will
resolve the longstanding issue of the level structure of 13Be, which is in the
N=8 region of the nuclear chart known for structural changes, and measurements
of unbound 28F states combined with previously determined two-body matrix
elements from 28F will help place limits on the one-neutron separation energy of
28O. To prepare for experiments at the upcoming FRIB facility, an experiment was
performed at the Los Alamos Neutron Science Center (LANSCE) in November 2019 to
measure neutron scattering and secondary neutron production during the
interaction of fast neutrons with plastic scintillator detectors. This work will
add to the recent neutron scattering work from the PIs which exposed some
failures of current GEANT4-based Monte Carlo simulation packages. The goal is to
improve the modeling of neutron interactions with these detectors, which will be
crucial for improving detector resolution and filtering of data for FRIB
experiments. The work also serves a broader community since plastic
scintillators are widely used for neutron detection in nuclear physics and
related applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.