* 2012207
* Efficient Monte Carlo Methods for Nonequilibrium Statistical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Brian Van Koten, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The PI will develop and analyze efficient computational methods for the
simulation of nonequilibrium systems. This work will focus on fundamental
problems from chemistry, such as the calculation of reaction rates. Potential
applications include drug design, the analysis and interpretation of single-
molecule experiments, and the development of a better understanding of the
chemical reaction networks that regulate and sustain life. The PI will implement
the methods and disseminate them in open-source software. This software will be
designed for use by scientists, and will interface with existing computational
chemistry software. The educational component of the proposed work will bring
diverse groups of high school students onto the campus of the host institution
for a summer course in data science emphasizing the use of computer simulations
to understand problems such as the COVID-19 pandemic and racial bias in jury
selection. This project will support one undergraduate student in year 1 and 1
graduate student each year of years 2 and 3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonequilibrium
can be used to describe two types of quantities: (a) averages over the steady-
state distribution of an irreversible stochastic process and (b) dynamic
properties of reversible or irreversible stochastic processes, for example mean
first passage times. Typical nonequilibrium calculations involve rare events.
For example, when calculating the folding rate of a protein, the time step used
in simulation may be ten or more orders of magnitude below the time between
folding events, rendering direct simulation impractical. However, classical rare
event methods like importance sampling do not usually apply in the
nonequilibrium case. The PI will analyze and improve a new class of rare event
methods that adapt the principle of stratified survey sampling to nonequilibrium
calculations. Building on ideas from stochastic approximation and the theory of
multigrid methods, the PI will provide a convergence analysis, develop practical
a posteriori error estimates, and identify classes of problems for which
stratification is more efficient than competing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.