* 2012907
* Quality and Productivity Research Conference - Data Science and Statistics for Quality
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Eric Chicken, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2022
* USD 22,690.00

The 37th annual Quality and Productivity Research Conference will be hosted by
Florida State University in Tallahassee, Florida, on June 8 through June 11 of
2020. This conference is the main annual meeting for the Quality and
Productivity Section of the American Statistical Association, the leading
professional association for statisticians in the US. The 2020 conference theme
reflects the changing nature of the discipline of statistics, "Data Science and
Statistics for Quality." The overall aim of the conference is promotion of data
science in diverse applied areas, in particular those associated with the fields
of quality and process control. Massive amounts of data are being collected on a
daily basis, processed and analyzed in virtually every branch of modern society
and every aspect of everyday life, and so the science, quality, and statistical
communities are obligated to keep up with the rapid growth and variety of
collected data and provide up-to-date methodologies and guidance to those using
this data. This conference will explore and promote ideas that will further this
goal. Student participation is a vital part of the conference. The students from
numerous universities and graduate programs across the US, especially including
students from under-represented groups will be fully engaged. NSF funds are used
to support their active participation in the conference and its associated one-
day short course. Students will be invited to submit contributed and poster
presentations and compete for travel scholarships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference attracts prominent researchers from academia, industry, and
government. Statisticians, data scientists, and practitioners from these areas
will propose and discuss the latest ideas and cutting-edge modern methodologies
in all aspects of big data analysis and their application to various and diverse
fields. The conference will focus on the progress made in such computationally
intensive fields such as data mining, machine learning, functional data
analysis, image reconstruction, statistical process control, and uncertainty
quantification, among others. It will be a unique venue for participants to form
collaborations and interact with the next generation of rising students
interested in these fields. The first day of the conference is a short course
emphasizing computational methods for analyzing big data, "Introduction to Data
Science the Tidy Way." The remaining three days consist of plenary, invited, and
contributed presentations and poster sessions. More details on the conference
can be found at its web page: https://qprc2020.com.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.