* 2012931
* Examining the Effects of Training Undergraduate Chemistry Students How to Deliberate
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Laura Wysocki, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 599,297.00

This project aims to contribute to the national interest in excellent
undergraduate STEM education. It will do so by studying the impacts of teaching
undergraduates how to deliberate. Deliberation skills include the ability to
have respectful conversations among people with different experiences, to think
critically, and to make better decisions by considering multiple perspectives.
Many pressing national and global challenges such as pollution and energy
consumption interweave complex scientific concepts with ethical and moral
issues. As a result, society often struggles to coordinate the actions needed to
address such challenges. Decision-making around such complex issues would
benefit from a more deliberative mindset to enhance effective collaboration and
informed decision-making. However, deliberation training is rare in
undergraduate science education. Deliberation training and opportunities to
practice deliberation will be integrated in undergraduate chemistry courses.
Students will participate in facilitated deliberation exercises that challenge
them to find and evaluate approaches to real-world issues. The project will
determine whether deliberation training enhances scientific learning, encourages
a deliberative mindset, and deepens studentsâ€™ sense of civic engagement. In
addition, the project team will study deliberation training in chemistry courses
at two four-year colleges and a community college, as well as the impact of
facilitator training. In this way, the project will investigate whether similar
student outcomes can be achieved across different institutions with different
student demographics. If successful, the project will better prepare graduates
to enter the STEM workforce and to become engaged citizens. Importantly, many
students from groups underrepresented in STEM enter postsecondary education
through community colleges. If deliberation training achieves the desired
student outcomes in this setting, the project may contribute to the inclusion of
diverse voices and broaden participation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine several variables
to determine if they are key factors for successful deliberative pedagogy (i.e.
training students how to deliberate) in a chemistry curriculum. It will also
develop and test multiple methods for assessing these impacts. An environmental
contaminants deliberation module will be implemented in a first-year chemistry
course taken by chemistry, biochemistry, and biology students. After students
become familiar with the background of the issue through assigned readings and
class lectures, they will be presented with three options to move forward.
Students will then participate in a facilitated deliberation that thoughtfully
discusses the benefits of each approach and the tradeoffs that inevitably exist
in those actions. They will then propose the best way forward. This exercise
engages students in analyzing different viewpoints and acknowledging that every
approach, even if not favored by the student, is rooted in values. To reinforce
this experience, a genetic engineering deliberation module will be designed and
implemented in a third-year biochemistry course. In this experience, students
will be encouraged to consider the values that genetic engineering both
engenders and compromises, and how it can both benefit and harm members of
society. In both the first- and third-year courses, student outcomes related to
scientific learning and civic engagement will be assessed. Following any
necessary changes, the modules will be implemented at another four-year college
and subsequently an urban community college to measure translatability. The
Deliberative Pedagogy Modules that will be created during the project will be
made publicly available for use by other instructors and institutions. This
project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources. The IUSE: EHR program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. This project is in the Engaged Student Learning track, through which
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.