* 2012041
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RoL: The evolution and maintenance of variable species boundaries
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Robin Tinghitella, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,645,452.00

Speciation is the process through which new species are formed and is a
fundamental driver of the Earth’s biodiversity. New species are defined by the
combination of traits that prevent them from mating with other species. However,
these traits are not static – they vary depending on the history of a particular
population and across different environments. The researchers will use a
combination of field and laboratory-based experiments to identify key traits
that define two closely related species and test how those traits vary across
space. They will then expand their study to other closely related species to
test whether traits that define speciation are predictable across a group of
species. The project will test new genome sequencing tools in wild populations,
inspiring new areas of research in evolution, behavior, and conservation. It
will also contribute to the understanding of how new species arise, how they
persist across different environments, and whether comparisons between related
species are useful to learn about speciation when applied to a broader group of
organisms. Through this project, the researchers will provide critical training
to undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers. The researchers will
also develop public citizen science resources to help document species diversity
across the Colorado Front Range. These resources will improve undergraduate
science curriculum and public science education through meaningful scientific
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classic evolutionary theory assumes that
species boundaries are fixed differences between species, but barriers between
species vary over different temporal, spatial, ecological, and historical
contexts. The extent and consequences of this variation on the evolution and
maintenance of species boundaries is largely unknown and has not been studied
comprehensively in a single system. The proposed research will connect patterns
of population level variation to the origin and maintenance of reproductive
barriers across a species complex. It will integrate studies of barrier
phenotypes (temporal, habitat, behavioral, fertilization, and postzygotic
isolation) with patterns of spatial variation in recombination, hybridization,
and selection. The researchers will use replicate hybrid zones of North American
field crickets to understand variation in reproductive barriers across different
scales of biological diversity—within species, between species across multiple
independent contact zones of different ages, and across a species complex with
overlapping ranges. Key outcomes will be 1) integration of the ecological,
behavioral, and genomic context for variation in species barriers, 2) an
empirical test of the role of variable reproductive barriers in maintaining
species boundaries, 3) a test of the repeatability of the evolution of
reproductive barriers across multiple species pairs, and 4) meaningful research
experiences for undergraduate non-STEM majors and the public that will increase
public engagement with, and appreciation for, nature and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.