* 2012998
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Developing a Shared Vision for Engaging Persons with Disabilities in Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Sara Brownell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 12/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to develop a network of researchers working to create a shared vision for
classrooms that engage persons with disabilities, both visible and concealable,
considering both a curricular and physical perspective. For the purpose of this
project, a student with a disability is defined to be a student that is
registered with the Disability Resource Center or equivalent office. While
science and engineering education are both trending toward more active learning
approaches, most active learning approaches assume that students are able-
bodied. At the same time, many higher education classrooms, particularly large
lecture halls used for introductory science and engineering courses, were
designed and constructed prior to current Americans with Disabilities Act
regulations, so the physical spaces may present additional barriers to engaging
persons with disabilities in science and engineering
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to this shared visioning project
is to convene workshops that bring together faculty, disability resource staff,
and capital projects staff to develop a common agenda for creating inclusive
classrooms that effectively engage persons with disabilities. In particular, two
workshops will be convened to outline the goals of inclusive classroom pedagogy
and (physical) design and highlight relevant research and best practices in
each. The first workshop will seek to bring pedagogical knowledge to physical
space designers and vice versa, enabling each group to think more critically
about how their work impacts the other. The second workshop will focus on
implementation of inclusive classrooms, highlighting successes and challenging
participants to develop a plan to design and build inclusive classrooms and
pedagogies that can be shared more broadly. It is expected that this second
workshop will also focus on developing an innovative research agenda and plan
for designing pedagogy and classrooms that better engage all learners, while
ensuring engagement of persons with disabilities, both visible and
concealable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.