* 2012023
* Physics and Applications of Quantum Nanophotonics Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Mikhail Lukin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,076,625.00

A number of intellectual and technical advances have recently resulted in a new
era of the physical sciences that brings to the center stage the controlled
manipulation of physical systems according to the rules of quantum mechanics.
These advances have created an interdisciplinary research area that encompasses
fields ranging from quantum information theory, quantum optics and atomic
physics to mesoscopic physics, nanoscience and engineering. This research
program is aimed at exploring fundamental physics and potential applications of
controlled quantum systems at the interface of quantum optics and nanoscience.
The program involves the interplay between theory and experiment as well as
investigation of potential applications at the frontier of quantum information
processing and communication. This award is supported jointly by the following
NSF Programs that span four Divisions and two Directorates: Atomic Molecular and
Optical Physics (Theory and Experiment); Quantum Information Science; Electronic
and Photonic Materials; Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices; and
Chemical Measurement and Imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is based on
several major advances from prior years in the researcher's labs. These include
implementation of large arrays of individual trapped atoms, realization of
quantum network nodes using both individual atoms trapped near photonic crystals
and an integrated diamond nanophotonics platform, and exploration of a new
family of optical emitters in two-dimensional semiconductor materials.
Specifically, the work on quantum optical physics in nanophotonic structures
will be aimed at exploring arrays of quantum emitters coupled to photons
confined to sub-wavelength dimensions, and creating, controlling and exploring
large-scale entangled states in such systems. The project will specifically
emphasize the exploration of scalable systems for quantum networking. The
studies include investigation of techniques for quantum communication over long
distances using realistic, lossy optical fibers, as well as exploration of new
applications of quantum networks. The theoretical research will focus on quantum
dynamics of strongly interacting photons and atoms with emphasis on using
coherent and dissipative mechanisms to control quantum many-body states and
studies of novel applications. In addition to supporting the project’s own
experimental efforts, the theoretical work will provide “seeds” for new research
projects and directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.